CODE OF ORDINANCES 
CITY OF 
NEWPORT NEWS, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
VOLUME I 
____________ 
Adopted: August 14, 1978 
Effective: October 16, 1978 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, 1978 
Republished by Order of the City Council, 1989 
Republished by Order of the City Council, 2005 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF NEWPORT NEWS 
AT THE TIME OF RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joseph C. Ritchie 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jessie M. Rattley 
Aubrey H. Fitzgerald 
William F. Haskins, Jr. 
Mary Sherwood Holt 
Jerome M. Hogge 
Donald Neal Patten 
Council Members 
____________ 
Frank Smiley 
City Manager 
____________ 
Robert V. Beale 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Bernice I. Berry 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF NEWPORT NEWS 
____________ 
McKinley L. Price, DDS 
Mayor 
____________ 
Tina L. Vick 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Saundra N. Cherry, D.Min. 
Marcellus L. Harris, III 
David H. Jenkins 
Sharon P. Scott 
Patricia P. Woodbury 
Council Members 
____________ 
Cynthia D. Rohlf 
City Manager 
____________ 
Collins L. Owens, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mabel Washington Jenkins 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
As adopted in 1978, this Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Newport News of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. The Code was republished in the 8½ by 11 format in 1989, and included ordinances through Ordinance No. 3906-89, enacted June 27, 1989. Subsequently, the Code was republished in 2005 and included ordinances through Ordinance No. 6143-05, enacted July 12, 2005. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the recodification were the 1961 Newport News Code, as supplemented through September 27, 1976, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1961 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
The republication of this Code was under the direct supervision of John Dombroski, Vice President, and Anne Wilson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout both the recodification and the republication projects. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Leonard E. Ringler, Deputy City Attorney, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on the republication project. It is hoped that these efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
_______2005 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 2468 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Newport News, Virginia; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for the Manner of Amending and Supplementing Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Council of the City of Newport News, Virginia: 
  Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 34, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Newport News, Virginia", which Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances of the City adopted on or before January 9, 1978, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
  Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after October 16, 1978, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Newport News, adopted on final passage on or before January 9, 1978, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code. 
  Section 3. That the repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
  Section 4. That any person convicted of a violation of such Code shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-11 thereof, or as provided in any other applicable section of such Code. 
  Section 5. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
  Section 6. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-11 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
  Section 7. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
  Section 8. This ordinance and the Code adopted hereby, shall become effective October 16, 1978. 
 PASSED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NEWPORT NEWS AUGUST 14, 1978. 
(SEAL) 
Bernice I. Berry 
  City Clerk 
Joseph C. Ritchie 
Mayor    
A true copy, teste: 
Bernice I. Berry 
  City Clerk  
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF NEWPORT NEWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Charter is set out herein as enacted by section 1 of chapter 576, 1978 Acts of the General Assembly. Sections 2 and 3 of said Chapter read as follows: 
"2. That Chapters 1 through 26, consisting of sections numbered 1.01 through 26.06, §§ 27.07, 27.09, 27.20 through 27.22 of Chapter 27, and Chapters numbered 28 through 31, consisting of sections numbered 28.01 through 31.03, of the fourth enactment of Chapter 141 of the Acts of Assembly of 1958 are repealed. 
"3. That an emergency exists and this act is in force from its passage." 
 
CHAPTER 1. - TERRITORY COMPRISING CITY 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Area; boundaries to embrace military and government reservations, etc. 
The territory comprising the consolidated city shall consist of all the territories comprising the former cities of Newport News and Warwick, as the same now are or may hereafter be established by law. The boundaries of such city shall be construed to embrace all United States military and government reservations within such city and all wharves, docks and other structures of every description that have been or may hereafter be erected along the waterfront of the city, and any contiguous territory heretofore or hereafter ceded to the Commonwealth of Virginia by any government or agency thereof, and all rivers, creeks, and lakes encompassed within its territory, and to the center line of any body of water located between its territory and any other jurisdiction. 
(Acts 2012, Ch. 193, § 1) 
Editor's note— The enactment of Chapter 193 of the Acts of Assembly of 2012 shall be effective July 1, 2012.  
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS OF CITY 
 
Sec. 2.01. - General grant. 
The city shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth and all other powers pertinent to the conduct of a city government the exercise of which is not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this Charter, and no enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive but shall be held to be in addition to this general grant of powers. 
In addition, the powers set forth in §§ 15.2-1100 through 15.2-1131 of the Code of Virginia as in force on January one, nineteen hundred seventy-eight, and as hereafter amended, are hereby conferred on and vested in the city.  
Sec. 2.02. - Relative to finance. 
In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the city shall have the power: 
A.  Taxes and assessments generally; licenses, etc. To raise annually by taxes and assessments in the city such sums of money as the council shall deem necessary to pay the debts and defray the expenses of the city, in such manner as the council shall deem expedient. In addition to, but not as a limitation upon this general grant of power, the city shall have power to levy and collect ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property and machinery and tools; to levy and collect taxes for admission to or other charge for any public amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport or athletic event in the city, which taxes may be added to and collected with the bills rendered purchasers of such service; to require licenses, prohibit the conduct of any business or profession without such a license, require taxes to be paid on such licenses in respect of all businesses and professions which cannot, in the opinion of the council, be reached by the ad valorem system; and to require licenses of owners of vehicles of all kinds for the privilege of using the streets, alleys and other public places in the city, require taxes to be paid on such licenses and prohibit the use of streets, alleys and other public places in the city without such license. 
B.  Borrowing. To borrow money for the purposes and in the manner provided by Chapter 7 of this Charter. 
C.  Appropriations generally. To make appropriations, subject to the limitations imposed by this Charter, for the support of the city government and any other purposes authorized by this Charter or by the general laws of the Commonwealth. In lieu of an ordinance, and unless otherwise specifically provided for by this Charter, the Code of the City of Newport News, the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or the United States of America, appropriations provided for in this subsection may be passed by a resolution of council with the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of council. 
D.  Emergency appropriations. To appropriate, without being bound by other provisions of this Charter, not more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in any one (1) fiscal year for the purpose of meeting a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property of the inhabitants of the city, provided that any such appropriation shall require at least four (4) affirmative votes of the council and that the resolution making such appropriation shall contain a clear statement of the nature and extent of the emergency. 
E.  Acceptance or refusal of gifts, etc. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city government. 
F.  Public libraries and schools. To provide, or aid in the support of, public libraries and public schools. 
G.  Military units; charitable, etc., institutions and corporations. To grant financial aid to military units organized in the city in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth, and to charitable or benevolent institutions and corporations, including those established for scientific, literary or musical purposes or the encouragement of agriculture and the mechanical arts, whose functions further the public purposes of the city. 
H.  Pensions. To establish a system of pensions for injured, retired or superannuated city officers and employees, members of the police and fire departments, teachers and other employees of the school board, judges, clerks, deputy clerks, bailiffs and other employees of the various courts, and to establish a fund or funds for the payment of such pensions by making appropriations out of the treasury of the city, by levying a special tax for the benefit of such fund or funds, by requiring contributions payable from time to time from such officers or employees, or by any combination of these methods or by any other method not prohibited by law, provided that the total annual payments into such fund or funds shall be sufficient on sound actuarial principles to provide for the pensions to be paid therefrom, and provided further that the benefits accrued or accruing to any person under such system shall not be subject to execution, levy, attachment, garnishment or any other process whatsoever, nor shall any assignment of any such benefits be enforceable in any court, provided, however, that no vested rights of any person in any of the retirement systems in existence at the time of consolidation in the cities of Warwick or Newport News shall be adversely affected. However, the right to receive payments of retirement benefits from a system of pensions created pursuant to this subsection which have been deemed to be marital property pursuant to Chapter 6 (§ 20-89.1 et seq.) of Title 20 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or like provisions of the state code of another state, and which are payable to the spouse who is a member of the pension system, may be allocated by a court of competent jurisdiction by direct assignment of all or part of such benefit payments to a spouse or former spouse of the member. 
I.  Control of fiscal affairs; accounts, etc. To provide for control and management of the fiscal affairs of the city, and prescribe the adoption and keeping of such books, records, accounts and systems of accounting by the departments, boards, commissions, courts or other agencies of the city government provided for by this chapter [Charter] or otherwise by laws as may be necessary to give full and true accounts of the affairs, resources and revenues of the city and handling, use and disposal thereof. 
(Acts 2003, Ch. 183, § 1)  
Sec. 2.03. - Relative to port operation and properties. 
In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the city shall have the power to acquire, construct, own, maintain and operate, within and without the city, landings, wharves, docks, canals and the approaches to and appurtenances thereof, tracks, spurs, crossings, switching, terminals warehouses and terminal facilities of every kind and description necessary or useful in the transportations and storage of goods, wares and merchandise; perform any and all services in connection with the receipt, delivery, shipment and transfer in transit, weighing, markings, tagging, ventilation, refrigerating, icing, storing and handling of goods, wares and merchandise; prescribe and collect charges from vessels coming into or using any of the landings, wharves and docks, and from persons using any of the landings, wharves and docks, and from persons using any of the facilities above described; provided for the management and control of such facilities or any of them by a department of the city government or by a board, commission or agency specially established by ordinance for the purpose; lease any or all of such facilities or any concessions properly incident thereto to any person, firm or corporation or contract with any person, firm or corporation, for the maintenance and operation of any or all of such facilities on such terms and conditions as the council may determine by ordinance; apply to the proper authorities of the United States to grant to the city the privilege of establishing, maintaining and operating a foreign trade zone within or without the city; regulate the use of other landings, wharves and docks located on any river, stream or body of water within or contiguous to the city; prevent and remove obstructions from the harbor of such river, stream or body of water and in, upon or near the landings, wharves, docks or canals adjacent thereto, and collect from the person or persons responsible for such obstructions the cost of their removal; close or discontinue the use of any such wharf, dock, landing or canal now owned or hereafter acquired by the city and upon the closing or discontinuance of such use the same shall thereupon be forever discharged from any public use or easement or from any obligation theretofore imposed by reason of such public use or easement by statute or otherwise.  
Sec. 2.04. - Licenses and permits where advisable in judgment of council. 
Whenever in the judgment of the council it is advisable in the exercise of any of the powers of the city or in the enforcement of any ordinance or regulation, it may provide for the issuance of licenses or permits in connection therewith, establish the amount of the fee to be charged the licensee or permittee, and require from that licensee or permittee a bond and/or an insurance policy of such character and in such amount and upon such terms as it may determine.  
Sec. 2.05. - Residency requirement. 
The city council shall have the power to adopt by ordinance as a requirement of the position that all heads of city departments or their equivalents be residents of the city during their tenure in such positions irrespective of by whom appointed. 
The city council, at the time of the adoption of such an ordinance, may exempt from its operation current nonresident department head or their equivalents. 
(Acts 1993, Ch. 874, § 1)  
Sec. 2.06. - Land development and site plan. 
In order to provide for the orderly and proper development of land within the City of Newport News and to protect the public safety, health, and welfare, the city council shall have the power to adopt by ordinance regulations and restrictions relative to the development of land, except a detached dwelling located on a single lot and designed for or intended to be occupied by one family. Such regulations and restrictions may prescribe standards and requirements which provide for, but are not limited to, the following: access for fire, police, emergency, and service vehicles; width, grade, elevation, location, alignment, and arrangement of streets and sidewalks with relation to existing streets and sidewalks, planned streets and sidewalks, and the comprehensive plan; easements for public utilities; facilities for off-street parking; laying out, constructing, and improving streets, alleys, and sidewalks; access to adjacent land and to existing or proposed streets; water mains for servicing fire hydrants; disposition of storm water; disposition of sewage and waste; control of flooding through site elevation or otherwise; control of slippage, shifting, erosion, accretion, and subsidence of soil; dedication of public streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewers, drains, and other public improvements; protection to other land, structures, persons, and property; guarantee of payment by the developer of all costs or a proportionate share of costs for public streets, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, sewers, and drains; the submission and approval of site plans and plats prior to development of land; and procedures, enforcement, and penalties for violation of any such ordinance or ordinances. The procedures may include, but shall not be limited to, consideration of site plans and plats in light of the regulations and restrictions applicable thereto, and approval or disapproval of site plans and plats in accordance therewith and may include the requirement of dedication of necessary public streets and easements in accordance with the comprehensive plan for the city. The provisions of this section shall in nowise repeal, amend, impair, or affect any other power, right, or privilege conferred by this Charter or any other provision of general law. 
(Acts 1989, Ch. 653, § 1)  
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIONS, ETC. 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Election and terms of mayor and members of council. 
A.  On and after July 1, 2000, the council shall consist of seven members, a mayor and six members of council elected as herein provided. The city shall be divided into such districts as shall be provided by ordinance in accordance with the general laws of the Commonwealth. As hereinafter provided, the mayor shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the city and the six members of council shall be elected by the qualified voters of the districts in which they reside, respectively. 
Commencing in May 2000, all elections to fill the office of mayor or member of council shall be for terms of four years, except to fill vacancies which shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term as hereinafter provided. On the first Tuesday in May 2000, there shall be a general election for the election of one member of city council from each city council district by the voters thereof. On the first Tuesday in May 2002, there shall be a general election for the election of one member of city council from each city council district by the voters thereof and for the mayor by the voters of the city at large. 
B.  The mayor, whether elected or appointed, shall be and remain a resident and qualified voter of Newport News. All other council members, whether elected or appointed, shall be and remain residents of their respective districts and qualified voters of Newport News during the term for which they were elected or appointed. 
(Acts 1988, Ch. 631, § 1; Acts 1990, Ch. 305, § 2; Acts 1999, Ch. 799, § 1; Acts 1999, Ch. 827, § 1) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that section 4 of Ch. 305 stated that "the second enactment of this act shall expire upon the coming into full force and effect of Chapters 612 and 631 of the Acts of Assembly of 1988, pursuant to the third enactment of this act."  
Sec. 3.02. - Nomination of candidates for mayor and members of council. 
Candidates for member of city council shall be qualified voters of the city and shall file their notice of candidacy and be nominated only by petition in the manner prescribed by law for nonparty candidates and not by caucus, primary, convention or other party-affiliated proceeding. 
There shall be printed on the ballots the names of all candidates who have been nominated as provided herein and no others. 
(Acts 1988, Ch. 631, § 1; Acts 1990, Ch. 305, § 2) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that section 4 of Ch. 305 stated that "the second enactment of this act shall expire upon the coming into full force and effect of Chapters 612 and 631 of the Acts of Assembly of 1988, pursuant to the third enactment of this act."  
Sec. 3.03. - Party designations on ballots in councilmanic elections; conduct of general municipal election under general State law as to elections. 
The ballots used in the election of councilmen shall be without any distinguishing party name, mark or symbol. The general laws of the Commonwealth relating to the conduct of elections, so far as pertinent, shall apply to the conduct of the general municipal election.  
Sec. 3.04. - Vacancies in office of mayor or member of council. 
A.  Vacancies in the office of member of council, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled within sixty days of the occurrence of the vacancy. Such vacancies shall be filled by the remainder of the council. The person or persons so appointed to fill the vacancy shall be a resident of the district where the vacancy occurs and shall hold office until the qualified voters shall fill the same by election at the next general election and the person so elected shall have qualified. The election to fill such vacancies shall be held as required and provided herein and by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia; provided that nominations for any such vacancy shall be by petition in the manner prescribed by law for nonparty candidates and not by caucus, primary, convention or other party-affiliated proceeding. 
B.  A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection A above for vacancies in the officer of member of council; however, the person appointed must be a resident of the city at the time of his appointment. 
(Acts 1988, Ch. 631, § 1; Acts 1990, Ch. 305, § 2; Acts 1999, Ch. 799, § 1; Acts 1999, Ch. 827, § 1) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that section 4 of Ch. 305 stated that "the second enactment of this act shall expire upon the coming into full force and effect of Chapters 612 and 631 of the Acts of Assembly of 1988, pursuant to the third enactment of this act."  
Sec. 3.05. - Nomination, election, qualification and term of other city officers. 
All other city officers required by the laws of the Commonwealth to be elected by the qualified voters of the city shall be elected in November as required and provided by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The officers so elected or appointed shall qualify in the mode prescribed by law and shall continue in office until their successors are elected and qualified.  
CHAPTER 4. - COUNCIL GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4.01. - Composition; compensation of councilmen and mayor; appointment of council member to office of profit. 
The council shall consist of seven members elected as provided in chapter 3. The compensation of council members and the mayor shall be established by ordinance within the salary ranges permitted by state statute. The compensation of council members as being paid on the effective date of this Charter section shall remain in effect until the appropriate ordinance setting salaries is adopted by council; provided, however, that no such ordinance shall take effect until after the next council election following the effective date of this act. No member of the council shall, during the term for which he was elected and one year thereafter, be appointed to any office of profit under the government of the city. 
(Acts 1982, Ch. 76, § 1)  
Sec. 4.02. - Vesting in council of powers of city; council to be policy-determining body; powers of council generally. 
All powers of the consolidated city as a body politic and corporate shall be vested in the council except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The council shall be the policy-determining body of the city and shall be vested with all the rights and powers conferred on councils of cities of the first class, not inconsistent with this Charter. In addition to the foregoing, the council shall have the following powers: 
A.  Official inquiries and investigations. To have full power to inquire into the official conduct of any office or officer under its control, and to investigate the accounts, receipts, disbursements and expenses of any city employee; for these purposes it may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of books, papers and other evidence; subpoenas issued by the council shall be enforced by the circuit court of the city in the manner provided by general law. 
B.  Performance of governmental functions; creation, etc., of city departments, etc. To provide for the performance of all governmental functions of the city; and to that end, provide for and set up all departments and agencies of government that shall be necessary. Whenever it is not designated by law or by ordinance what officer or employee of the city shall exercise any power or perform any duty conferred upon or required of the city, or any officer thereof, then any such power shall be exercised or duty performed by that officer or employee of the city so designated by the city manager. Any activity which is not assigned by the provisions of this Charter to specific departments or agencies of the city government shall be assigned by the council to the appropriate department or agency. The council may further create, abolish, reassign, transfer or combine any city functions, activities or departments. 
C.  Auditing of accounts. After the close of each fiscal year, the council shall cause to be made an independent audit of the accounts, books, records and financial transactions of the city by the Auditor of Public Accounts of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or by a firm of independent certified public accountants to be selected by council. The report of such audit shall be filed within such time as the council shall specify and one copy thereof shall be always available for public inspection in the office of the clerk to the council during regular business hours. Either the council or the city manager may at any time order an examination or audit of the accounts of any officer or department of the city government. Upon the death, resignation, removal or expiration of the term of any officer of the city, the director of finance shall cause an audit and investigation of the accounts of such officer to be made and shall report the results thereof to the city manager and the council. In case of death, resignation or removal of the city auditor, the council shall cause an audit to be made of his accounts. If as a result of any such audit, an officer be found indebted to the city, the council shall proceed forthwith to collect such indebtedness. 
D.  Schedule of compensation of city officers and employees. The council shall fix a schedule of compensation for all city officers and employees which shall provide uniform compensation for like service. The council may by ordinance define certain classes of city officers and employees whose salaries shall be set by the city manager, except that this provision shall not apply to the constitutional officers, the heads of city departments and judges. 
E.  Surety bonds of officers and employees. To prescribe the amount and condition of surety bonds to be required of such officers and employees of the city as the council may prescribe.  
Sec. 4.03. - Powers and duties of mayor generally; absence or disability of mayor and of vice-mayor. 
The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council and shall have the same right to vote and speak therein as other members. He shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, the purposes of military law and the service of civil process. The mayor shall execute all bonds and notes issued for the purpose of borrowing money, under the direction of the council, and the seal of the corporation shall be affixed and attested by the city clerk. The vice-mayor shall in the absence or disability of the mayor perform the duties of mayor. In the absence or disability of both the mayor and vice-mayor, the council shall, by majority vote of those present, choose one of their number to perform the duties of mayor. The council shall have no authority to choose one of its members to be mayor except to fill a vacancy in the office of mayor as provided in § 3.04. 
(Acts 1988, Ch. 631, § 1; Acts 1990, Ch. 305, § 2; Acts 1999, Ch. 799, § 1; Acts 1999, Ch. 827, § 1; Acts 2012, Ch. 193, § 1) 
Editor's note— The enactment of Chapter 193 of the Acts of Assembly of 2012 shall be effective July 1, 2012.  
Sec. 4.04. - Appointment, term, powers and duties and compensation of city clerk; inspection of records; appointment of deputy city clerk. 
The council shall appoint a city clerk for an indefinite term. He shall be the clerk of the council, shall keep the journal of its proceedings and shall record all ordinances in a book kept for the purpose. He shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the city and shall be the officer authorized to use and authenticate it. The city clerk shall be the custodian of all official records of the city. All records in his office shall be public records and open to inspection at any time during regular business hours. He shall receive compensation to be fixed by the council and all fees received by him shall be paid into the city treasury. He shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or by ordinance. The council may designate a deputy city clerk who shall act during the absence of the city clerk.  
Sec. 4.05. - Inaugural meetings; induction of members and election of vice-mayor. 
The first meeting of a newly elected council shall take place on the date of the first regularly scheduled meeting of the city council in the month of July following the election at a time and location specified for same in the notice sent to the council members in accord with the manner set forth in § 4.06 of this charter for special meetings. At or before this first meeting, the oath of office shall be administered to the duly elected members as provided by law. In the absence of the mayor, the meeting may be called to order by the city clerk. The first business of the council shall be the election of a vice-mayor and the adoption of rules of procedure. Until this business has been completed, the council shall not adjourn for a period longer than forty-eight hours. 
(Acts 1988, Ch. 631, § 1; Acts 1990, Ch. 305, § 2; Acts 1999, Ch. 799, § 1; Acts 1999, Ch. 827, § 1; Acts 2007, Ch. 319, § 1; Res. No. 13181-19, § 1)  
Sec. 4.06. - Rules of procedure; notice of special meetings; quorum. 
The council shall have power, subject to the provisions of the consolidation agreement and this Charter, to adopt its own rules of procedure. Such rules shall provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings of the council which shall be not less frequently than once in each month. They shall also provide for the calling of special meetings by the mayor, the city manager or any three members of the council, and shall prescribe the method of giving notice thereof, provided that the notice of each special meeting shall contain a statement of the specific item or items of business to be transacted and no other business shall be transacted at such meeting except by unanimous consent of all the members of the council. A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.  
Sec. 4.07. - Action by council at open meetings; voting procedure. 
No ordinance, resolution, motion or vote shall be adopted by the council except at a meeting open to the public and, except motions to adjourn, to fix the time and place of adjournment, and other motions of a purely procedural nature, unless it shall have received the affirmative votes of at least four members. All voting except on procedural motions shall be by roll call and the yeas and nays shall be recorded in a journal.  
Sec. 4.08. - Certain acts of council to be by ordinance. 
In addition to such acts of the council which are required by the Constitution or general laws of the Commonwealth or by this Charter to be by ordinance, every act of the council creating, altering or abolishing any department or creating, altering, assigning or abolishing any bureau, division, office, agency or employment, fixing the compensation of any officer or employee of the city, authorizing the borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a fine or penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property, shall be by ordinance. Council may delegate to the city manager the power to create, alter, assign or abolish bureaus, offices and divisions within a department without the necessity of having an ordinance passed by council.  
Sec. 4.09. - Effective date of ordinances generally. 
Unless another date is specified therein and except as otherwise provided in this Charter, an ordinance shall take effect on the tenth day following its passage.  
Sec. 4.10. - Procedure for introducing ordinances. 
An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council at any regular meeting of the council or at any special meeting when the subject thereof has been included in the notice for such special meeting or been approved by the unanimous consent of all the members of the council.  
Sec. 4.11. - Submission of propositions to the qualified voters of the city. 
The council shall have authority to request by resolution directed to the court of record the submission to the qualified voters of the city of an advisory referendum on any proposed ordinance. Upon receipt of such resolution, the court of record, or the judge thereof in vacation, shall order an election to be held at a regular or special election as provided by the order of the court. The election shall be conducted and the result thereof ascertained and determined in the manner provided by law for the conduct of such elections and by regular election officials of the city.  
Sec. 4.12. - Numbering, recordation, codification and printing of ordinances. 
Every ordinance, after passage, shall be given a serial number and shall be recorded by the clerk in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose. Within one year after the first day of July, nineteen hundred fifty-eight, there shall be prepared under the direction of the city attorney, who is hereby authorized to employ such assistance as he deems necessary for the purpose, a codification of all ordinances in force. Such codification may be passed by the council as a single ordinance and without prior publication. Upon its passage, it shall be published in bound or loose-leaf form. This codification, to be known and cited officially as the city code, shall be furnished to city officers and shall be sold to the public at a price fixed by the council. A similar codification shall be prepared, passed, published and distributed, as above provided, at least every five years. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to cause all ordinances adopted to be printed as promptly as possible after their adoption in substantially the same style and format as the codification of ordinances and sold at such prices as the council may establish.  
Sec. 4.13. - Required vote in making appointments and removals; procedure for removal of persons appointed by council for indefinite term. 
The council in making appointments and removals shall act only by the affirmative votes of at least four members. It may remove any person appointed by it for an indefinite term, provided that the person sought to be removed shall have been served with a written notice of the intention of the council to remove him, containing a clear statement of the grounds for such removal and fixing the time and place, not less than ten days after the service of such notice, at which he shall be given an opportunity to be heard thereon. After the hearing, which shall be public at the option of the person sought to be removed and at which he may be represented by counsel, the decision of the council shall be final.  
Sec. 4.14. - Emergency ordinances. 
The council may, by the affirmative vote of four of its members, pass emergency measures to take effect at the time indicated therein. An emergency measure is an ordinance or resolution for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health or safety, or providing for the usual daily operation of a municipal department, in which the reasons for the emergency are set forth and defined. Ordinances appropriating money for such emergency may be passed as emergency measures, but no measure for the sale or lease of city property, or making a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise or other special privilege, or the regulation of the rate to be charged for its services by any public utility shall be so passed.  
CHAPTER 5. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Establishment of position of city manager; to be chief administrative officer; provision for assistant city manager or assistant city managers; appointment, term and qualifications; residence requirements. 
There shall be a city manager who shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of the city government. He shall be appointed by the council for an indefinite term. He shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office. 
There may be one or more assistant city managers as authorized by the council. Such assistant city manager, or assistant city managers, shall be appointed by and responsible to the city manager. 
At the time of appointment, the city manager or his assistant or assistants, if any, need not be a resident or residents of the city or the Commonwealth, but during the tenure of their respective offices they shall reside within the city.  
Sec. 5.02. - Appointment and removal of department heads, etc., generally. 
The city manager shall appoint for an indefinite term and remove, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the heads of all departments and all other officers and employees of the city, provided the city manager may delegate such powers as he sees fit to heads of the departments under his supervision.  
Sec. 5.03. - Interference by council in appointments or removals; dealings between council and administrative services. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, any office or employment by the city manager or by any of his subordinates or in any way take part in the appointment of or removal of officers and employees of the city except as specifically provided in this Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders either publicly or privately to any subordinate of the city manager. Any councilman violating the provisions of this section or voting for a motion, resolution or ordinance in violation of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall cease to be a councilman.  
Sec. 5.04. - Temporary transfer of personnel between departments. 
The city manager shall have the power, whenever the interests of the city require, irrespective of any other provisions of this Charter, to assign employees of any department, bureau, office or agency, the head of which is appointed by the city manager, to the temporary performance of duties in another department, bureau, office or agency.  
Sec. 5.05. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to: 
A.  Attend all meetings of the council with the right to speak but not to vote; 
B.  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and the future needs of the city and of all matters pertaining to its proper administration, and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable; 
C.  Prepare and submit the annual budget to the council as provided in Chapter 6 of this Charter and be responsible for its administration after its adoption; 
D.  Prepare in suitable form for publication and submit to the council not later than the thirty-first day of December of each year, a concise, comprehensive report of the financial transactions and administrative activities of the city government during the fiscal year ending on the preceding thirtieth day of June, and cause to be printed such number of copies thereof as the council shall direct; 
E.  Prepare and submit to council quarterly statements of all revenues, expenditures and encumbrances of funds in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city; council may by ordinance prescribe more frequent financial reporting; 
F.  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the council or which may be required of the chief executive officer of a city by the general laws of the Commonwealth other than the duties conferred on the mayor by this Charter; 
G.  Execute, under the direction of the council, all contracts, deeds and other papers, and the seal of the corporation shall be affixed, and attested by the city clerk; and 
H.  Have direction of and control over all departments of the city except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
(Acts 1982, Ch. 76, § 1; Acts 1983, Ch. 45, § 1; Acts 2007, Ch. 319, § 1)  
Sec. 5.06. - Absence or disability of the city manager; acting city manager; limitation on appointment of council member. 
During the absence or disability of the city manager, the council may designate some properly qualified person to perform his duties until his return to duty or the appointment of his successor. Upon the death or resignation of the city manager, the council shall designate an acting city manager to serve until the appointment of a city manager. Provided that in no instance shall a member of council be appointed as city manager or acting city manager.  
CHAPTER 6. - BUDGET, ETC. 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Fiscal year; definition of "budget year." 
The fiscal year of the city government shall be established by ordinance. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. As used in this Charter, the term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and in which it is administered.  
Sec. 6.02. - Submission of general budget. 
The city manager, at least sixty days prior to the beginning of each budget year, shall submit to the council a general budget.  
Sec. 6.03. - Estimates of revenue and expenditures filed by department heads, etc. 
It shall be the duty of the head of each department, the judges of all courts, each board or commission, including the school board, and each other officer or agency supported in whole or in part by the city, including the commissioner of revenue, the treasurer, the sheriff, the attorney for the Commonwealth and clerks of courts to file with the city manager or with his/her designee for budget preparation, at such time as the manager may prescribe, estimates of revenue and expenditure for that department, court, board, commission, office or agency for the ensuing fiscal year. Such estimates shall be submitted on the forms furnished by the city manager's designee for budget preparation and it shall be the duty of the head of each such department, judge, board, commission, office or agency to supply all the information which the city manager may require to be submitted thereon. The city manager's designee for budget preparation shall assemble and compile these estimates and supply such additional information relating to the financial transactions of the city as may be necessary or valuable to the city manager in the preparation of the budgets. The city manager shall hold such hearings as he may deem advisable and with the assistance of the city manager's designee for budget preparation, shall review the estimates and other data pertinent to the preparation of the budgets and make such revisions in such estimates as he may deem proper, subject to the laws of the Commonwealth relating to obligatory expenditures for any purpose, except that in the case of the school board, he may recommend a revision only in its total estimated expenditures. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
Sec. 6.04. - Contents and form of general budget. 
The general budget shall contain: 
A.  An estimate of such portion of the general fund balance, if any, at the end of the current fiscal year as it is proposed to use for meeting expenditures in the general budget. 
B.  An estimate of the revenues from current ad valorem taxes on real estate and personal property during the ensuing fiscal year. 
C.  An estimate of revenues from all other sources of revenue. 
D.  A statement to be furnished by the director of finance of the debt service requirements for the ensuing year. 
E.  An estimate of the city's general fund balance deficit, if any, at the end of the current fiscal year and of any other obligations required by this Charter to be budgeted for the ensuing fiscal year. 
F.  An estimate of expenditures for all other purposes to be met in the ensuing fiscal year. 
All the estimates shall be in detail, showing revenues by sources and expenditures by operating units, functions, character and object, so arranged as to show revenues and expenditures as estimated for the current fiscal year and actual revenues and expenditures for the last preceding fiscal year in comparison with estimated revenues and recommended expenditures for the ensuing year. At the head of the budget, there shall appear a summary of the budget, which need not be itemized further than by principal sources of anticipated revenue, stating separately the amount to be raised by property tax, and by departments and kinds of expenditures, in such a manner as to present a simple and clear summary of the detailed estimates of the budget. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
Sec. 6.05. - Balancing of budget. 
In no event shall the expenditures recommended by the city manager in the general budget exceed the receipts estimated, taking into account the estimated general fund balance or deficit at the end of the current fiscal year, as provided in the preceding section, unless property assessments have been raised or unless the city manager shall recommend an increase in the rate of ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property or other new or increased taxes or licenses within the power of the city to levy and collect in the ensuing fiscal year, the receipts from which, estimated on the basis of the average experience with the same or similar taxes during the three tax years last past, will make up the difference. If estimated receipts exceed estimated expenditures the city manager may recommend revisions in the tax and license ordinances of the city, in order to bring the general fund budget into balance. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
Sec. 6.06. - Budget message. 
The budget message submitted by the city manager to the council shall be explanatory of the budget, shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the budget year and shall describe in connection therewith the important features of the budget plan. It shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous year in cost and revenue items and shall explain any major changes in financial policy. As a part of the budget message, with relation to the proposed expenditures for down payments and other proposed expenditures for capital projects stated in the budget, the city manager shall include a statement of pending capital projects and proposed new capital projects, relating the respective amounts proposed to be raised therefor by appropriations in the budget and the respective amounts, if any, proposed to be raised therefor by the issuance of bonds during the budget years.  
Sec. 6.07. - Appropriation and additional tax ordinances. 
At the same time that he submits the general fund budget, the city manager shall present to the council a general appropriation ordinance. The appropriation ordinance shall be based on the general fund budget but need not be itemized further than by administrative units. At the same time, the city manager shall also present any ordinance or ordinances altering the tax rate on real estate and personal property or levying a new tax or altering the rate of any other tax necessary to balance the general fund budget as hereinbefore provided. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the adoption of an ordinance altering the tax rate on real estate or personal property or the levying of a new tax or altering the rate of any other tax, at a time other than when the general fund budget and general appropriation ordinance is presented to council, when necessary for the efficient operation of the city. The hearing on the budget plan as a whole, as provided in this section, shall constitute the hearing on all ordinances presented at the same time the budget is presented. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
Sec. 6.08. - Budget, etc. as public record. 
The budget and budget message and all supporting schedules shall be a public record in the office of the city manager open to public inspection after the budget has been made public by the city manager; provided, however, that no department or agency head or judge or board or commission shall divulge details of the proposed budget nor make public statements regarding budget estimates until the budget has been publicized by the city manager and made public by him. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the city manager from discussing budget estimates with city council. The city manager on authorization from the council shall cause sufficient copies of the budget and budget message to be prepared for distribution to interested persons. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
Sec. 6.09. - Publication of notice of public hearing. 
At the meeting of the council at which the budget and budget message are submitted, the council shall determine the place and time of the public hearing on the budget, which time shall be at least thirty days prior to the beginning of each budget year, and shall cause to be published a notice of the place and time, not less than fifteen days prior to the date of the public hearing.  
Sec. 6.10. - Public hearing on budget. 
At the time and place so advertised, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted, at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, for or against the estimates or any item thereof.  
Sec. 6.11. - Action by the council on general budget. 
After the conclusion of the public hearing on the general budget, the council may insert new items of expenditures or may increase, decrease or strike out items of expenditure in the general fund budget, except that no item of expenditure for debt service as required by law shall be reduced or stricken out. The council shall in no event adopt a general budget in which the total expenditures exceed the revenues, estimated as hereinbefore provided, unless at the same time it adopts measures for providing additional revenue in the ensuing fiscal year, estimated as hereinbefore provided, sufficient to make up the difference. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
Sec. 6.12. - Adoption of budget. 
The budget shall be adopted by ordinance by the votes of at least a majority of all the members of the council. The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the fifteenth day of the last month of the fiscal year. Should the council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget, as submitted, shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the council.  
Sec. 6.13. - Additional appropriations. 
An appropriation in addition to those contained in the general appropriation ordinance, except for the purpose of meeting a public emergency as provided for elsewhere in this Charter, may be made by the council, by not less than a majority affirmative vote of the members present, only if there is an available funding source to meet such appropriation. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
Sec. 6.14. - Reserve for permanent public improvements. 
The council may by ordinance establish a reserve fund for permanent public improvements and may appropriate thereto any portion of the general fund balance not otherwise appropriated at the close of any fiscal year. It may likewise assign to such fund a specified portion of the ad valorem tax on real estate and tangible personal property not to exceed ten cents on the hundred dollars of the assessed valuation thereof or the whole or part of the proceeds of any other tax. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
CHAPTER 7. - BORROWING 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Power of council to issue bonds and notes. 
The city council may, in the name and for the use of the city, incur indebtedness by issuing its negotiable bonds or notes for the purposes, in the manner and to the extent provided in this chapter.  
Sec. 7.02. - Purposes for which bonds may be issued. 
Bonds may be issued for the purpose of financing the whole or any part of the cost of any capital improvement project and to refund outstanding bonds. A capital improvement is hereby defined to include any public improvement or utility which the city is authorized to undertake, including the acquisition of any property, real or personal, incident thereto, the construction or reconstruction, in whole or in part, of any building, plant, structure, or facility necessary or useful in carrying out the powers of the city, and in the equipment or re-equipment of the same.  
Sec. 7.03. - Limitation on indebtedness. 
Except as otherwise provided in §§ 7.07 and 7.08 of this chapter, the city shall not issue bonds or other interest bearing obligations to an amount which, including existing indebtedness, shall, at anytime, exceed ten (10) percent of the assessed valuation of real estate in the city subject to taxation, as shown by the last preceding assessment for taxes; provided, however, that in determining the limitations to the power to incur indebtedness, there shall not be included the classes of indebtedness especially described in Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Acts 1982, Ch. 76, § 1)  
Sec. 7.04. - Notes in anticipation of bonds. 
Whenever an issue of bonds has been authorized as provided in this Charter, the mayor, when authorized by resolution, shall have power to issue notes of the city in anticipation of such bonds, for the purpose of defraying the whole or any part of the cost of such project. Such notes shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and the city treasurer and shall mature not later than five years after the date of issue. 
(Acts 1982, Ch. 76, § 1)  
Sec. 7.05. - Form of bonds. 
All bonds issued pursuant to this Charter shall be issued in accordance with the general laws of Virginia relating to the issuance of bonds by municipalities.  
Sec. 7.06. - Payment of bonds and notes generally. 
The faith and credit of the city and all taxes and revenues paid thereto are hereby pledged for the payment of principal of and interest on all bonds and notes of the city issued pursuant to this Charter, except bonds for revenue producing utilities issued pursuant to this Charter and which bonds are by their terms payable solely from the revenues derived from such utilities, whether or not such pledge be stated in the bonds or notes or in the bond ordinances authorizing their issue.  
Sec. 7.07. - Bond issues for revenue producing utilities. 
The city is hereby empowered to issue from time to time, in the manner prescribed by Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia, bonds of the city, for the purpose of acquiring, establishing, constructing, improving or enlarging any sewage disposal system, waterworks, gas plant, electric plant, garbage and trash disposal system, incinerator, toll bridge, motor vehicle parking area or building, airport or other public utility, from which the city may derive a revenue, for the purpose of reimbursing the general fund or any other fund of the city for monies paid from such fund or funds for such purposes, and/or for the purpose of funding or refunding any existing indebtedness incurred for such purposes. Such bonds shall not be included in determining the power of the city to incur indebtedness within the limitation prescribed by Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia or § 7.03 hereof, but from and after a period to be determined by the council, not exceeding five years from the date of the election authorizing such bonds, whenever and for so long as any such revenue producing utility fails to produce sufficient revenue to pay for cost of operation and administration, including the interest and amortization of such bonds, and the cost of insurance against loss by injury to persons or property, all such bonds outstanding shall be included in determining the limitation of the power of the city to incur indebtedness under any provision of this Charter or under the provisions of Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia. The city may, however, issue bonds from time to time for any or all of such purposes, including reimbursement of funds and the funding or refunding of existing indebtedness, in the manner prescribed by Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia, the principal and interest of which bonds shall be payable exclusively from the revenue of such revenue producing utilities and for which payment of principal and interest the full faith and credit of the city shall not be deemed to be pledged, notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, and such bonds shall never be included in determining the limitation of the power of the city to incur indebtedness under the provisions of this Charter or under the provisions of Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia.  
Sec. 7.08. - Contents of bond ordinance for revenue producing utilities. 
The ordinance authorizing the issuance of any bonds for any revenue producing utility shall state either: 
A.  That the bonds shall be payable from the ad valorem taxes without limitation of rate or amount; the full faith and credit of the city is deemed to be pledged for the payment of principal and interest thereof; and the bonds are to be issued pursuant to the provisions of Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia and are not to be included in determining the power of the city to incur indebtedness within the limitation prescribed by Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia; provided, however, that from and after a period specified in such ordinance, not exceeding five years from the date of the election authorizing the bonds, whenever and for so long as such revenue producing utility fails to produce sufficient revenue to pay for the cost of operation and administration, including the interest on bonds issued therefor, the cost of insurance against loss by injury to persons or property, and an annual amount to be placed into a sinking fund sufficient to pay the bonds at or before maturity, all outstanding bonds issued on account of such revenue producing utility shall be included in determining such limitation; or 
B.  That the principal and interest of such bonds shall be payable exclusively from the revenue of such revenue producing utility, the faith and credit of the city shall not be deemed to be pledged for the payment of such principal and interest, and the bonds are to be issued pursuant to the provisions of Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia and are never to be included in determining the power of the city to incur indebtedness within the limitations prescribed by Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia.  
Sec. 7.09. - Borrowing to pay judgment. 
In the absence of unappropriated available revenues to pay a final judgment for money which may be recovered against the city, the council may by resolution authorize the issuance of a note or notes, the proceeds of which shall be used to pay such judgment, which note or notes may be renewed from time to time, but such note or all such notes of any fiscal year and any renewals thereof shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding the budget year in which such judgment was recovered.  
Sec. 7.10. - Borrowing in anticipation of property taxes. 
In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection of the property tax for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "tax anticipation note for the year 19___" (stating the budget year). Such notes may be issued for periods not exceeding one year and may be renewed from time to time for periods not exceeding one year, but together with renewals shall mature and be paid not later than the end of the third fiscal year after the budget year in which the original notes have been issued.  
Sec. 7.11. - Borrowing in anticipation of other revenues. 
In any budget year, in anticipation of the collection or receipt of other revenues of that year, the council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the city, each of which shall be designated "special revenue notes for the year 19___" (stating the budget year). Such notes may be renewed from time to time, but all such notes, together with the renewals, shall mature and be paid not later than the end of the fiscal year after the budget year in which the original notes shall have been issued.  
Sec. 7.12. - Notes redeemable prior to maturity. 
No notes shall be made payable on demand, but any note may be made subject to redemption prior to maturity on such notice and at such time as may be stated in the note.  
Sec. 7.13. - Sales of notes. 
All notes issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, when authorized by the council, may be sold at not less than part and accrued interest at private sale without previous advertisement by the director of finance, with the approval of the city manager.  
Sec. 7.14. - Payment of notes. 
The power and obligation of the city to pay any and all notes hereafter issued by it pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be unlimited and the city shall levy ad valorem taxes on all the taxable property within the city for the payment of such notes and interest thereon without limitation of rate or amount.  
Sec. 7.15. - Supplemental method of borrowing and payment. 
In addition to any other indebtedness of the city and certificate of debt, or bonds, which the council of the city has issued, the council of the city, by the affirmative vote of not less than four members thereof, may, from time to time, borrow an additional sum or sums of money not exceeding in the aggregate, however, under this authority, the sum of five hundred thousand dollars (provided, however, such sum shall not be in excess of the amount fixed by law which it may borrow), and may, in the name and for the use of the city, cause to be issued certificates and notes evidencing the indebtedness, which certificates and notes, however, shall be payable in not more than five years from their date, and upon payment or redemption of such certificates of debt or notes, the council may again, by the affirmative vote of not less than four of the members thereof, from time to time, borrow a like sum and issue like certificates or notes evidencing the indebtedness thereof, which shall likewise be payable not more than five years from their date.  
Sec. 7.16. - Inclusion of certain notes, etc., in determining Constitutional debt limit. 
All notes or other evidences of debt issued pursuant to §§ 7.09 through 7.15, inclusive, of this chapter shall, unless payable within one year of their issue, or the date of the original obligation if the issue is a renewal, and not past due, be included in determining the limitation on indebtedness in accordance with Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution.  
CHAPTER 8. - FINANCE GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Establishment of department of finance; functions. 
There shall be a department of finance, which shall include the functions of accounting and control, and such other functions as may be provided by ordinance. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, §1)  
Sec. 8.02. - Director of finance generally; to be head of department of finance; appointment and qualifications. 
The head of the department of finance shall be the director of finance, who shall be appointed by the city manager. He shall be a person skilled in accounting and financial control.  
Sec. 8.03. - Same; bond. 
The director of finance shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the council may require.  
Sec. 8.04. - Same; powers and duties. 
The director of finance, under the supervision of the city manager, shall have authority and shall be responsible for the department of finance in order to discharge the following functions: 
A.  Current expense estimates. [Reserved.] 
B.  Capital estimates. [Reserved.] 
C.  Disbursement and expenditures. Supervise and authorize the disbursement of all monies and have control over all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded. 
D.  Accounts and accounting. Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial accounting control over each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the city budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid thereon, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; and require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient. 
E.  Monthly statement. [Reserved.] 
F.  Annual statement and report. Prepare for the city manager, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report. 
G.  Certification of unencumbered balance. No appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be made unless the director of finance shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriated and available funds. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1; Acts 1982, Ch. 76, § 1)  
Sec. 8.05. - Departmental, etc., work programs and requested allotments. 
Before the beginning of the fiscal year, the head of each office, department or agency may be required to submit to the city manager or his/her designee for budget preparation, at such time as may be set by him, a work program for the year, which program shall show the requested allotments of the appropriations for such office, department or agency, for such periods as may be designated by the city manager, for the entire budget year. The city manager shall review the requested allotments and may revise, alter or change such allotments before approving the same. The aggregate of such allotments shall not exceed the total appropriation available to such office, department or agency for the budget year. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
Sec. 8.06. - Approved departmental, etc., allotments as basis for expenditures. 
The director of finance shall authorize all expenditures for the offices, departments and agencies to be made from the appropriations on the basis of approved allotments and not otherwise. An approved allotment may be revised during the budget year in the same manner as the original allotment was made. If, at any time during the budget year, the city manager shall ascertain that the available income, plus balances, for the year will be less than the total appropriations, he shall reconsider the work programs and allotments of the several offices, departments and agencies and revise the allotment so as to prevent the making of expenditures in excess of such income.  
Sec. 8.07. - Transfer of unencumbered balance of appropriation. 
The city manager may at any time transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof within the same general classification of expenditures within an office, department or agency.  
Sec. 8.08. - Supervision and control of accounting. 
The director of finance shall have power and shall be required to: 
A.  Forms. Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the city government. 
B.  Contracts, etc. Examine and approve all contracts, orders and other documents by which the city government incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that funds have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligation shall become due and payable. 
C.  Bills, etc. Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidences of claims, demands or charges against the city government and, with advice of the city attorney, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges.  
Sec. 8.09. - Certain contracts and expenditures prohibited. 
No officer, department or agency shall, during any budget year, expend or contract to expend any money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money, for any purpose, in excess of the amounts appropriated for that general classification of expenditure pursuant to this Charter. Any contract, verbal or written, made in violation of this Charter shall be null and void. Any officer or employee of this city who shall violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall cease to hold his office or employment. Nothing in this section contained, however, shall prevent the making of contracts or the spending of money for capital improvements to be financed in whole or in part by the issuance of bonds, nor the making of contracts of lease or for services for a period exceeding the budget year in which such contract is made, when such contract is permitted by law.  
Sec. 8.10. - Lapse of appropriations. 
All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the budget year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered.  
Sec. 8.11. - Disposition of fees received by officers or employees. 
All fees received by any officer or employee shall belong to the city government and shall be paid to the city treasurer as and when directed by the director of finance, and the officer or employee shall notify the director of finance and pay same to the treasurer as and when directed by the director of finance. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1)  
Sec. 8.12. - Contracts for city improvements. 
Any city improvement costing more than $1,000.00, except where such improvement is executed directly by a city department, shall be executed by contract. All such contracts for more than $50,000.00 shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, or if the council should so determine, to such bidder whose bid is more acceptable to the public interest, after such public notice and competition as may be prescribed by ordinance, provided the city manager shall have the power to reject all bids and advertise again. Alterations in any contract may be made when authorized by the council upon the written recommendation of the city manager. 
(Acts 1980, Ch. 78, § 1; Acts 2007, Ch. 766, § 1)  
Sec. 8.13. - Effectiveness of bond ordinances prerequisite to execution of certain contracts. 
No contract shall be executed for the acquisition of any property or the construction of any improvement or betterment to be financed by the issuance of bonds until the ordinance authorizing the issuance of such bonds shall have taken effect and any contract executed before such day shall be unenforceable in any court of law.  
Sec. 8.14. - Periodic independent audits. 
After the close of each fiscal year, the council shall cause to be made an independent audit of all accounts, books, records and financial transactions of the city, including the school board, by the Auditor of Public Accounts of the Commonwealth or by a firm of independent certified public accountants to be selected by the council. The report of such audit shall be filed within such time as the council shall specify and one copy thereof shall always be available for public inspection in the office of the city manager during regular business hours.  
Sec. 8.15. - Collection of taxes generally; taxes paid by tenant; recordation of list of delinquent real estate taxes. 
The city treasurer or city collector, if designated by council, shall have any or all of the powers which are now or which may be hereafter vested in any officer of the Commonwealth charged with the collection of State taxes, and may collect the same in the same manner in which State taxes are collected by any officer of this Commonwealth. No deed of trust or mortgage upon goods and chattels shall prevent the same from being distrained or sold for taxes assessed thereon, no matter in whose possession such goods and chattels may be found. A tenant from whom payment of taxes on his landlord's property shall be obtained by distress or otherwise shall have credit for the same against such person on account of his rent, unless by contract the tenant is to pay such taxes. The council may require a list of all real estate in the city delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes thereon for the preceding year to be recorded in a book of delinquent taxes to be kept in the office of the director of finance.  
Sec. 8.16. - Penalties for nonpayment of taxes; distress; garnishment, etc., after addition of penalty; collection when delinquent taxpayer is or contemplates moving. 
The council may impose penalties for the nonpayment of city taxes and levies and for the failure to make any return required by law for the assessment of taxes, and may cause such penalties to be added to the amount of taxes and levies due from taxpayers, as it may by ordinance or resolution from time to time prescribe; and after such penalty has been added, the city treasurer or the city collector if designated by the council shall have the power of distress, garnishment or action and any other power now possessed or that may hereafter be given to any person charged with the collection of State taxes after the penalty for the nonpayment of State taxes has been added. Should it come to the knowledge of the city treasurer or the city collector that any person, firm or corporation owing taxes or levies to the city is moving or contemplating moving therefrom prior to the time such penalty may be added by the council, he shall have the right to collect taxes by distress, garnishment, suit or action or otherwise at any time after such bills for taxes have come into his hands.  
CHAPTER 9. - CITY AUDITOR 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Establishment of position; appointment; term; qualifications; powers and duties. 
The council may appoint a city auditor for a four-year term. He shall be qualified by training and experience for the duties of his office, and shall have supervision and control of the person-nel in his department. The city auditor's duties and responsibilities shall be those set out by council in an ordinance. 
(Acts 1983, Ch. 45, § 1)  
CHAPTER 10. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Establishment; composition. 
There shall be a department of law which shall consist of the city attorney and such assistant city attorneys and other employees as may be provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 10.02. - City attorney; to be head of department; qualification; appointment; term. 
The head of the department of law shall be the city attorney. He shall be an attorney-at-law licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth. He shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at its pleasure. He shall not engage in the private practice of law. 
(Acts 1988, Ch. 146, § 1)  
Sec. 10.03. - Same; powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall: 
A.  be the legal advisor of the council, the city manager and of all departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the city, including the school board, in all matters affecting the interests of the city and shall upon request furnish a written opinion on any question of law involving their respective official powers and duties; 
B.  at the request of the city manager or any member of the council, prepare ordinances for introduction at the request of the council or any member thereof, shall examine any ordinance after introduction and render his opinion as to the form and legality thereof; 
C.  draw or approve all bonds, deeds, leases, contracts or other instruments to which the city is a party or in which it has an interest; 
D.  have the management and control of all the law business of the city and the departments, boards, commissions and agencies thereof or in which the city has an interest, and represent the city as counsel in any civil case in which it is interested and in criminal cases in which the constitutionality or validity of any ordinance is brought in issue; 
E.  institute and prosecute all legal proceedings he shall deem necessary or proper to protect the interests of the city; 
F.  attend in person or assign one of his assistants to attend all meetings of the council; 
G.  appoint and remove such assistant city attorneys and other employees as shall be provided by the council, and authorize the assistant city attorney or any of them or special counsel to perform any of the duties imposed upon him in this Charter; and 
H.  have such other powers and duties as may be assigned to him by ordinance.  
Sec. 10.04. - Filing of statement of claim prerequisite to maintenance of action for damages against city. 
No action shall be maintained against the city for injury to any person or property, or for wrongful death alleged to have been sustained by reason of the negligence of the city or of any officer, agent or employee thereof, unless a written statement by the claimant, his agent, attorney or representative, of the nature of the claim and of the time and place at which the injury is alleged to have occurred or been received, shall have been filed with the city attorney or with the mayor or chief executive within six months after such cause of action shall have accrued, except if the complainant, during such six-month period, is able to establish by clear and convincing evidence that, due to the injury sustained for which a claim is asserted, he was physically or mentally unable to give such notice within the six-month period, then the time for giving notice shall be tolled until the claimant sufficiently recovers from the injury so as to be able to give such notice. Neither the city attorney or any other officer, employee or agent of the city shall have authority to waive the foregoing conditions precedent or any of them.  
CHAPTER 11. - DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Composition; powers and duties of school board, division superintendent of schools, etc. 
The department of education shall consist of the city school board, the division superintendent of schools, and the officers and employees thereof. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city school board and the division superintendent of schools, and the officers and employees thereof, shall exercise all the powers conferred and perform all the duties imposed upon them by general law.  
Sec. 11.02. - Composition of school board; choice, term and qualifications of members; filling of vacancies. 
The school board of the city shall be composed of seven members who shall be elected as required by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia pertaining to the popular election of schools boards. Any vacancies occurring on the school board shall be filled as required by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia pertaining to the popular election of school boards. All members shall be residents of the city and, furthermore, residents of the district within the city which they represent, if not elected at large. 
(Acts 1999, Ch. 799, § 1; Acts 1999, Ch. 827, § 1)  
CHAPTER 12. - ASSESSMENT OF REAL ESTATE FOR TAXATION 
 
Sec. 12.01. - Annual assessment, etc., of real estate for taxation; authority of council. 
The council shall have the power, in lieu of the means and methods prescribed by law, to provide by ordinance for the annual assessment and reassessment and equalization of assessments of real estate for local taxation.  
Sec. 12.02. - Basis of assessment of real estate for taxation. 
Such assessment or reassessment shall be made on the same basis as real estate is required to be assessed under the provisions of the Code of Virginia, except that such assessments or reassessments shall be made annually and the assessments and reassessments so made shall have the same effect as if they had been made under the provisions of the Code of Virginia; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the assessment or reassessment of real estate at more frequent intervals when so authorized by the Code of Virginia.  
Sec. 12.03. - Board of review; composition; appointment, term and compensation of members; vacancies. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of §§ 58-895 to 58-902 [58.1-3370—58.1-3377] and 58-914 [repealed] of the Code of Virginia, as amended, the court of record en banc of the city or the judges thereof in vacation shall, annually, appoint for the city a board of review of real estate assessments to be composed of three members, who shall be freeholders of the city for which they serve. The terms of such members shall commence on September one of the year in which they are appointed and shall expire on the thirtieth day of November of the year in which they are appointed, unless their terms are extended. Such courts of the judges thereof in vacation may extend the terms of the members of the board of review and shall fill any vacancy therein for the unexpired term. The members of the board shall receive per diem compensation for the time actually engaged in the duties of the board to be fixed by the council of the city, and to be paid out of the treasury of the city, and the council may limit the per diem compensation to such number of days as, in its judgment, is sufficient for the completion of the work of the board.  
Sec. 12.04. - Same; powers; procedural regulations. 
Such board of review shall have and may exercise the power to revise, correct and amend any assessment of real estate made in the year in which they serve, and to that end shall have all powers conferred upon boards of equalization by §§ 58-903 to 58-912 [58.1-3378—58.1-3387], inclusive, of the Code of Virginia, as amended. Notwithstanding any provision of such sections, however, the board of review may adopt any regulations providing for the oral presentation, with formal petitions or other pleadings of requests for review, and looking to the further facilitation and simplification of proceedings before the board.  
Sec. 12.05. - Same; appeal. 
Any person, or the city, aggrieved by any assessment made by the board of review may apply for relief in the manner provided by §§ 58.1-3984 to 58.1-3993, inclusive, of the Code of Virginia, as amended.  
Sec. 12.06. - Real estate assessable by State Corporation Commission. 
This charter shall not apply to the assessment of any real estate assessable under the law by the State Corporation Commission.  
CHAPTER 13. - PORT AND INDUSTRIAL AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 13.01. - Establishment authorized. 
There may be established a port and industrial authority for the consolidated city.  
Sec. 13.02. - Grant of powers under Acts 1952, Chapter 46. 
All of the provisions and powers set forth in Chapter 46, Acts of Assembly, 1952, as amended, are hereby granted to the consolidated city as though the consolidated city were the city set forth in such chapter.  
CHAPTER 14. - COURTS OF RECORD 
 
Sec. 14.01. - Appointment by judges of the court of record. 
The judges of the court of record shall act en banc in making appointments to fill vacancies occurring in any office in the city which are filled or to be filled by the judges of the court of record and, in case of disagreement, the vote of a majority of such judges shall be binding.  
CHAPTER 15. - OFFICES OF COURTS OF RECORD 
 
Sec. 15.01. - Compensation of clerk; expenses and fees. 
The clerk of the court of record of the city of Newport News shall be paid a salary of not less than twelve thousand dollars per annum. Such salary shall be in full compensation for services and shall be in lieu of the retention by such officer of any and all official fees, commissions or compensation of whatever kind or character, and from whatever source derived; and the city council of the city shall provide for the payment of such salary out of the city treasury. 
The expenses of office of such officer, including the compensation of deputies and employees, shall be likewise paid out of the city treasury on duly authenticated vouchers, when and as such expenses are incurred, or may become due and payable, or at least twice monthly. The maximum amount of such expenses in the case of the officer shall be fixed by the State Compensation Board, and the State Compensation Board shall fix the number and compensation of the deputies and employees of such officer. 
All fees and commissions of every kind or character received or collected by such clerk and from whatever source derived shall be paid into the city treasury by such clerk monthly. All fees and commissions of every kind and character, whether payable by the Commonwealth, the United States, or private persons, firms or corporations, now or hereafter made receivable by law or ordinance by such clerk shall continue to be paid to and collected by him, and shall be paid into the city treasury monthly, except that the city aforesaid shall not be required to pay such clerk any fees or commissions for services performed for such city.  
Sec. 15.02. - Location of records. 
Commencing on the effective date of consolidation, the clerks' offices, and the records thereof, of the courts of record of the consolidated city shall be located and maintained in or adjacent to the building in which the clerk's office of the circuit court is located.  
CHAPTER 16. - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD 
 
Sec. 16.01. - Creation of the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board. 
There may be created by ordinance a Hilton Village Architectural Review Board which shall have the authority and power to review all building and construction plans pertaining to the Hilton Village Historical Zoning District. The architectural review board shall have the power to review all plans pertaining to the Hilton Village Historical Zoning District, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, and the city council may enact by ordinance such rules and regulations pertaining to the review board as it deems necessary.  
CHAPTER 17. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 17.01. - Severability of charter provisions. 
In the event that any portion, section or provision of this Charter shall be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by final judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not invalidate any other portion, section or provision hereof, but all parts of the charter not expressly held to be invalid shall remain in full force and effect.  
Sec. 17.02. - Maximum length of service for members and trustees of boards and commissions 
No member or trustee of any board or commission of the city, no matter who the appointing authority, shall be eligible to serve more than: 
A.  Eight consecutive terms if the term of office is one year. 
B.  Four consecutive terms if the term of office is two years. 
C.  Three consecutive terms if the term of office is three years. 
D.  Two consecutive terms if the term of office is four years. 
E.  Two consecutive terms if the term of office is for five years or more. 
Notwithstanding the above limitations, no member or trustee of any board or commission of the city shall be appointed so as to serve more than ten years on a board or commission, except that a person who has served on a board or commission may be reappointed to that same board or commission if one year has elapsed since the expiration of his last appointment to the board or commission. 
Council is hereby authorized and empowered, but not directed, to provide by ordinance for staggered terms of all members of boards and commissions of the city to the end that there will not result a complete board or commission membership turnover on the same date. 
The portion hereof concerning limitations of terms shall apply to regional boards and commissions only in those cases in which all political subdivisions appointing members to such regional board or commission are bound by a like provision. 
This section shall be in effect, notwithstanding any other provision in the city code or city charter to the contrary.  
Sec. 17.03. - Authority to create library board. 
There may be a Newport News Public Library Board, as provided by the council of the city of Newport News, which shall consist of such number of members or trustees as the council may provide. Vacancies on the library board shall be filled by the council for the unexpired portion of the term. The library board shall have such authority, powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 17.04. - Power to contract with and receive aid from federal government. 
In addition to the other powers conferred by this Charter, the city of Newport News shall have the power and authority to accept contributions, grants and other financial assistance from the federal government and other agencies and agency or instrumentality thereof for or in aid of the local federally assisted programs. To these ends, the city of Newport News shall have the power to comply with such conditions and to execute such agreements as may be necessary, convenient or desirable and not in conflict with any other provision of this Charter.  
Sec. 17.05. - Continuance of Acts 1926, Chapter 530. 
All of the provisions, obligations and directions of Chapter 530, Acts of Assembly, 1926, and all amendments thereto, except as otherwise changed by this chapter, concerning the waterworks system shall continue in full force and effect as though the consolidated city was in the original act the city set forth in such act.  
Sec. 17.06. - Continuation of rights, powers, etc., in Regional Redevelopment and Housing Authority for Hampton and Warwick, Virginia, and the Newport News Housing and Redevelopment Authority. 
All rights, powers, liabilities and benefits of the former city of Warwick resulting from agreement or arising by law in the Regional Redevelopment and Housing Authority for Hampton and Warwick, Virginia, shall inure to the consolidated city, and the representative of the former city of Warwick to such authority at the time of the effective date of the consolidation shall continue on the commission as if the consolidated city had originally been a party to the agreement and action creating the Regional Redevelopment and Housing Authority for Hampton and Warwick, Virginia; and all the rights, powers, liabilities and benefits of the former city of Newport News resulting from agreement or arising by law in the Newport News Redevelopment and Housing Authority shall inure to the consolidated city and the representatives of the former city of Newport News on the authority at the time of the effective date of the consolidation shall continue as the representatives of the consolidated city as if the consolidated city had originally been a party to the agreement and action creating the Newport News Redevelopment and Housing Authority.  
Sec. 17.07. - Courts not of record. 
The City of Newport News shall provide suitable quarters for the general district court and its clerk, the juvenile and domestic relations court and its clerk, social services staff and a suitable room or rooms for the sessions of the courts at the places designated for such purpose. The City shall also provide all necessary furniture, filing cabinets and other equipment necessary for the efficient operation of the courts. 
All fees, fines and commissions of every kind and character received or collected by the judges or clerks of such courts and from whatever source derived shall be paid promptly to the clerk of the circuit court. All fees, fines and commissions of every kind and character, whether payable by the Commonwealth, the United States, or private persons, firms or corporations, now or hereinafter made receivable by law or ordinances by such judge or clerk, shall continue to be paid to the clerk of the circuit court, except that the city aforesaid shall not be required to pay such judge or clerk any fees or commission for services performed for such city. 
(Acts 1989, Ch. 654, § 1)  
CHAPTER 27. - MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITION PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 27.01. - Ownership of commissions, authorities, etc. 
All of the ownership, rights, title, interest, powers and obligations of the former political subdivisions comprising this City or of either of them, resulting from law, by agreement, or otherwise, relative to or in any manner connected with (1) the waterworks plant or system of the former City of Newport News, (2) The Peninsula Airport Commission, (3) the Chesapeake Ferry District, (4) the Port and Industrial Authority, (5) any sewerage and sewerage disposal systems, (6) Housing Authorities, and (7) rights and privileges granted by the Commonwealth of Virginia or the United States of America, shall be vested in, enure to and be assumed by this City, and any ordinances or regulations in connection therewith which are in effect at the time of the effective date of this City shall remain in effect unless and until revoked, amended or superseded by ordinances or regulations of this City, except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.02. - Assumption of all debts, obligations. 
Upon the effective date of consolidation all of the then outstanding indebtedness, bonded or otherwise, including interest thereon, and all of the then existing contracts, franchises, and any other legal obligations, including but not limited to all legal obligations existing by reason of any retirement plans within the cities in effect at the time of consolidation, or debts of each of the former cities now comprising this city shall become the indebtedness and obligation of this city, and there shall enure to this city in connection therewith all of the rights and privileges therein, or by law provided for, in the same manner and to the same extent as if they were issued, made, entered into or arose, in the original instances directly by or with this city. It is a provision of this consolidation agreement that the payment of the employer's share of the obligation under existing retirement or pensions plans in effect on the date of consolidation in the cities of Warwick and Newport News, and all allowances, annuities, and benefits accruing, granted and to be paid in the future to employees of the cities pursuant to such plans, and all expenses in connection with the operation and administration thereof are hereby made obligations of the consolidated city, to the extent herein specified and in accordance with the ordinances and provisions of the various cities affecting retirement. The consolidation agreement shall be deemed an agreement between the Consolidated City and the employees and retirants covered by such retirement plans as of the date of consolidation, to the end that the right and equities of the employees and retirants, as herein specified, in service or in retirement on the date of consolidation, under the existing retirement plans, in accordance with the provisions of such plans, shall not be diminished, curtailed or impaired for services rendered as of the effective date of consolidation. This obligation on the part of the consolidated city shall include, in accordance with the provisions of the various pension or retirement plans: 
(a)  The continuation of retirement allowances or pension payments to retired employees. 
(b)  The payment of retirement allowances or pensions, when due, to those former employees who retained "vested rights." 
(c)  The retirement and payment of pensions to those employees who are qualified for retirement under any of the existing plans on the effective date of consolidation. 
(d)  The vesting of service retirement allowances for those employees who are qualified under the terms of existing plans. 
(e)  The payment of withdrawal benefits, as provided in existing plans, to all employees who do not qualify for pensions or vested service retirement allowances. 
(f)  The payment of any other benefit provided, including Social Security payments made by any employee, for which the employee has qualified, on the date of consolidation that is in the particular plan applicable to the employee. 
(g)  The payment of any other benefit provided to retire employees prior to consolidation to any employees receiving the same by special pension benefits not covered by a general plan. 
It is also provided that any employee of either of the cities who is employed by the consolidated city, shall be given credit for the years of service already to his credit in Warwick or Newport News in any retirement plan enacted by the consolidated city at a cost not to exceed the withdrawal allowance to the credit of said employee at the date of consolidation. 
If any employee who is entitled to retirement, or who has retired from either of the cities, is employed by the consolidated city, he shall not receive his pension during the term of his employment with the consolidated city but shall be entitled to receive such pension when his employment with the consolidated city ends. Provided, however, that independent contractors, substitute teachers, or other nonpermanent or seasonal employees shall not have their pension withheld by the provisions of this paragraph. 
This provision applies to all pension or retirement systems of both cities and includes the systems that provide retirement to employees of school boards or other boards or commissions and to the city officers and their employees if such employees were included in retirement systems prior to consolidation. 
Such funds, reserves, appropriation, cash and investments in the hands of either of the cities or in hands of trustees of any of the retirement funds of the cities shall, on the date of consolidation, or as soon thereafter as is practicable, be paid over to such officers or boards of the consolidated city, as the council of the consolidated city may designate, to be used to meet the obligations as herein provided. 
The consolidated city is hereby authorized and directed to provide and pay such additional money as is necessary to fulfill and carry out the provisions of this portion of the consolidation agreement of the consolidated city. 
The full faith and credit of the consolidated city is hereby irrevocably pledged to meet this obligation. 
(1958, c. 141; 1973, c. 157)  
Sec. 27.03. - All assets and property to be owned by consolidated city. 
All property, real, personal or mixed, and all other assets of every kind, and wheresoever the same may be situated or located, owned by the political subdivisions comprising this city immediately preceding the effective date of this city shall become the property of this city upon its effective date, and all legal rights or interest of any kind in the aforesaid property which the said political subdivisions had at such time shall fully enure to this city. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.04. - Provisions as to constitutional officers. 
Upon the date the consolidation agreement takes effect, there shall be terminated the terms of office of the Commonwealth's Attorney, Commissioner of the Revenue, Treasurer and Sergeant for each of the political subdivisions so consolidated. 
On the second Tuesday in April, 1958, an election shall be held to select the Commonwealth's Attorney, Commissioner of the Revenue, Treasurer and Sergeant of the Consolidated City, who will take office July 1, 1958, for a term expiring December 31, 1961. In the general election to be held in November, 1961, these officers will be elected for four (4) year terms, starting January 1, 1962, and each four (4) years thereafter, these offices will be filled at the general elections in November. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.05. - Effects upon members of boards, commissions or any agency. 
The terms of all persons holding office as members of any board, commission, agency or authority created by any ordinance of either of the cities or appointed by council pursuant to any law of the Commonwealth shall terminate as of July 1, 1958, except as otherwise herein provided, and the Council of the consolidated city shall have authority and power to make new appointments for an original term as prescribed by any such ordinance or statute. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.06. - Tax levies, funds and assessments. 
All levies, both current and delinquent, and all school and other funds which may be held by the State to the credit of the cities of Newport News and Warwick shall become the property of this city. The tax levies, service charges and assessments made for the current or ensuing year or years by the aforesaid cities shall stand as levies and assessments of this city until superseded by levies and assessments made by this city. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.07. - (1958, c. 141; repealed 1978, c. 576)  
Sec. 27.08. - (1958, c. 141; repealed 1968, c. 448)  
Sec. 27.09. - (1958, c. 141; repealed 1978, c. 576)  
Sec. 27.10. - Election of officers and councilmen. 
An election shall be held by the combined qualified voters of the cities of Newport News and Warwick in accordance with general law, on April 8, 1958, for the offices of Commonwealth Attorney, Commissioner of Revenue, Treasurer and Sergeant of the Consolidated City. The candidate receiving the highest number of said combined qualified votes for each of such offices shall be declared the holder of such office and their respective terms of office shall commence July 1, 1958. 
The said election shall be held within the areas of the cities in all respects in the same manner and subject to the same rules and regulations as if the respective officers were being elected for such city in a general election, and the costs of such elections within the respective areas of such cities shall be borne by each such city. 
In the event all matters in any way concerning or governing said election have not herein been provided for, or if any question in connection therewith is raised, the judges of the courts of record of said cities sitting en banc are authorized and directed to enter such orders concerning the same which may be necessary to provide such omission or settle such dispute. 
The terms of office of the city councilmen elected by the combined qualified voters of the cities of Newport News and Warwick, in accordance with general law, on Tuesday, November 5, 1957, shall commence June 30, 1958. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.11. - Preliminary meeting of the council elect to choose a city manager and for other purposes. 
At any time following the ascertainment of the result of the first election of councilmen for this city, such councilmen-elect are directed and authorized to meet at such places they may select and at such times as they may deem necessary for the purposes of considering the appointment of a city manager, the preparation of ordinances, appointments which are required of them, and all such other matters as may be necessary to effectuate the transition resulting from the consolidation of the cities into this city. All expenses of the council-elect in complying with the above provisions shall be paid by this city upon vouchers signed by such members of the council-elect as they may designate. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.12. - Transfer of books and papers. 
If any person having been an officer of the city, shall not, within ten days after he shall have vacated or been removed from office, deliver over to his successor in office all the property, books and papers belonging to the city or appertaining to such office, in his possession or under his control, he shall forfeit and pay to the city the sum of $500, to be sued for and recovered with costs. All books, records, and documents used in any such office, by virtue of any provision of this charter or of any ordinance or order of the council or any superior officer of the city, shall be deemed the property of the city and appertain to said office, and the chief officer thereof shall be responsible therefor. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.13. - Notary public. 
All certificates of acknowledgments to deeds and other writings taken and certified by a Notary Public or other officer originally duly authorized to take acknowledgments in the former City of Newport News, and the former City of Warwick, prior to the normal expiration date of the commission of such Notary Public or other officer, are declared to be valid to the same extent they would have been valid as if such Notary Public or other officers had been commissioned for the Consolidated City. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.14. - (1958, c. 141; repealed 1968, c. 448)  
Sec. 27.15. - Peninsula airport commission. 
All the rights, powers and liabilities of the former City of Newport News, and the former City of Warwick resulting from any agreement or arising by law in the Peninsula Airport Commission shall be acquired by the Consolidated City and the representation of the former Cities of Newport News and Warwick at the time of consolidation shall continue as the representatives of the Consolidated City as if the Consolidated City had originally been a party to the creation of the Peninsula Airport Commission until their successors are appointed by the council of the Consolidated City. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.16. - (1958, c. 141; repealed 1968, c. 448)  
Sec. 27.17. - Water, sewerage and sewage disposal systems. 
The consolidated city shall acquire all of the rights, privileges, and liabilities of the former City of Newport News, and the former City of Warwick respective to the law under which its interest in any water supply system and any sewage disposal systems have been and are being installed, and all rights and privileges granted by the Commonwealth of Virginia or by the United States of America to the former Cities of Newport News and Warwick. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.18. - Meaning of "at the effective date of this charter." 
As used in this charter, the term "at the effective date of this charter" shall be interpreted to refer to a period immediately preceding the taking effect thereof. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.19. - Saving clause. 
In the event that any portion, section or provision of this charter shall be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by final judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not invalidate any other portion, section or provision hereof, but all parts of said charter not expressly held to be invalid shall remain in full force and effect. 
(1958, c. 141)  
Sec. 27.20. - (1971, c. 77; repealed 1978, c. 576)  
Sec. 27.21. - (1970, c. 647; repealed 1978, c. 576)  
Sec. 27.22. - (1970, c. 647; repealed 1978, c. 576)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Newport News, Virginia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Newport News City Code." 
(Code 1961, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, § 4.12. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise. Unless otherwise prescribed in this section or other sections of this Code or other ordinances of the city, the rules of construction and definitions given in title 1, chapter 2.1, Code of Virginia, shall govern, so far as applicable. 
And, or. "And" may be read "or" and "or" may be read "and," if the sense requires it. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the city as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
City. The term "city," "this city" or "the city" shall mean the Consolidated City of Newport News, in the State of Virginia. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used, without further qualification, it shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Newport News, Virginia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council. Whenever the term "council" or "city council" is used it shall be construed to mean the council of the Consolidated City of Newport News, Virginia. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
Health officer. The term "health officer" shall be taken to mean the director of public health of the city or such director's authorized representative. 
In the city; within the city. The words "in the city" or "within the city" shall mean any territory, jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred on the city by general or special law. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise expressly stated. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one (1) person and thing, and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one (1) person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, department, board, commission or other agency, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Newport News, Virginia." 
Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are referred to, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the city. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" may extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature; subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State or commonwealth. The word "state" or "commonwealth" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Virginia." 
State Code. References to the "State Code" or "Code of Virginia" shall mean the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Street. The word "street" shall include streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public highways in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. 
Swear; sworn. The words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed" in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Written; in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1961, § 1-2; Ord. No. 6398-07) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions and rules of construction applicable to state law, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1961, § 1-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to sections of state code, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9.  
Sec. 1-4. - Provisions of Code considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances adopted on and subsequent to July 1, 1958, the effective date of the consolidation of the former Cities of Warwick and Newport News, and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1961, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-5. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance relating to salaries of city officers and employees or to compensation or pay plans or classification plans for such officers or employees; 
(4)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement; 
(6)  Ordinance No. 1020, being the subdivision ordinance set out in Appendix B of this Code, or any amendment thereto; 
(7)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; or 
(8)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5292-99; Ord. No. 7339-17)  
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6642-09, adopted Nov. 10, 2009, repealed § 1-7, which pertained to limitation on amount of real estate that may be held by trustees of church or religious society, and derived from Ord. No. 267, § 1; Code 1961, § 1-7; Ord. No. 2733-81; Ord. No. 5822-02, § 1. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 1-8. - Limitation on amount of real estate that may be held by trustees of benevolent or literary associations. 
The trustees of any society of Freemasons, Odd Fellows, Sons of Temperance, posts of Veterans of Foreign Wars or of the American Legion, Spanish War Veterans, Disabled American Veterans and of other associations of veterans of the armed forces of the United States or any other benevolent or literary association, or school league, or other group, organized for rural community civic purposes or improvement of farm life or operations of like purposes and not for profit, shall not take or hold in the city, for the use of any such association, any land, exceeding ten (10) acres, at any one (1) time; and the trustees of two (2) or more such bodies or societies may hold jointly, land not exceeding ten (10) acres. 
(Ord. No. 1060, § 1; Code 1961, § 1-8) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 57-20.  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference— Authority to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 1-10. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
At least three (3) copies of this Code and every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall there be available for public inspection, during normal business hours. 
State Law reference— Copy of Code on file, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 1-11. - Classification of and penalties for violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city or any rule or regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the city, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a Class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by confinement in jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(b)  Whenever in any provisions of this Code or in any other ordinance of the city or any rule or regulation promulgated by an officer or agency of the city, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, such violation shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor and be punished as prescribed in subsection (a)(1) above. 
(c)  Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation referred to in this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. 
(d)  In addition to the fines and costs herein imposed, there shall be collected interest thereon at the annual rate of eight (8) percent from the date of entry of the judgment for such fine and costs or October 1, 1977, whichever is later, through June 30, 1981, and at the annual rate of ten (10) percent from the date of entry of the judgment for such fine and costs imposed after June 30, 1981. 
(Ord. No. 2179; Code 1961, §§ 12-1, 25-59; Ord. No. 2969-82; Ord No. 4078-90; Ord. No. 4159-91) 
Cross reference— Bondsmen, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11; authority of city to provide penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one (1) year, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1430; injunctive relief for continuing violations of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432.  
Sec. 1-11.1. - Penalties for failure to appear. 
Whoever, having been released from custody pursuant to chapter 9, title 19.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or on a summons pursuant to section 19.2-73 or 19.2-74 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, for having violated any criminal provision of the Newport News City Code, willfully fails to appear before any court or judicial officer as required shall, after notice to all interested parties, incur a forfeiture of any security which may have been given or pledged for his release, unless one (1) of the parties can show good cause for excusing the absence, or unless the court, in its sound discretion, shall determine that neither the interests of justice nor the power of the court to conduct orderly proceedings will be served by such forfeiture. In addition, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2824-81)  
Sec. 1-12. - Refund of forfeiture previously deposited upon acquittal. 
If any person charged with the violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city, or city regulation, deposits a forfeiture, with the appropriate court clerk or other person authorized to receive such forfeiture, and such forfeiture is entered as a fine and costs in the court having jurisdiction of such violation, and if the accused, within ten (10) days thereafter demands trial and, upon trial in such court is acquitted, the accused shall be entitled to a refund of such forfeiture as follows: The judge of the court in which the case was tried shall certify to the city manager the name of the defendant, the amount of such forfeiture so entered as a fine and costs and the date on which the defendant was acquitted. Upon receipt of such certificate, the city manager shall direct that the amount be paid to the accused by city warrant. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 2; Code 1961, § 12-5)  
Sec. 1-13. - Refund of fine and costs paid upon appeal to circuit court. 
Any person charged with the violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city, or city regulation, and who has been tried in a court of original jurisdiction over such violation, and a fine and costs having been imposed by the court and paid to the court by the defendant for the use and benefit of the city, and who thereafter, within the period provided by law, perfects an appeal to the circuit court of the city, by giving bond within the time prescribed by law, shall be entitled to a refund of such fine and costs, as follows: The judge of the court in which the case was tried shall certify to the city manager the name of the defendant, the amount of fine and costs so paid, and the date on which the defendant perfected his appeal to the circuit court of the city, by giving bond within the time prescribed direct the amount of fine and costs so paid to be refunded to the accused by city warrant. 
(Ord. No. 123, § 1; Code 1961, § 12-4)  
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is, for any reason, declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
(Code 1961, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-15. - Incorporation of future amendments by reference. 
When the city incorporates, by reference, any state statute or regulation into an ordinance, the incorporation by reference shall include any future amendments to the referenced state statutes or regulations, unless contrary intent is specifically stated in the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5651-01, § 1)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building board of appeals, § 13-60 et seq.; election districts, § 15-50 et seq.; fire department, § 16-1 et seq.; health department, § 20-1 et seq.; human rights commission, § 21.1-4 et seq.; library system, Ch. 22; transportation safety commission, § 26-32 et seq.; department of parks and recreation, § 29-3 et seq.; board of trustees of employees' retirement fund, § 31-72 et seq.; division of pensions in department of finance, § 31-74; police department, § 32-1; department of social services, § 34-1 et seq.; board of public welfare, § 34-4; social services advisory board, § 34-15 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 40; board of zoning appeals, § 45-3201 et seq. 
State Law reference— State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq.; The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq.; Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4300 et seq.; counties, cities and towns, Code of Virginia, title 15.2; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
(a)  The seal for the city shall be and consist of a metallic disc containing, within a plain border indicating a ship's wheel, mounted externally with eight (8) evenly spaced spokes, the following inscription "CORPORATION OF NEWPORT NEWS, VIRGINIA," in Roman letters; double lines both parallel to the external border, the outer and inner lines forming an incomplete circle, which is completed by a separate arc at the top containing the date 1958; springing from the inner line at the bottom of the circle, and as a continuation of said line, is the Warwick Elm, in the background of which are three (3) ships, the Susan Constant on the right of the trunk and the Godspeed and Discovery on the left of the trunk. 
(b)  Neither the city seal nor any image or reproduction thereof can be used by any person or entity, other than by the city government or an agency, board, commission, department or a current officer thereof, for official city business, unless same is authorized by specific provision of law or by any policy regulating the use of the city seal promulgated hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 30; Code 1961, § 1-6; Ord. No. 5697-01, § 1)  
Sec. 2-2. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of the following June. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 1; Ord. No. 983, § 1; Ord. No. 998, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-1) 
Charter reference— Fiscal year to be established by ordinance, § 6.01. 
Cross reference— Tax and assessment year, § 40-21.  
Sec. 2-3. - Budget, accounting, etc., year. 
The fiscal year provided for in section 2-2 shall constitute the budget and accounting year and period of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 6, § 2; Ord. No. 983, § 1; Ord. No. 998, § 1; Ord. No. 1105, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-2) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 6.01.  
Sec. 2-4. - Custody, cancellation and destruction of redeemed bonds and coupons. 
The city treasurer shall be the custodian of bonds and coupons which comprise the bonded debt of the city when such bonds and coupons have been paid or otherwise redeemed. The city treasurer shall cause such paid or redeemed bonds and coupons to be cancelled and destroyed and shall retain a permanent record of such cancellation and destruction in accordance with sound accounting practices and laws of this state. When the paid bonds and coupons have been destroyed, a certificate of such destruction, containing an itemized list of bonds and coupons destroyed, shall be filed with the director of finance and one (1) such certificate retained by the treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 34, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-3)  
Sec. 2-5. - Bonds of officers and employees generally. 
The city manager shall place all fidelity bonds for which the city pays the premium required of any and all officers of the city, whether appointed or elective, as well as such bonds as may be required of city employees. The surety on all such bonds shall be satisfactory to and approved by the city manager, and the form thereof shall be acceptable to the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 18, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-45) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to prescribe amount and condition of surety bonds for officers and employees, § 4.02(E).  
Sec. 2-6. - Bond of city treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall furnish a bond, with a surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the sum of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), for the faithful discharge by the city treasurer of the official duties of the treasurer's office as city treasurer and such other official duties of such office as are, or may be, imposed upon the city treasurer by law and by the Charter and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 16, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-44)  
Sec. 2-7. - General duties of city clerk. 
The city clerk shall perform such clerical duties on behalf of the council or its members as the council may, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 420; Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-42) 
Charter reference— City clerk, § 4.04  
Sec. 2-8. - Duty of city clerk to publish reports and ordinances. 
The city clerk shall publish such reports and ordinances as the council is required by law to publish and such other reports and ordinances as it may direct. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-41)  
Sec. 2-9. - City clerk as clerk of boards and commissions. 
The city clerk shall act as clerk of such boards and commissions as the council may, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-38)  
Sec. 2-10. - Normal work schedule. 
The normal work schedule for city employees shall consist of a forty-hour work-week. Work schedules which deviate from forty (40) hours per week shall be approved by the city manager. The city manager is authorized to promulgate policies and procedures governing employee work schedules. 
(Ord. No. 2570-79; Ord. No. 4470-93, § 1)  
Sec. 2-11. - Continuation of service of members of city boards, commissions, committees and offices; residency requirement. 
Consistent with the Charter, members of all boards, commissions, committees and other offices appointed by the city council at the end of their terms continue in office until reappointed or replaced. 
Every person, appointed by city council on and after September 8, 1998, as a member of a board, commission, committee, or other office, shall be, at the time of his appointment, a resident of this city and during the tenure of his appointment shall reside within the city, provided that initial appointments to the board of the commission on youth established in this Code may include non-residents. Such initial appointments to the commission on youth board shall be limited to members of the alliance for youth and youth services commission boards of directors who were active board members on April 1, 2000, and who represented youth serving agencies; provided further, that such non-resident board members shall not be eligible for reappointment for any subsequent term of office. 
To meet the test of residency, the person considered for appointment must, at a minimum, reside in Newport News, utilize Newport News as his/her place of residence for income tax and personal property purposes, and register all motor vehicles titled solely in the name of the person, if any, in the city. If registered to vote, same must be done in the City of Newport News. Any failure to maintain residency within the city shall terminate that person's membership and cause to be forfeited any remainder of the term for which the member was appointed. This residency requirement will not apply to persons appointed to serve on boards, commissions, committees, or other offices, each of which are of a regional nature; however, those persons must have and maintain a substantial business or professional interest or undertaking in Newport News or have some other significant connection to the welfare and well-being of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2737-81; Ord. No. 5188-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5548-00)  
Sec. 2-11.1. - Attendance of members of city boards, authorities, commissions and committees; procedure governing unexcused absences. 
(a)  As used in this section the words and phrases identified below shall have the following meaning: 
(1)  Appointed body shall mean the city's boards, authorities, commissions and committees, whose members are appointed by the Newport News City Council and who are residents of the city. The phrase "appointed body" shall not mean regional boards, or authorities, such as, but not limited to, the Peninsula Ports Authority of Virginia, or the Peninsula Airport Commission. 
(2)  Consistent absence shall mean unexcused absences by a member of an appointed body from three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of that appointed body during any city fiscal year. 
(3)  Irregular attendance shall mean unexcused absences by a member of an appointed body from three (3) regularly scheduled meetings of that appointed body during any city fiscal year. 
(4)  Member shall mean a person appointed by the Newport News City Council to serve as a voting member of an appointed body. 
(5)  Unexcused absence shall mean an absence, by a member of an appointed body from a regularly scheduled meeting of that appointed body, for which the member of that appointed body failed to notify the chairman or other designated officer thereof of an impending absence prior to the date of the public body's regularly scheduled meeting. 
(b)  The city council finds that attendance of members of appointed bodies are an important and necessary component of service on same and that failure of a member of an appointed body to attend scheduled meetings of his or her appointed body affects the ability of that appointed body to conduct its public business. Attendance data shall be compiled by the chairman or other designated officer of the appointed body and reported by him or her to the city clerk on a monthly basis. Such data shall be a factor utilized by city council when it considers an individual for removal, appointment or reappointment to an appointed body. A member of an appointed body who is unable to attend a meeting of that body shall notify the chairman or other designated officer thereof of that impending absence prior to the date of the appointed body's meeting. 
(c)  Irregular attendance. During the city's fiscal year, if any member's attendance at regularly scheduled meetings of that appointed body shall be deemed to be irregular attendance, such occurrences shall give rise to the presumption that such member has voluntarily resigned from that appointed body. Prior to a determination that the member has voluntarily resigned from that appointed body, the following shall occur: 
(1)  During that fiscal year of the city, once any member incurs two (2) unexcused absences from regularly scheduled meetings of his or her appointed body the chairman or other designated officer thereof shall cause a letter to be written to the member who has incurred two (2) unexcused absences, requesting that the member advise the chairman or other designated officer of the member's intent with reference to future attendance at meetings of the appointed body. 
(2)  If the member provides a written statement to the chairman or other designated officer of the appointed body indicating a desire to continue to serve on said appointed body, the chairman or other designated officer shall report same to the city clerk who shall write to said member who experienced two (2) unexcused absences, and remind that member that a third such unexcused absence will be deemed to be a voluntary resignation. 
(3)  If the member does not communicate with the chairman or other designated officer of the appointed body prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the appointed body, the chairman or other designated officer thereof shall so notify the city clerk. The city clerk shall thereafter notify the city council of the attendance issue; provided that the city clerk shall send a copy of that correspondence to said member. The city council shall take such action with reference to the attendance issue as the city council in its sole discretion deems appropriate. 
(d)  Consistent absence. During the city's fiscal year, if any member's attendance at regularly scheduled meetings of that appointed body shall be deemed to be a consistent absence, such occurrences shall give rise to the presumption that such member has voluntarily resigned from that appointed body. Prior to a determination that the member has voluntarily resigned from that appointed body, the following shall occur: 
(1)  The chairman or other designated officer of the appointed body shall cause a letter to be written to such member who has incurred two (2) consecutive unexcused absences from two (2) regularly scheduled meetings requesting that the person advise the chairman or other designated officer of the member's intent with reference to future attendance at meetings. 
(2)  If the member provides a written statement of the member's intent to cease attending and to officially resign as a member of that appointed body, the chairman or other designated officer shall so notify the city clerk and provide the city clerk with a copy of that written statement. The city clerk shall thereafter request in writing that the city council appoint a new member to the affected appointed body; provided that the city clerk shall send a copy of that correspondence to said member. 
(3)  If the member provides a written statement to the chairman or other designated officer of the appointed body indicating a desire to continue to serve on said appointed body, the chairman or other designated officer shall report same to the city clerk who shall write to said member who incurred two (2) unexcused absences, and remind that member that a third unexcused absence will be deemed to be a voluntary resignation. 
(4)  If the member does not communicate with the chairman or other designated officer of the appointed body prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the appointed body the chairman or other designated officer thereof shall notify the clerk of such occurrence. The city clerk shall thereafter notify the city council in writing of the attendance issue; provided that the city clerk shall send a copy of that correspondence to said member. The city council shall take such action with reference to the attendance issue as the council in its sole discretion deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 6297-06)  
Sec. 2-12. - Civil penalty recovery from drawer of bad check, draft or order. 
In the event a check, draft or order tendered for payment of any amounts due the city, or due any other organization for which the city is acting as a fiscal agent, the payment of which has been refused by the drawee because of lack of funds in or credit with such drawee, is not paid in full within thirty (30) days after receipt by the drawer of written notice by registered or certified or regular mail with the city retaining sufficient proof of mailing, which may be a U.S. Postal Certificate of Mailing, from the city that the check, draft or order has been returned unpaid, the city may recover from the drawer in a civil claim or action a civil penalty of the lesser of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or three (3) times the amount of the check, draft or order. No action may be initiated under this section if any action has been initiated under section 18.2-181 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2881-82; Ord. No. 3355-85; Ord. No. 5070-97; Ord. No. 5818-02, § 1)  
Sec. 2-12.1. - Fees, penalties and interest for collection of delinquent charges. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon each delinquent charge due the city, where the charge is delinquent and has been referred to an attorney for collection, a fee to cover reasonable attorneys' fees in the amount of twenty (20) percent of the delinquent charge, including penalties. In any case where a collection agency is contracted to collect any delinquent charge, the collection agency's fees, up to twenty (20) percent of the delinquent charge, including penalties, shall be chargeable against any amount due. 
(b)  Any person failing to pay any account due the city on or before its due date, other than taxes, shall incur a penalty thereon of ten dollars ($10.00) or ten (10) percent of the amount delinquent, whichever is greater. The penalty shall be added to the amount of the account due for such person. No penalty shall be imposed for failure to pay any account if such failure was not in any way the fault of the debtor. 
(c)  Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent annually from the first day following the day such account is due, shall be collected upon the principal and penalty due on all such accounts. 
(Ord. No. 5474-00, § 1)  
Sec. 2-13. - Contract execution. 
(a)  The city manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to execute all city contracts. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority to delegate to the purchasing agent, and his designee, the authority to execute contracts for the purchase of goods and services in and for such amounts as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2900-82; Ord. No. 2993-82; Ord. No. 5037-97; Ord. No. 7072-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-13.1. - Acceptance of deeds by city manager or his designee. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to accept, on behalf of the city, deeds purporting to convey real property to the city which have been approved as to form by the city attorney, or one (1) of his assistants. 
(Ord. No. 5086-97, § 1)  
Sec. 2-14. - Authority to accept revenue by commercially acceptable means; service charge; bad check charge. 
(a)  Subject to § 19.2-353.3 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, relative to payments of fees, fines, restitutions, forfeitures, penalties and other costs to the Newport News circuit and district courts, payments of taxes, interest, penalties, fees, fines or other charges due the city as designated by the city manager may be made by any commercially acceptable means, including, but not limited to, checks, credit cards, debit cards, and electronic funds transfers. 
(b)  A sum, not to exceed the amount charged to the city for acceptance of any payment by a means that incurs a charge to the city, shall be owed by the payee and added to any such payment. 
(c)  If any check or other means of payment tendered to the city is not paid by the financial institution on which it is drawn, because of insufficient funds in the account of the drawer, was returned because of a stop-payment order placed in bad faith, no account is in the name of the drawer, or the account of the drawer is closed, and the check or other means of payment is returned to the public body unpaid, the amount thereof shall be charged to the person on whose account it was received, and his liability and that of his sureties, shall be as if he had never offered any such payment. A penalty of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) or the amount of any costs, whichever is greater, shall be added to such amount, provided that the unpaid amount, plus penalty, is received by the city within ten (10) days of the date notice is mailed to the person who passed the dishonored instrument. Thereafter, should any unpaid amount remain, the penalty shall increase to fifty dollars ($50.00) or the amount of the costs, whichever is greater. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 3210-84, § 1; Ord. No. 5818-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6040-04, § 1; Ord. No. 6724-10; Ord. No. 6772-11, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6772-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 2-15. - Acting city manager. 
The city manager is hereby authorized to designate an acting city manager who, in the absence of the city manager, shall possess all the powers and responsibilities conferred upon the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3350-85, § 1)  
Sec. 2-16. - Capital improvements program procedure and adoption. 
(a)  The city manager shall no later than November 1 of each year submit to the council a multi-year capital improvements program which is consistent with the policies established by the council for such a program. 
(b)  The capital improvements program shall contain estimates of the costs of the facilities presented therein and the means of financing them. 
(c)  The council may request that the Newport News City Planning Commission review the capital improvements program for conformity with the city's comprehensive plan. The council shall establish a time for receipt of the commission's recommendations in its request for recommendation. 
(d)  The capital improvement program shall be adopted by resolution by the votes of at least a majority of the members of council. 
(Ord. No. 3960-89; Ord. No. 5277-99)  
Sec. 2-17. - Budget submission procedure for city attorney and city clerk. 
The following procedure shall apply to submission and review of the budgets of the city attorney and city clerk: 
(1)  Consistent with the City Charter, the city attorney and city clerk shall submit estimates of revenue and expenditure for their departments on the forms and at such time prescribed by the city manager or the manager's designee for budget preparation. 
(2)  The city manager may conduct such meetings with the city attorney or the city clerk as he may deem proper to create an understanding of their departmental budgets. The city manager's budget recommendation to the council may include a recommended revision to these departmental budgets, but such revision shall relate only to the total estimated departmental expenditure. 
(3)  Prior to the council's first scheduled budget work session, the city attorney and city clerk shall transmit a copy of their office budgets directly to the council. 
(4)  The council shall request such information from the city manager, city attorney and city clerk as it deems necessary to obtain a full understanding of the city attorney's budget and city clerk's budget. The council may request that this information be provided in the form of written reports or it may seek information through discussion with the city attorney or city clerk, or both. 
(5)  The council shall approve the budgets of the city attorney and city clerk at the same time as it acts on the operational budget of the city as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 4067-90)  
Sec. 2-18. - Assessment for courthouse construction, renovation or maintenance. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed, as part of the fees taxed as costs in each civil action, criminal or traffic case in a district or circuit court in the city, an assessment of two dollars ($2.00). Such assessment shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. 
(b)  The assessments shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, and remitted to the city treasurer who shall hold the monies subject to disbursements by the city council for the construction, renovation or maintenance of courthouse or jail and courthouse-related facilities and to defray increases in the cost of heating, cooling, electricity and ordinary maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 4054-90; Ord. No. 4197-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4516-93; Ord. No. 4622-94; Ord. No. 5387-00; Ord. No. 6608-09, § 1)  
Sec. 2-18.1. - Assessment of additional court costs in criminal and traffic cases for courthouse and courtroom security. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 53.1-120 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed and assessed, as part of the costs incident to each criminal and traffic case in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance, in the circuit, general district and juvenile and domestic relations district courts located within the city, the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) for courthouse and courtroom security. 
(b)  The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law and shall be collected by the clerk of the respective courts, remitted to the treasurer of this city and held by such treasurer subject to appropriation by the city council to the sheriff's office for the funding of courthouse security personnel. 
(Ord. No. 5797-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6382-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7618-20, § 1)  
Sec. 2-18.2. - Assessment of additional court costs to support Newport News' local criminal justice training academy. 
(a)  Pursuant to § 9.1-106 of the Code of Virginia, the clerks of the circuit, general district, and juvenile and domestic relations district courts located within the city shall assess and collect a fee of five dollars ($5.00) in every case in which costs are assessable pursuant to the Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-69.48:1, 17.1-275.1, 17.1-275.2, 17.1-275.3, 17.1-275.4, 17.1-275.7, 17.1-275.8, and 17.1-275.9. 
(b)  The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law and shall be remitted to the treasurer of this city and held by such treasurer subject to appropriation by the city council. All funds collected pursuant to this ordinance shall be used to support the police department's criminal justice training academy. 
(Ord. No. 6698-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— This section shall be in effect on and after August 1, 2010.  
Sec. 2-19. - Setoff debt collection; recovery of administrative costs. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by Virginia Code § 58.1- 520.1, the council hereby imposes, in addition to the amount of delinquent debt collected pursuant to the provisions of the Setoff Debt Collection Act (Virginia Code § 58.1-520, et seq.), a fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per claim as a means of recovering the administrative costs associated with collection of the debt. 
(Ord. No. 4661-94)  
Sec. 2-19.1. - Traveling and meeting expenses. 
(a)  Any person traveling on city business in a privately owned motor vehicle, wherein no part of the cost is borne by the Commonwealth, may be reimbursed for the cost of the use of such vehicle at the standard mileage rate which is deductible as a business expense pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to promulgate policies and procedures governing the administration of travel expenses and meeting expenses for city business. 
(Ord. No. 4934-96; Ord. No. 6897-12, § 1)  
Sec. 2-19.2. - Jail processing fee imposed on certain individuals; use of revenue by sheriff's office. 
There is hereby imposed a processing fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) on any individual admitted to the city jail following conviction. The fee shall be ordered as a part of court costs collected by the clerk of court and shall be deposited into the account of the treasurer of the city. The fee shall be used by the Newport News Sheriff's Office to defray the costs of processing arrested persons into the city jail. 
(Ord. No. 5793-02, § 1)  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Council generally, Ch. 4. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-20. - Duties of officers of council. 
(a)  The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council and shall have the same right to vote and speak therein as other members. The mayor shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, the purposes of military law and the service of civil process. 
(b)  The vice-mayor shall, in the absence or disability of the mayor, perform the duties of mayor. In the absence or disability of both the mayor and vice-mayor, the council shall, by majority vote of those present, choose one (1) of their number to perform the duties of mayor. 
(c)  The mayor shall call meetings to order at the hour for holding such meetings and, if a quorum be present, shall cause the journal of the proceeding meeting to be read and call for corrections at the conclusion thereof, after which same shall be approved, and, when transcribed in the book provided for that purpose, the mayor shall sign same. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-3) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 4.03.  
Sec. 2-21. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
The regular meetings of the council shall be held in the council chambers at 7:00 p.m. on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month, except there shall be no meeting on the fourth Tuesday of July, August and December. Should any regular meeting fall on a legal holiday, the meeting shall be held on the next succeeding day which is not a legal holiday and at the same hour. Regular meetings, without further public notice, may be adjourned from day to day or from time to time or from place to place, not beyond the time fixed for the next regular meeting, until the business before the council is completed. 
If the council subsequently prescribes any public place other than the regular meeting place, or any day or time other than that established by this section, as a regular meeting day, place or time, the council shall pass a resolution as to such future meeting day, place or time. The council shall cause a copy of such resolution to be posted on the door of the courthouse or the initial regular meeting place and inserted in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least seven (7) days prior to the regular meeting at such other day, place or time. 
In addition, a regular meeting of the council may be cancelled by (1) the city manager, after consulting individually with the members of council, in the event that there are no agenda items for consideration at a regular meeting; or (2) if the mayor, or vice-mayor if the mayor is unable to act, finds and declares that weather or other conditions are such that it is hazardous for members and the public to attend the regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 187, § 1; Ord. No. 1945, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-5; Ord. No. 2537-79; Ord. No. 2593-79, § 1; Ord. No. 3196-84, § 1; Ord. No. 6659-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6723-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7289-16, § 1) 
Charter reference— Council to provide for time and place of regular meetings, which shall be not less frequently than once per month, § 4.06. 
Cross reference— Disrupting council meetings, § 28-11.  
Sec. 2-21.1. - Work session meetings. 
If needed, work sessions of the council may be held prior to the regular meetings established by section 2-21, without need for call and notice of special meeting under section 2-22. Except as necessary to fill vacancies created by death, disability or resignation, appointments to boards, commissions, authorities and committees shall take place at the work session on the second Tuesday of March, June, September and December. 
(Ord. No. 7290-16)  
Sec. 2-22. - Call and notice of special meetings; limitations on business transacted at special meeting. 
(a)  The mayor, the city manager or any three (3) members of the council may call a special meeting of the council at any time upon at least twenty-four (24) hours' written notice to each member, served personally or left at such member's usual place of business or residence. Such special meetings may be held at any time, without notice, provided all members of the council attend such meetings and sign a waiver of the written notice. The notice of each special meeting shall be served by the city clerk and shall contain a statement of the specific item or items of business to be transacted, and no other business shall be transacted at such meeting except by unanimous consent of all members of the council. 
For the purpose of discussing council ideas/suggestions/concerns at city council work sessions, those ideas, suggestions or concerns shall not be deemed to be a specific item or items of business to be transacted and as such will not require a waiver of notice identifying same. No topic discussed as an idea, suggestion or concern shall bind the council to any decision or line of procedure except and until duly and specifically authorized by the council at a regular meeting or a special meeting called for that purpose. 
(b)  The delivery of formal written notice of a special meeting to a member of the council may be waived by the member by so advising the city clerk. If such waiver is not in writing, the member shall reduce such waiver to writing at or before the special meeting or not later than the next regular meeting of the council following the special meeting at which the member is in attendance. Unless the delivery of formal written notice is waived as provided in this section by all of the members of the council, no special meeting shall be held unless the notice required in this section is delivered as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, §§ 2-7, 2-8; Ord. No. 6744-10) 
Charter reference— Call and notice of special council meetings, § 4.06.  
Sec. 2-23. - Meetings to be open to public. 
The meetings of the council shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-4)  
Sec. 2-24. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-5.1) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 4.06.  
Sec. 2-25. - Special committees. 
For obtaining information or the preparation of reports, special committees may be appointed by the mayor or council in accordance with resolutions adopted in an open meeting, such committees to consist of such numbers as designated in the resolution. Such committees shall report to the council at each regular meeting following their appointment until the purpose for which they were appointed is fulfilled, whereupon the committee shall be discharged by the presiding officer. No such committee shall, by word or writing, bind the council to any decision or line of procedure except and until duly and specifically authorized by the council in meeting assembled. 
(Ord. No. 1887, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-11)  
Sec. 2-26. - Duty of city clerk to attend council and committee meetings and record and index proceedings. 
The city clerk shall attend all regular and special meetings of the council as well as the meetings of any special committee of the council, if required. The clerk shall record the proceedings of such meetings in a journal and the same shall be properly indexed. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1, Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-37) 
Charter reference— Clerk's duty to keep journal of council proceedings, § 4.04.  
Sec. 2-27. - Signing, recording and indexing of ordinances and resolutions. 
All resolutions and ordinances adopted by the council shall be signed by the presiding officer and the city clerk and shall be recorded in a book which shall be properly indexed. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-12) 
Charter reference— Numbering and recording of ordinances, § 4.12.  
Sec. 2-28. - Duty of city clerk at close of session of council. 
The city clerk shall, immediately after the close of each session of the council: 
(1)  Make and present to the mayor a transcript of every ordinance, resolution or order and act of legislative character passed at such session. 
(2)  Transmit to the director of finance and city treasurer a transcript of all ordinances or resolutions appropriating money or authorizing the payment of money or the issuance of bonds or notes. 
(3)  Give notice to all persons presenting letters, petitions or communications to the council of the final action of the council on such petitions or communications. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-41)  
Sec. 2-29. - Decorum at council meetings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person present at a council meeting, no matter where held, to enter such meeting with or display at such meeting any placard, banner, or sign. This prohibition shall not apply to visual aids utilized in presentations of matters under consideration by council when permission for such use is granted by the mayor, acting mayor, or a majority of the council. 
(Ord. No. 3067-83)  
Sec. 2-30. - Council travel expenditures. 
(a)  Travel expense fund allocations for each council member shall be established as a part of the development of the city's operating budget. Each council member must prepare a travel expense estimate for a fiscal year and submit the estimate for discussion and approval as a part of the adopted operating budget. In the instance where an individual council member exhausts the allocated travel expense allowance, further travel expenses may not be incurred without the approval of a majority of the members of the council. 
(b)  Travel reports shall be filed with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after a member's return from that travel. In addition, travel shall not be authorized unless and until outstanding travel reports, if any, have been completed and submitted. 
(c)  Council travel preparation, to include travel advances, ticket acquisitions, reservations, etc., shall be coordinated by and handled through the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 3197-84, § 1; Ord. No. 3323-85)  
Sec. 2-31. - Salaries. 
For the 2002-03 fiscal year, and each fiscal year thereafter, the salaries for the mayor and members of city council shall be twenty-seven thousand dollars ($27,000.00) and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), respectively, payable in prorated monthly installments. 
(Ord. No. 4947-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5716-01, § 1)  
Secs. 2-32, 2-33. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 2-34. - Adoption pursuant to Charter. 
The rules of procedure for council meetings set out in this division are adopted pursuant to section 4.06 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-2)  
Sec. 2-35. - Absence of quorum. 
In the absence of a quorum, at the expiration of fifteen (15) minutes from the time appointed for a council meeting, the clerk shall enter upon the journal the names of the members present, and the meeting shall stand ipso facto adjourned until the next regular meeting or until a new call is issued in the regular way if it be a special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-16)  
Sec. 2-36. - Order of business prescribed—Regular meetings. 
(a)  At every regular meeting of the council, the order of business shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call of the roll. 
(2)  Invocation. 
(3)  Pledge of allegiance. 
(4)  Agenda to be compiled by the city manager. 
(5)  Citizen comments on matters germane to the business of city council. 
(6)  Old business. 
(7)  New business. 
(b)  Council appointments to boards, commissions and committees and zoning matters may be considered at any regular council meeting, or special council meeting called for that purpose. 
(c)  Comments on matters germane to the business of city council are those comments or statements which address issues or topics that the city council is empowered to address. Comments on matters germane to the business of city council do not include, although the following items are not all inclusive: issues or topics dealing with the hiring, firing, or disciplining of city employees other than council appointees, unless specifically authorized by the City Charter; the assessment of value for taxation on a specific parcel or parcels of property; the management or operation of the school system or any political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia or the activities of a constitutional officer; the management or control of probable or actual litigation or other law business of the city; statements in support of or in opposition to any candidate for public office, with exception of offices filled by appointment of the city council; statements or announcements which call attention to or publicize the activities or events of organizations, groups or an individual, when said activity or event is not sponsored by the City of Newport News or its officers. 
(d)  When appropriate, the agenda to be compiled by the city manager shall include items for the purpose of bestowing and accepting declarations, proclamations and other commemoratives. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-6; Ord. No. 2331; Ord. No. 2659-80; Ord. No. 3198-84, § 1; Ord. No. 3470-86; Ord. No. 4068-90, § 1; Ord. No. 5914-03; Ord. No. 6659-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7074-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7586-19, § 1)  
Sec. 2-37. - Same—Special meetings. 
The order of business at special meetings of the council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Call of the roll. 
(2)  Reading of the call for the special meeting, if written, or stated, if verbal. 
(3)  Discussion of the business on call, in the order given in the call. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-9)  
Sec. 2-38. - Departure from order of business. 
The order of business at regular or special council meetings shall not be departed from except by the consent of four (4) members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-10)  
Sec. 2-38.1. - Consent agenda. 
(a)  The agenda may include a section entitled "consent agenda" which shall immediately follow such hearings as may be authorized or required by law to be granted to the public. This section may include by way of illustration but not limitation: 
(1)  Approval of minutes. 
(2)  Any item believed by the clerk of council or the city manager to be routine and not controversial in nature. 
(b)  The following rules shall apply to the consent agenda: 
(1)  A member of council may by request have any item removed from the consent agenda, which shall then be taken up after disposing of all other matters on the agenda. 
(2)  Items not removed from the consent agenda by the procedure outlined above shall be approved by motion and roll call vote. Said roll call vote shall constitute the vote on all items of the consent agenda and shall be recorded as such for each individual item by the clerk. 
(3)  No public hearing items shall be an item of the consent agenda. 
(4)  No item requiring other than a simple majority vote shall be a consent agenda item. 
(5)  The clerk of council shall ensure that all council members are aware in advance of the items comprising the consent agenda. 
(Ord. No. 2660-80; Ord. No. 6494-08)  
Sec. 2-39. - Calendar or docket. 
The city clerk shall keep, at the clerk's table during the sitting of the council, a calendar or docket so arranged as to show the condition or progress of the business of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-39)  
Sec. 2-40. - Roll of council. 
The city clerk shall keep a roll of the council for each meeting, and shall enter thereon the names of the members in alphabetical order. The city clerk shall use this roll in alphabetical order in recording all votes which are required to be recorded. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-40)  
Sec. 2-41. - Manner of obtaining floor. 
A member desiring to speak at a meeting may, from his accustomed seat, obtain the floor by addressing the presiding officer by his official title thusly: "Mr. Mayor," or if a woman, "Madam Mayor" and, if the member is entitled to the floor, the presiding officer assigns the member the floor by announcing the member's name. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-32)  
Sec. 2-42. - Manner of speaking; use of offensive language or gestures. 
(a)  No member shall speak on pending motions until he has been recognized by the mayor and, during the time allowed him, he shall confine himself strictly to the question before the council. 
(b)  No member shall, in debate, use any language or gesture calculated to wound, offend or insult another member. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, §§ 2-33, 2-35)  
Sec. 2-43. - Speaker not to be disturbed. 
No member, while speaking, shall be disturbed in any manner by private conversation or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-34)  
Sec. 2-44. - Transgressions of rules; violations of order. 
For any willful transgression of the rules or for any repetition of a transgression, the mayor shall or any member may call the offender to order, in which case the member so called to order shall immediately yield the floor unless permitted to explain. For flagrant or repeated violations of order, especially if persisted in after the admonition of the presiding officer, a member shall be liable to the censure of the council and may, in addition thereto, be removed from the council chamber by order of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-36)  
Sec. 2-45. - Order in which questions to be propounded. 
The mayor shall propound all questions in the order in which they are moved, unless the subsequent motion shall be previous in its nature. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-17)  
Sec. 2-46. - Receipt of motions when questioned under debate. 
When a question is under debate, the mayor shall receive no other motion than to adjourn, to lay on the table, for the previous question, for the pending question, to postpone to a certain day, to amend or to postpone indefinitely, which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they stand arranged. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-18)  
Sec. 2-47. - When motion to adjourn in order; decision on motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall be in order at any time except on an immediate repetition or when, on the call of the previous question or the pending question, the same shall have been ordered or when a member shall have the floor or pending the verification of a vote and such motion to adjourn shall be decided without debate. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-19)  
Sec. 2-48. - Putting the previous question generally. 
The mayor shall put the previous question which shall be decided without debate, and all debate upon the question shall be suspended until the previous question shall be decided. After the adoption of the call for the previous question, the same sense of the council shall be taken forthwith upon all pending amendments and then upon the main question. All incidental questions of order arising after a motion for the previous question shall be decided without debate. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-20)  
Sec. 2-49. - Reduction of motions and propositions to writing; stating and withdrawal of motion or proposition; further provisions as to previous question. 
Every motion or proposition shall be reduced to writing, if desired by any member of the council, and shall be delivered at the clerk's table to be there read, and the question shall be stated by the mayor before same shall be adopted. A motion or proposition, after it has been stated by the mayor, shall not be withdrawn except upon the request of the member who made the same with the consent of the member seconding it and of the mayor. Pending a debate, any member who obtains the floor for that purpose only and submits no other motion or remark may move for the previous question or the pending question, and in either case the motion shall be forthwith put to the council. A majority may require an immediate vote upon the pending question, whatever it may be. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-21)  
Sec. 2-50. - Division of question; consideration of motion under color of amendment. 
If the question for decision includes several definite propositions, the same may be divided upon demand of any one (1) council member, but a motion to strike out and insert shall not be divided, nor shall a motion to strike out, being lost, preclude either an amendment or a motion to strike out and insert. No motion or proposition on the subject different from that under consideration shall be admitted under color of amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-22)  
Sec. 2-51. - Putting and stating of questions. 
The mayor shall put a question, and questions shall be distinctly put and the following form may be used: "As many as agree that, etc. (as the question may be) say `Aye"' and, after the affirmative vote is given, "Those opposed, `No"'. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-23)  
Sec. 2-52. - Powers of mayor with reference to points of order. 
The mayor may speak on points of order in preference to other members, and shall decide questions of order without debate, subject to an appeal to the council. On every appeal, the mayor shall have the right to assign reasons for his decision, and such decision shall be final unless reversed by a majority vote of all the other members present. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-24)  
Sec. 2-53. - Duty of members to vote. 
Every member who shall be present when any question is put, including the presiding officer, shall vote unless excused by the council; provided, however, that no member of the council shall participate in the vote on any ordinance, resolution, motion or vote in which such member or any person, firm or corporation for which such member is attorney, officer, director, employee or agent has a financial interest other than a minority stockholder of a corporation or a citizen of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, §§ 2-25, 2-30.2)  
Sec. 2-54. - Submission of ordinances and resolutions. 
Any member of the council desiring to submit an ordinance or resolution to the council shall submit it in writing under the regular order of "new business," and such ordinance or resolution shall be signed by the member sponsoring it, and it shall not be regarded as before the council for action thereon before it has been read at least once by its title or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-28)  
Sec. 2-55. - Required vote on ordinances, resolutions, etc.; recordation of votes. 
(a)  No ordinance, resolution, motion or vote shall be adopted by the council except at a meeting open to the public and, except motions to adjourn, to fix the time and place of adjournment and other motions of a purely procedural nature, unless it shall have received the affirmative votes of at least four (4) members. All voting, except on procedural motions, shall have the ayes and nays recorded in the journal. 
(b)  No ordinance or resolution shall be passed having for its object the appropriation of any sum of money or creating indebtedness or directing the payment of any sum of money, except by the concurrence of four-sevenths ( 4/7 ) of all the members elected to the council. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-30) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 4.07.  
Sec. 2-56. - Motions for reconsideration. 
No motion for reconsideration of an ordinance or resolution shall be in order: 
(1)  Unless made at the same meeting at which such ordinance or resolution was considered, and such motion shall be proposed by one (1) of the members of the prevailing side and shall require the consent of four-sevenths ( 4/7 ) of the entire council; or 
(2)  Unless a written notice at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance has been given to each council member that such motion shall be proposed at the next regular council meeting by one (1) of the members of the prevailing side and shall require the consent of four-sevenths ( 4/7 ) of the entire council. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-27; Ord. No. 3170-84)  
Sec. 2-57. - Effective date of ordinances and resolutions. 
All ordinances and resolutions passed by the council shall, unless another date is specified therein as the effective date and except as otherwise provided in the city charter, be in effect on the tenth day following their passage. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-30.1; Ord. No. 5374-99) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, §§ 4.09, 4.14.  
Sec. 2-58. - Amendment, suspension or repeal of ordinances. 
No ordinance shall be amended, suspended or repealed except by ordinance regularly introduced and passed, nor shall any section of an ordinance be amended unless the whole section of the ordinance be reordained. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-26)  
Sec. 2-59. - Presentation of petitions, memorials, etc. 
Petitions, memorials, remonstrances, propositions, declarations, proclamations and other commemoratives requested by council members shall be presented to the council by the member sponsoring or making them under new business pursuant to the regular order of business. The requests shall be reduced to writing, if not already, and signed by the member sponsoring or making them at the request of any other member, and such shall not be regarded as before the council for action thereon before it has been read at least once by its title or otherwise. Upon approval by city council, the document shall be presented to its recipient, if appropriate, at a succeeding 7:00 p.m. prefatory meeting of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-29; Ord. No. 4068-90, § 1)  
Sec. 2-60. - Application of Robert's Rules and general principles of parliamentary procedure. 
The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in "Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised", 11 th Edition, 2011 Copyright, shall be parliamentary authority in the council except as otherwise provided in this division. Upon all questions where there is no rule, the general principles of parliamentary procedure shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, §§ 2-13, 2-31; Ord. No. 5815-02, § 1; Ord. No. 7291-16)  
Sec. 2-61. - Suspension of rules. 
Except as provided by the Charter, any of the rules of the council may be suspended by a vote of at least six (6) members voting in the affirmative. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-14)  
Sec. 2-62. - Amendment of rules. 
The rules set out in this division may be amended at any stated meeting by an affirmative vote of four (4) members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 1877, § 1; Ord. No. 2250; Code 1961, § 2-15)  
Sec. 2-63. - Public hearing closure. 
No further items of business shall be addressed by city council at the completion of discussion or other termination of a public hearing until such time as the council, by motion, either closes the public hearing or continues the public hearing to a date specific. 
(Ord. No. 4069-90, § 1)  
Sec. 2-64. - Regulations for citizen participation. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of the city council by adoption of these regulations, to ensure that the affairs of the city council may be conducted in an open and orderly manner, that all persons desiring to address the city council on matters that are germane to the business of the Council of the City of Newport News are afforded an opportunity to do so, that persons in attendance may observe and hear the proceedings of the city council without distraction, and that the members of the city council and city employees are able to transact the business of the city council with minimal disruption, and that the city's business be conducted with full respect and adherence to applicable law. 
(b)  Citizens wishing to address city council at a regular meeting thereof, in accord with section 2-36 of the City Code, shall follow the following regulations: 
(1)  Registering: Every item on the agenda of a regular meeting of council is open to discussion by anyone attending the meeting. Persons having an interest in any agenda item who desire to comment on an agenda item or on another matter germane to the business of city council, shall fill out a card with their name and residential address, and indicating the item on which they wish to speak. The cards shall be available at the main entrance to the Council chambers and should be given to the city clerk or her designated representative prior to the meeting. The mayor will recognize speakers when the item they are interested in is called, or if an agenda item is not identified on the card, speakers will be called under a section of the agenda entitled "Citizen Comments on Matters Germane to the Business of City Council". Speakers will be asked to approach the podium in front of city council when their name is announced. 
(2)  Use of pagers and cell phones. Ringers on cell phones or pagers shall be turned off during the time that persons are in the city council chambers. Persons needing to make or receive a telephone call, should go into the lobby to do so. 
(3)  Taking of photographs and video or audio recordings; etc. The taking of photographs and video or audio recordings of a speaker or the activities during a regular meeting of city council shall be from the side aisles so as to minimize the manner and the amount of time that the photographer or person with the recording device screens the view of others attending the city council meeting. During regular meetings of city council no flashes or lighting devices may be used by photographers or operators of video recording equipment during prefatory meetings of city council, the taking of photographs and video or audio recordings of a speaker or the activities thereof are permitted from the center aisle; however, the photographer or recorder should take steps to avoid obstructing the center aisle for any length of time in such a manner as to prevent others from taking photographs, or to block the view of others attending the city council meeting. 
(4)  Speaking. When a speaker is called by the mayor, the following is required: 
a.  Speakers shall proceed to the speaker's podium and adjust the microphone to the level of their mouth. Speakers should speak into the microphone to ensure that their name and remarks are heard and recorded as a part of the record for the meeting. 
b.  Speakers shall state their name and address. 
c.  If a speaker represents a group or organization, the speaker shall indicate the name of the group or organization and the speaker's relationship to the group or organization. Speakers may ask others from their group or organization to stand at their seats while the group's or organization's name is announced, but non-speakers or individual members are not permitted to stand with speakers at the podium and for safety reasons, no members of the group or organization are permitted to stand in the aisles or doorways of the city council chambers. Those members of a group or organization who do stand when the name of the group or organization is announced shall then be seated. 
d.  Speakers shall state their position, give the facts to substantiate their position, and relate the concerns they believe city council should consider. 
e.  If a written statement or other supportive material is available, it should be delivered to the city clerk for the record. 
f.  Speakers shall confine their comments to matters germane to the business of the City Council of the City of Newport News. 
g.  Speakers shall refrain from words or statements which, from their usual construction and common acceptance, are construed as insults or which have a tendency to cause an act of violence or a breach of the peace. 
h.  Speakers shall refrain from obscenity, vulgarity, profanely cursing or swearing. 
i.  Speakers shall refrain from actions that would interrupt the public meeting. 
(5)  Time limitations for remarks; questions; etc. Speakers shall confine their remarks to no more than three (3) minutes on any agenda item or when addressing city council on matters germane to the business of city council. If the electronic device on the podium is available, it will signify when three (3) minutes have concluded by lights that change from green, to yellow, and finally to red. If the electronic device is not available, speakers will be advised when their three (3) minutes have concluded. Speakers cannot "transfer" nor "designate" their time to another speaker in an effort to provide another speaker more than the allotted three (3) minutes on any agenda item or when making comments on matters germane to the business of city council. After a speaker has concluded his or her remarks, the speaker should return to his or her seat unless a member of city council indicates that he or she has a question to address to the speaker. After city council begins its deliberation, the public speakers may be asked questions but shall not speak otherwise. 
(6)  Decorum and order: 
a.  For safety reasons, expressive activities including, but not limited to, petitioning, picketing, displaying signs or posters, solicitation, demonstrating, pamphlet distribution, and conducting polls shall not be permitted in the council chambers, the council conference room, or the waiting areas and corridors adjacent to the chambers and conference room or within fifty (50) feet of the doorway to the council chambers, council conference room, or the waiting areas and corridors adjacent to the chambers, the council conference room, and the building containing the council chambers. 
b.  These regulations do not preclude speakers, when addressing city council, from delivering to the council members by way of the city clerk written materials including reports, statements, exhibits, letters, or signed petitions. Nor do these regulations preclude those addressing city council from using a chart or graph during their verbal presentation. 
c.  The mayor or other presiding officer shall preserve decorum and shall decide all questions of public order. 
d.  At the request of the mayor or city manager, one or more persons, including city police officers shall act as sergeant-at-arms or sergeants-at-arms at all city council meetings. The sergeant-at-arms or sergeants-at-arms shall, under the direction of the mayor or other presiding officer, have charge of the council chambers, the council conference room, and the waiting areas and corridors adjacent thereto, and shall prevent disorder or interruption of the business of the city council. 
(7)  Furthermore, nothing herein shall be interpreted to prohibit speakers or any citizens from addressing oral or written comments or complaints on any subject not germane to the business of city council, to city council, its constituent members, the city clerk or city administration, outside of the context or time frame of city council's regular or prefatory or special meeting(s). 
(Ord. No. 5807-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5914-03; Ord. No. 7074-14, § 1)  
Secs. 2-65—2-72. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY DEPOSITORIES 
 
Sec. 2-73. - Designated. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall deposit or cause to be deposited all funds of the city in the following banks and/or savings and loans: 
(1)  Wachovia Bank, N.A., Newport News, Virginia. 
(2)  Cenit Bank, Newport News, Virginia. 
(3)  First Union National Bank, Newport News, Virginia. 
(4)  First Virginia Bank of Tidewater, Newport News, Virginia. 
(5)  Harbor Bank, Newport News, Virginia. 
(6)  The Old Point National Bank, Newport News, Virginia. 
(7)  NationsBank, Newport News, Virginia. 
(8)  SunTrust Bank, Hampton Roads, Newport News, Virginia. 
(9)  Branch Banking and Trust Company of Virginia, Newport News, Virginia. 
(10)  First Coastal Bank, Newport News, Virginia. 
(11)  Consolidated Bank & Trust Company, Newport News, Virginia. 
(b)  The city treasurer may deposit city funds in any bank or savings and loan that becomes a successor to a bank or savings and loan named in paragraph (a) of this code section. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1; Ord. No. 782, § 1, Ord. No. 907, § 1; Ord. No. 1278, § 1; Ord. No. 1735, § 1; Ord. No. 1835, § 1; Ord. No. 1951, § 1; Ord. No. 2120, § 1; Ord. No. 2137, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-5; Ord. No. 3274-85; Ord. No. 3501-86; Ord. No. 3508-86; Ord. No. 3637-87; Ord. No. 3653-87; Ord. No. 3990-89; Ord. No. 4299-92; Ord. No. 4518-93; Ord. No. 4955-96; Ord. No. 5105-98; Ord. No. 5110-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5135-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5485-00)  
Sec. 2-74. - Surety bond generally; notice of withdrawal of savings accounts. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no money shall be deposited in any bank enumerated in section 2-73, until such bank shall have executed a bond, with some guaranty or surety company authorized to do business in this state, as surety, in the penalty of at least the amount of money that is at any time on deposit in such designated depository. The condition of such bond shall be that such bank will faithfully account for and promptly pay over, when and as required or requested, whatever amount of money which may be on deposit in such bank to the credit of the city treasurer or the city, either or both, and shall indemnify the city against any loss that may be incurred by reason of the failure of such bank to honor all checks lawfully drawn on the funds in such bank or return to the city treasurer all funds of the city as and when the same may be called for; provided, however, that the bank shall have the right to require notice in writing for the withdrawal of any sums on deposit in the savings account in such bank to the credit of the treasurer or the city, either or both, provided the terms of such notice are agreed upon in writing at the time the deposit is made. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 3; Code 1961, § 16-7)  
Sec. 2-75. - Security in lieu of surety bond—Generally. 
(a)  Any bank mentioned in section 2-73 may deposit with the treasurer, in lieu of the bond required by section 2-74, bonds of the United States of America or of this state and obligations of the City of Newport News, bonds of any city or county of this state, or farm loan bonds issued under an act of Congress, approved July 17, 1916, known as the Federal Farm Loan Act, or bonds listed for sale on the New York Stock Exchange, bonds and notes of the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Banks, debentures and other obligations of federal intermediate credit banks, or banks of cooperatives issued pursuant to acts of Congress, to be held upon the same condition and trust for the protection and indemnity of the city as is stipulated in section 2-74; provided, that such bonds shall be acceptable only at the actual value thereof, except obligations of the City of Newport News, which shall be acceptable at their par value. 
(b)  Any bank mentioned in section 2-73 may deposit with the city treasurer, in lieu of the surety or other bonds designated in section 2-74 and subsection (a) of this section, notes or bonds secured by first mortgages or deeds of trust on real estate in the City of Newport News as security and indemnity for a portion of such fund so on deposit, but at no time, under any circumstances, shall the character of security provided for in this subsection be acceptable for any amount in excess of one-half (½) of the funds on deposit in any such depository. These notes and bonds shall be delivered to the city treasurer accompanied by first mortgages or deeds of trust securing the same, abstracts of titles with a certificate of title satisfactory to the city attorney, and proper insurance policies, all of which, including the value of such notes and bonds, shall be at all times acceptable and satisfactory to the city treasurer and the director of finance. 
(c)  The security evidenced by notes and bonds secured by deeds of trust or mortgages and by bonds listed on the New York Stock Exchange, as provided in this section, shall, at all times, be of the value of at least ten (10) percent in excess of the amount of money for which they are accepted and held as such security, less such amount as shall be insured, by evidence satisfactory to the city treasurer, by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, a corporation created pursuant to an act of Congress of the United States, approved June 16, 1933, and known as the Banking Act of 1933, and amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 15, §§ 4—6; Ord. No. 1526, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 16-8—16-10)  
Sec. 2-76. - Same—Deposit and control generally. 
Whenever in section 2-75 it is provided that bonds, notes and other securities shall be deposited with the city treasurer, it shall be interpreted to mean that the securities shall be deposited with the city treasurer in the several city depositories wherein funds of the city are deposited, and the securities of such depository shall remain in the vault of such depository, under the joint control of such depository and the city treasurer. At all times, when an officer of the depository and the city treasurer shall have access to the deposit boxes, in the vault where securities are located, they shall jointly open such deposit boxes and jointly close such boxes. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 11; Code 1961, § 16-15)  
Sec. 2-77. - Same—Deposit under escrow agreement. 
Any bank mentioned in section 2-73 may, in lieu of the bond required by section 2-74, and in lieu of the deposit of the bonds or notes secured by first mortgages or deeds of trust on real estate, as permitted under section 2-75, deposit in escrow with any bank, in or out of the state acceptable and satisfactory to the city treasurer and the director of finance, any of the bonds and notes mentioned in section 2-76, which bonds or notes so deposited in escrow shall be held by such bank in trust to secure the public funds deposits of the city in the bank so delivering such bonds or notes in escrow as herein permitted. No such bonds or notes shall be deposited in escrow until the bank so depositing and the bank so receiving the same shall have executed an escrow agreement acceptable and satisfactory to the city treasurer and director of finance and approved by the city attorney, a copy of which agreement, duly executed, shall be delivered to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 10; Code 1961, § 16-14)  
Sec. 2-78. - Acceptable surety on bonds. 
Whenever, under this article, any bond is required by or given to the city upon which surety is required, any company which shall have complied with the provisions of section 49-15 of the Code of Virginia shall be acceptable to the city as surety on such bond. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 9; Code 1961, § 16-13)  
Sec. 2-79. - City treasurer to be given power of attorney with respect to securities. 
Every depository of city funds shall execute and deposit with the city treasurer a power of attorney or agreement authorizing and empowering the treasurer, upon default of such depository, to realize upon the obligations and securities deposited under this article, either by collection or absolute sale thereof, or otherwise and in any manner, in the discretion of the treasurer, or upon the advice of the director of finance, or under the direction of the council. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 7; Code 1961, § 16-11)  
Sec. 2-80. - When additional security required; withdrawal of funds not adequately secured. 
Should the city treasurer at any time have in hand a sum of money belonging to the city in excess of the total of the securities as provided in this article, the treasurer shall, before depositing such sum, demand and require, from the bank in which such excess is to be deposited, that an additional bond be given or additional security be deposited to cover, as provided in this article, the amount of such excess. Should the amount of money deposited with any such depository be at any time in excess of the value of the security or securities deposited under this article, either in the treasurer's judgment or that of the director of finance or the city council, the treasurer shall forthwith withdraw from the depository such funds as may not be adequately secured. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 8; Code 1961, § 16-12)  
Sec. 2-81. - Securities to be insured. 
Every bank wherein securities are deposited as provided by this article shall, at its own cost, insure the securities against robbery and burglary, except the securities required under section 2-77, for the full value of such securities so on deposit, such insurance policy to be approved by the city treasurer and the director of finance, and a copy thereof furnished to the city treasurer. Such insurance policy or policies shall be payable, in the event of loss of any of the securities, to the city and the bank where the securities are so deposited, as its interest may appear. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 11; Code 1961, § 16-16)  
Sec. 2-82. - Safe deposit boxes. 
(a)  The securities and other papers of the various funds of the city under the control of the city treasurer shall be deposited in safe deposit boxes in banks located in the city. The opening and control of such safe deposit boxes and the checking and examination of such securities and other papers of the various funds of the city shall be only upon the demand, control and in the presence of the city treasurer, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The director of finance or, in case of the disability or illness of the director of finance, the assistant of finance shall be present with the city treasurer or, in case of the disability or illness of the city treasurer, the chief deputy city treasurer shall be present with the director of finance at the opening of such safe deposit boxes and the check and examination of such securities and other papers of the various funds of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 694; Code 1961, § 16-4)  
Secs. 2-83—2-92. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4259-91, adopted Sept. 24, 1991, amended Art. IV, Divs. 1—5, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV, Divs. 1—5, pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Salary ordinances not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-5(4); pensions and retirement, Ch. 31. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-93. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Employee. Those persons employed by the City of Newport News. Employee shall also include the constitutional officers and their employees, the registrar and the registrar's employees, the sheriff and the sheriff's employees, and the clerk of court and the clerk's employees. The term employee shall not include independent contractors nor shall it include school board employees, boards and commission members or employees of agencies for which the city acts as fiscal agent. 
(2)  Regular position. A position which has an expected duration of one (1) year. 
(a)  Regular full-time positions have an established work schedule of forty (40) hours per week or equivalent (e.g., fire department employees assigned to the three-platoon system). 
(b)  Regular part-time positions have an established work schedule of twenty (20) hours or more per week for at least forty (40) weeks per year. 
(3)  Temporary position. A position not meeting the criteria defining regular full-time or regular part-time positions. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-93.1. - Eligibility of constitutional officers for benefits. 
Persons elected to constitutional offices, who were not city employees at the time of their election, shall not be eligible to participate in paid personal leave and paid medical leave programs, but will be eligible for other benefits. Persons who were employed by the city in a regular full-time position at the time of their election shall be eligible to continue to participate in paid personal leave and paid medical leave benefits if they were so participating at the time of their election. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1)  
Sec. 2-93.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5162-98, § 1, adopted June 23, 1998, repealed § 2-93.2, which pertained to eligibility of employees of other agencies for insurance benefits. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-93.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7338-17, adopted January 10, 2017, repealed § 2-93.3, which pertained to eligibility of employees of the magistrate's office for benefits and derived from Ord. No. 4990-97; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1.  
Sec. 2-94. - Holidays. 
(a)  All regular full-time employees are eligible for paid holidays. 
(b)  The following days shall be designated as "holiday" and shall be so observed in the city: 
(1)  First day of January (New Year's Day). 
(2)  Third Monday in January (Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday). 
(3)  Third Monday in February (George Washington's Birthday). 
(4)  Last Monday in May (Memorial Day). 
(5)  Fourth day of July (Independence Day). 
(6)  First Monday in September (Labor Day). 
(7)  Eleventh day of November (Veteran's Day). 
(8)  Fourth Thursday in November (Thanksgiving Day) and the Friday next following such day. 
(9)  One-half day (four (4) hours) on the twenty-fourth day of December (Christmas Eve). 
(10)  Twenty-fifth day of December (Christmas Day). 
(c)  The city recognizes eight (8) working hours for each full day holiday and four (4) working hours for Christmas Eve when Christmas Eve is recognized as a holiday. 
(d)  Whenever any of such days, except Christmas Eve, shall fall on Sunday, the Monday next following such day shall be observed as a holiday, and whenever any of such days, except Christmas Eve, shall fall on Saturday, the Friday preceding such day shall be observed as a holiday. 
(e)  Employees who are eligible for paid holidays and whose work schedules regularly require holiday work shall be granted compensatory time off equivalent to the recognized number of holiday hours. Pay at the regular rate of pay of the employee may be granted at the discretion of the department head in lieu of compensatory time off under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-95. - Overtime pay; compensatory time off. 
(a)  Employee eligibility. The city manager is authorized to determine the eligibility for or exemption from overtime compensation for each position. Such determinations shall be made in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(b)  Criteria. Eligible employees shall receive overtime compensation for time worked in excess of forty (40) hours per week for those on the standard forty (40) hours per week work schedule or in excess of the maximum number of hours permitted by the Fair Labor Standards Act for other work schedules. The city manager may establish policies to provide additional compensation in certain work situations. 
(c)  Overtime pay rate. Overtime shall be compensated at a rate of one and one-half (1½) times the employee's hourly rate of pay. 
(d)  Compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay. Employees who are eligible for overtime compensation may be compensated with compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay within the limits permitted by the Fair Labor Standards Act. Compensatory time off shall be computed at a rate of one and one-half (1½) times the overtime hours worked. 
(e)  Administrative guidelines. The city manager shall promulgate the necessary administrative rules and procedure to ensure the uniform operation of this section. 
(f)  Authority. Overtime shall be allowed only pursuant to this section and only by authority of the city manager or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1)  
Sec. 2-95.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4470-93, § 2, adopted May 25, 1993, repealed § 2-95.1, which pertained to temporary work schedule change, compensation. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-95.2. - Standby pay. 
(a)  Definition. "Standby pay" is that particular compensation which is authorized to be paid to an eligible employee who must be on call during periods which are outside that employee's normal work schedule. Such on-call status must be approved by the city manager prior to the placement of an employee in the on-call status. Merely being subject to call is not equivalent to being in a formal on-call status. 
(b)  Authorization. Standby pay is authorized to be paid to eligible employees who are placed in a formal on-call status outside their normal work schedule. Employees who are exempt from overtime eligibility shall be ineligible to receive standby pay unless an exception is authorized by the city manager. 
(c)  Rate of compensation. The rate of compensation which shall be received by an employee who serves in an on-call status shall be determined by the city manager after careful consideration of the following: 
(1)  Regular rate of pay of the employee. 
(2)  Conditions imposed as a result of the individual employee's standby status which restricts the employee's activities. 
(3)  Conditions of employment, whether formal or as the result of custom or usage. 
(d)  Standby hours not considered as overtime. Hours served in a standby status shall not be considered as "hours worked" for overtime purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-95.3. - Holiday-differential pay. 
(a)  Employee eligibility. All regular full-time employees of the city who are eligible for overtime compensation and who work a normal work schedule which does not regularly require holiday work shall be eligible to receive holiday-differential pay for each hour worked on a holiday. Employees whose work schedules regularly require work on holidays do not qualify for holiday-differential pay. 
(b)  Holiday-differential pay. Holiday-differential pay shall be computed at the rate of one and one-half (1½) times the employee's regular hourly rate of pay for those hours worked on a holiday, which pay shall be in addition to eight (8) hours of regular holiday pay. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-95.4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5161-98, § 1, adopted June 23, 1998, repealed § 2-95.4, which pertained to part-day absences. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-96. - Tuition refund; administrative policies and procedures. 
Subject to the annual appropriation of funds for this program, the city manager is authorized to promulgate policies and procedures governing tuition reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 6609-09, § 1; Ord. No. 7027-14)  
Sec. 2-97. - Jury duty pay. 
(a)  Regular full-time employees who must be absent from work as a result of jury duty shall be excused and continue to receive regular compensation as though they had worked their regularly scheduled work day. Regular part-time and temporary employees shall be excused from work to perform jury duty without pay. Employees may, at their option, charge any paid personal leave or compensatory time that the employee may have accrued. Regular full-time employees who exercise this option shall charge paid personal leave or compensatory time in lieu of receiving regular compensation 
(b)  Any court payments received by regular full-time employees as a result of jury duty performance during the employee's normal working hours, excluding compensation for mileage and tolls, shall be submitted to the city treasurer for deposit into the general fund of the city. Payments from the court may be retained by regular full-time employees when the employee has served on jury duty during hours in which the employee is off duty, or when the employee, at his option, has chosen to charge any paid personal leave or compensatory time that the employee may have accrued in lieu of receiving regular compensation for the time served on jury duty. Payments received by regular part-time and temporary employees may be retained by the employee. 
(c)  No adverse personnel action shall be taken against any employee who must be absent from work as a result of jury duty. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 6499-08)  
Sec. 2-98. - Employee appearance in court and administrative proceedings. 
(a)  Any regular full-time employee subpoenaed or summoned to appear in a court or an administrative proceeding, including situations when the employee has already appeared in court and has been required in writing to appear at a future hearing, provided the employee has given reasonable notice to his supervisor, shall receive a civil leave of absence with pay if said appearance is during the employee's normal working hours and the case is not related to his employment. 
(b)  Employees who are required to attend court or an administrative proceeding by the office of the city attorney or the office of the commonwealth's attorney to testify on behalf of the city or the commonwealth, respectively, in regards to matters arising in the course of official duties shall be considered to be working during such court or administrative proceedings. Time spent in court or at an administrative proceeding, or while participating in other aspects of case preparation or discovery, where the employee is a defendant or witness in a court case or an administrative proceeding and is being defended or assisted by the city attorney, or his designee, shall also be considered work time. 
(c)  Any payments other than regular pay, received by employees for court and discovery appearances under subsections (a) and (b), excluding compensation for mileage and tolls, shall be submitted to the city treasurer for deposit into the general fund of the city. 
(d)  Employees appearing as a plaintiff in a court case, or as a defendant in a civil or criminal case not defended by the city attorney or his designee, shall not be entitled to civil leave with pay during such court appearances. In such cases, the employee shall be excused from work to attend, and no adverse personnel action shall be taken against the employee. Regular full-time and regular part-time employees may, at their option, charge any paid personal leave or compensatory time that the employee may have accrued, or the time may be unpaid. 
(e)  When regular part-time and temporary employees are subpoenaed or summoned to appear in court for non work related cases, the employee shall be excused from work to attend the court case. Time off for court appearances for regular part-time and temporary employees shall be without pay and no adverse personnel action shall be taken against the employee for being absent from work as a result of the court appearance provided the employee has given reasonable notice to his supervisor. However, regular part-time employees may, at their option, charge any paid personal leave or compensatory time that the employee may have accrued. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 6499-08)  
Sec. 2-99. - Payment of compensation after death of officer or employee. 
Upon the death of any officer or employee of the city, other than an elective officer, who shall die during the term of employment, as one (1) of the terms or conditions of employment, there shall be paid to the surviving spouse or if there be none, then to the dependents of such officer or employee, wholly dependent upon such officer's or employee's earnings for support at the time of such death, such officer's or employee's regular pay or compensation to the end of the pay period in which the officer or employee died; provided, however, that no payment, other than the compensation earned but unpaid at the time of death, shall be made hereunder in cases of death resulting from causes for which the city will be liable under the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-100. - Acceptance of salary allotment authorizations generally. 
The city manager is authorized to accept salary allotment authorizations from employees to cover the entire cost of any deferred compensation plan, hospitalization plan, health maintenance plan, health fitness plan, life insurance, health and accident insurance, dental insurance, Peninsula United Way contributions, and any of the component parts of any cafeteria benefits plan established pursuant to Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code, or any similar plans authorized by the city council which will promote the welfare of city employees. The city manager is also authorized to accept salary allotment authorizations to the employee credit union. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4630-94, § 1)  
Sec. 2-101. - Payroll deduction plan for purchase of U.S. savings bonds. 
(a)  The director of finance is hereby designated as the custodian of the funds allotted by the employees of the city from their salaries and wages for the purchase of savings bonds of the United States. All funds so allotted and deducted shall be accumulated in a payroll deduction account known as "City of Newport News Savings Bond Deductions," and shall be subject to disbursement on checks signed by the director of finance as custodian of such funds. 
(b)  The custodian shall keep an account for each employee showing the amount of each deduction under this section, the date made and the purchase of bonds in such employee's name. 
(c)  The custodian shall purchase, from time to time, for each such employee, such savings bonds as the accumulated deductions to the credit of such employee warrants. 
(d)  In the event any employee participating in the plan provided for in this section cancels such participation, the custodian shall return to the employee any balance then remaining in the savings bond deduction account to the credit of such employee. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-102. - Service awards; program establishment. 
(a)  All regular, full-time employees of the city with five (5), ten (10), fifteen (15), twenty (20), twenty-five (25), thirty (30), thirty-five (35), forty (40), forty-five (45) or fifty (50) years of continuous service with the city shall be able to participate in the service awards program. Service with the former cities of Newport News and Warwick will be counted in making this award, as will service in the armed services, provided the employee was employed by the city prior to enlistment or induction and provided the employee was given an honorable or medical discharge by the United States government. Employees who terminate their employment for reasons other than retirement prior to presentation of awards shall be ineligible to receive an award. 
(b)  The city manager shall establish the service awards program. The program may consist of awards in the form of gifts or certificates. Each award shall display the seal of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6686-10, § 1, effective July 1, 2010, repealed § 2-103, which pertained to educational incentive pay and derived from Ord. No. 4259-91.  
Sec. 2-104. - Applicant interview expenses. 
The city manager may designate management and professional positions for which reimbursement for actual interview expenses incurred by applicants from outside the local area for such positions may be provided. Reimbursement shall be made pursuant to reasonable expense guidelines approved by the city manager. "Outside the local area" shall be interpreted to mean beyond a seventy-five-mile radius from the City of Newport News. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-105. - Moving expense reimbursement. 
The city manager may designate professional, administrative and supervisory positions for which household goods moving expenses may be reimbursed when the employee is required to relocate to accept employment with the city. The city manager shall develop guidelines to implement this section, limiting the reimbursement to reasonable household goods moving expenses. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-106. - Alternative deferred compensation. 
(a)  Assistant city managers and department heads may upon commencement of employment opt to participate in an alternative deferred compensation plan instead of the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund. This option, once exercised, may not be changed, except as provided in (d) below. 
(b)  The alternative deferred compensation plan shall consist of a city contribution to the International City Management Association Retirement Corporation for the benefit of the employee participant in lieu of a contribution to the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund. The contribution rate shall be eight and one-half (8.5) percent of the employee's annual salary or the maximum annual salary percentage permitted under the Internal Revenue Code, whichever is lesser. 
(c)  As a transition provision, the council hereby authorizes those assistant city managers and department heads employed as of the date of adoption of this section [December 12, 1983] to exercise an option to participate in the alternative deferred compensation plan. This option must be exercised within thirty (30) days after the passage of this section. If the option to join the alternative deferred compensation plan is exercised, an initial contribution to the alternative deferred compensation plan for these employees shall be computed retroactive to January 1, 1980, or retroactive to the employee's hiring date, whichever is the lesser period. 
(d)  Assistant city managers and department heads who were enrolled as participants in the alternative deferred compensation plan as of October 1, 1995, may opt to transfer from the alternative deferred compensation plan to the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund by filing a new election on or before January 31, 1996, such election to take effect on the first day of the month succeeding such election. Except as otherwise provided in section 31-38 of this Code for transfers of creditable service, no service served while covered by the alternative deferred compensation plan shall be included as creditable service in the Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund; provided, however, that all such service shall be included for the purpose of vesting as provided in section 31-56 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4851-96; Ord. No. 5769-02)  
Sec. 2-107. - Employee pride awards program; employees of the month; employee of the year. 
(a)  All regular full-time and regular part-time employees of the City of Newport News, except elected and appointed officials, assistant city managers, department heads, assistant department heads and equivalent level management employees, shall be eligible to be nominated for the employee pride awards program. Employees who terminate their employment with the city for reasons other than retirement prior to presentation of awards shall be ineligible to receive an award. 
(b)  The city manager shall establish the employee pride awards program for the selection of employees of the month. The program shall consist of the nomination and selection by a selection committee, which shall be appointed by the city manager, of one (1) employee of the month for each calendar month. The awards to such employees shall include a one hundred dollar ($100.00) U.S. Savings Bond, and such other nonmonetary presentations which will recognize the selected employees for exceptional service to the city and its citizens. 
(c)  The employee pride awards program shall also consist of the selection of an employee of the year from among the employees of the month. Such selection shall be made by the employee of the month selection committee. The award for employee of the year shall consist of a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) U.S. Savings Bond and such other nonmonetary presentations which will recognize the selected employee for exceptional service to the city and its citizens. 
(d)  The employee pride awards program is a discretionary program for the benefit and recognition of regular employees of the city; and as such, no employee shall accrue any rights, whether vested or otherwise, in the program, the selection of employees of the month or the awards presented by the program. Determinations of employees of the month shall be within the sole discretion of the selection committee and the committee's decision shall be final and not appealable. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4352-92)  
Sec. 2-107.1. - Merit bonus program. 
There is hereby established a merit bonus program for the city. Consistent with the following provisions, the city manager shall promulgate procedures for the recommendation and award of each bonuses: 
(1)  Merit bonuses may be awarded for exceptionally meritorious service or special act that is judged to be considerably above and beyond the normal scope of assigned duties and responsibilities. 
(2)  Employees designated as executive staff in the city's adopted classification and pay plan shall be eligible for merit bonuses not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). All other regular employees shall be eligible for merit bonuses not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(3)  Merit bonuses shall not be considered a part of an employee's regular compensation for salary administration or other benefit purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-107.2. - Suggestion awards program. 
There is hereby established a suggestion awards program for the city. Consistent with the following provisions, the city manager shall promulgate procedures for the recommendation and grant of suggestion awards: 
(1)  The intent of the program shall be to provide monetary and non-monetary awards to encourage and recognize employee participation in initiatives to improve operations and services. The program shall create a mechanism to receive and evaluate suggestions made by city employees concerning city operations and service delivery. 
(2)  All employees except top level management shall be eligible to participate in the program. For the purpose of this program, top level management shall include the city manager, executive staff, department heads, assistant department heads, division heads and equivalent level employees. 
(3)  The city manager shall appoint a suggestion awards committee to periodically meet to review and evaluate all suggestions made pursuant to the program guidelines. The committee shall recommend to the manager those suggestions with merit and shall recommend appropriate recognition, including a recommendation as to the amount of any monetary award if such is deemed appropriate by the committee. The city manager shall personally review the recommendations of the committee and shall make final determinations of appropriate recognition. 
(4)  Recognition under the program may include a variety of awards which may include monetary awards not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4469-93, § 1)  
DIVISION 2. - PAID PERSONAL LEAVE 
 
Sec. 2-108. - Amount prescribed; accrual. 
(a)  All regular full-time employees of the city shall accrue paid personal leave as set forth below and which shall be equally distributed every biweekly pay period: 
(1)  All regular full-time employees of the city, except firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts, shall accrue paid personal leave, as follows: 
a.  One hundred fifty-six (156) hours per year when employed in an active pay status through the fifth year of employment. 
b.  One hundred ninety-five (195) hours per year when employed in an active pay status after the fifth year of employment. 
c.  Two hundred twenty-one (221) hours per year when employed in an active pay status after the tenth year of employment. 
d.  Two hundred thirty-four (234) hours per year when employed in an active pay status after the fifteenth year of employment. 
e.  Two hundred forty and one-half (240.5) hours per year when employed in an active pay status after the twentieth year of employment. 
(2)  Firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts shall accrue paid personal leave as follows: 
a.  Two hundred forty and one-half (240.5) hours per year when employed in an active pay status through the fifth year of employment. 
b.  Three hundred five and one-half (305.5) hours per year when employed in an active pay status after the fifth year of employment. 
c.  Three hundred twenty-five (325) hours per year when employed in an active pay status after the tenth year of employment. 
d.  Three hundred thirty-eight (338) hours per year when employed in an active pay status after the fifteenth year of employment. 
e.  Three hundred sixty-four (364) hours per year when employed in an active pay status after the twentieth year of employment. 
(3)  Firefighters who transfer to or from assigned twenty-four-hour shifts shall have all leave balances for accrued paid personal leave converted to equivalent leave time in the new work schedule. 
(b)  Employees in regular part-time positions shall be granted thirty (30) hours of paid personal leave upon completion of twenty-six (26) biweekly pay periods in which the employee has worked at least forty (40) hours per biweekly pay period in active service with the city, in accordance with applicable policies. Thereafter such employees shall accrue paid personal leave at the rate of two and one half (2.5) hours per biweekly pay period for each pay period in which the employee while in active pay status works at least forty (40) hours per biweekly pay period, in accordance with applicable policies. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4499-93; Ord. No. 4995-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6504-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6660-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7360-17, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6660-10, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 2010, shall be in effect on and after March 1, 2010.  
Sec. 2-109. - How granted. 
Each department shall establish procedures for the request and approval of paid personal leave. Paid personal leave shall be granted when, in the opinion of the department head, it least interferes with departmental operations. The department head may require documentation to support the need for any paid personal leave. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to affect or abridge any rights granted to employees under the Family and Medical Leave Act. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1)  
Sec. 2-110. - Paid personal leave usage. 
Effective July 1, 2008, each regular full-time employee who has been employed for more than one year shall take at least eighty (80) hours (one hundred twelve (112) hours for firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts) of paid personal leave during each fiscal year in which the employee has been in active work status for more than half the fiscal year. If the employee does not take at least the above respective amounts of paid personal leave during each fiscal year, the difference between eighty (80) hours (one hundred twelve (112) hours for firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts) and the leave actually taken shall be transferred to the employee's paid medical leave balance at the end of such fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4295-91; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6399-07, § 1) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 6399-07 becomes effective July 1, 2008.  
Sec. 2-110.1. - Carry-over of paid personal leave. 
(a)  Generally. Effective July 1, 2008, no more than four hundred (400) hours (five hundred sixty (560) hours for firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts) of paid personal leave shall be carried over from one (1) fiscal year to the next by regular full-time employees. A regular full-time employee whose balance (including firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts) of paid personal leave at the end of a fiscal year is more than the above respective carry-over amounts, after all leave exchange options have been exercised for that fiscal year, shall have all paid personal leave in excess of the above respective amounts transferred to the employee's paid medical leave balance. 
(b)  Exception. Notwithstanding subsection (a), an employee whose balance of paid personal leave is in excess of four hundred (400) hours (five hundred sixty (560) hours for firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts) as of June 30, 2009, after all leave exchange options have been exercised for that fiscal year, shall maintain that balance, but no more than six hundred forty (640) hours (eight hundred sixty-four (864) for firefighters assigned to twenty-four hour shifts) as their maximum carry-over in subsequent fiscal years unless the balance as of June 30 of any subsequent fiscal year after all leave exchanges have been made in such year is below the June 30, 2009 carry-over amount. In such cases, the lower amount will become the employee's new limitation on carry-over in subsequent fiscal years, but shall not be less than four hundred (400) hours. 
(c)  Part-time positions. No more than sixty (60) hours of paid personal leave permitted by section 2-108 shall be carried over from one (1) fiscal year to the next by employees in qualified regular part-time positions. 
(Ord. No. 6399-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6504-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6515-08, § 1)  
Sec. 2-110.2. - City manager authority during declared emergencies. 
In order to effectuate the purpose and intent of the leave requirements contained within this division, the city manager, in the event of a declared emergency, may temporarily modify the leave usage and carryover provisions herein contained. 
(Ord. No. 7626-20, § 1)  
Sec. 2-111. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6684-10, § 1, effective July 1, 2010, repealed § 2-111, which pertained to leave exchange and derived from Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6399-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6504-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6616-09, § 1. Additionally, Ord. No. 6684-10, § 2, provides that each vested regular full-time employee eligible to receive the leave exchange benefit as provided in section 2-111 of the City Code as of June 30, 2010, may elect to receive said benefit for FY 2010 and shall receive same in accord with the city's ordinances, policies and procedures for exercising and receiving same.  
Sec. 2-112. - Payment for accrued paid personal leave upon termination of employment. 
Any employee who leaves the employment of the city for whatever reason shall be entitled to payment for any accrued paid personal leave, provided the employee has been employed in an active pay status for at least one (1) month. Should termination be due to death, payment for accrued paid personal leave shall be paid to the spouse, or if there be no spouse, then to the deceased employee's estate. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1)  
Sec. 2-113. - City manager authorized to promulgate polices and procedures. 
The city manager is authorized to promulgate policies and procedures governing the administration of paid personal leave. 
(Ord. No. 4499-93; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1)  
Secs. 2-114—2-117. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PAID MEDICAL LEAVE 
 
Sec. 2-118. - Paid medical leave benefits. 
(a)  Paid medical leave may be granted by the city to regular full-time employees in active pay status for the following purposes: 
(1)  Personal illness or disability, including disabilities resulting from pregnancy and childbirth. 
(2)  Bodily injury. 
(3)  Required medical or dental examinations as a result of illness or disability or to maintain the sound mental or physical health of the employee. 
(4)  Treatments, operations and other medical or dental procedures performed by a health care provider as a result of illness or disability. 
(5)  Having or having been exposed to a contagious disease when continuing to work might affect the health of the employee or others. 
(6)  Any serious health condition as defined in The Family and Medical Leave Act. 
(b)  Paid medical leave for family purposes. Paid medical leave benefits may be granted by the city, to regular full-time employees in active pay status, when an illness or injury of a member of the immediate family requires the employee's attendance and for the birth, adoption or foster care placement of a child. The term "immediate family," for purposes of this section, will include an employee's spouse, child and parent, including in-law, step and foster relationships, or any person for whom the employee has a primary care responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4995-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1)  
Sec. 2-119. - Amount prescribed; accrual. 
(a)  Paid medical leave shall accrue, for regular full-time employees in an active pay status, at the rate of seventy-one and one half (71.5) hours per year to be equally distributed every biweekly pay period except that firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts shall accrue one hundred ninety-five (195) hours of paid medical leave per year to be equally distributed every biweekly pay period. 
(b)  Paid medical leave accrued but unused shall accumulate without limit. 
(c)  Firefighters who transfer to or from twenty-four-hour shifts shall have all accrued paid medical leave balances converted to equivalent leave time in the new work schedule. 
(Ord. No. 4499-93; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6504-08, § 1; Ord. No. 7360-17, § 1)  
Sec. 2-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4995-97, § 2, adopted March 11, 1997, repealed § 2-120, which pertained to holiday or vacation leave not charged as sick leave. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-121. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7195-15, § 1, adopted June 23, 2015, repealed § 2-121, which pertained to use of paid medical leave and derived from Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6715-10, § 1; and Ord. No. 6884-12, § 1.  
Sec. 2-122. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5160, § 1, adopted June 23, 1998, repealed § 2-122, which pertained to false statement of sickness. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-123. - Forfeiture of accumulated unused paid medical leave benefits upon termination of employment; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), upon termination from regular full-time service, all accumulated unused paid medical leave shall be forfeited and no cash payment shall be made therefor. Such termination shall mean voluntary or involuntary termination of employment. 
(b)  Subject to section 31-35(e), the following employees may be credited with additional retirement credited service under the provisions of chapter 31 for accumulated unused paid medical leave: 
(1)  Employees who retire under the provisions of chapter 31 if termination of service occurs at retirement; 
(2)  Regular full-time employees who terminated from service prior to April 1, 2008 who were vested in the Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund; and 
(3)  Regular full-time employees who terminated from service prior to April 1, 2008 who became vested when their accumulated unused paid medical leave was added as additional service. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4995-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6796-11, § 1)  
Sec. 2-124. - City manager authorized to promulgate policies and procedures. 
The city manager is authorized to promulgate polices and procedures governing the granting and administration of paid medical leave and the compensation of employees while on leave. 
(Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1)  
Secs. 2-125—2-132. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS LEAVES 
 
Sec. 2-133. - Military leave. 
Military leave and reemployment rights will be administered in accordance with the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and applicable federal laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, Title 38, The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act, of the United States Code. 
(1)  All officers and employees of the City of Newport News who are former members of the Armed Services or members of the organized reserve forces of any of the Armed Services of the United States, National Guard, or naval militia shall be entitled to leaves of absence from their respective duties, without loss of seniority, accrued leave, or efficiency rating, on all days during which they are engaged in federally funded military duty, to include training duty, or when called forth by the governor pursuant to Sections 44-75.1 or 44-78.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. There shall be no loss of regular employer pay during such leaves of absence, except that paid leaves of absence for federally funded military duty, to include training duty, shall not exceed fifteen (15) workdays per federal fiscal year, and except that no officers or employees shall receive paid leave for more than fifteen (15) workdays per federally funded tour of active military duty. When relieved from such duty, they shall be restored to positions held by them when ordered to duty. If the office or position has been abolished or otherwise ceased to exist during such leave of absence, they shall be reinstated in a position of like seniority, status and pay, if the position exists, or in a comparable vacant position for which they are qualified, unless to do so would be unreasonable. For the purposes of this section, with respect to employees of the City of Newport News who do not normally work approximately equal workdays on five (5) or more days of each calendar week, the term "workday" shall mean one-two hundred sixtieth ( 1/260 ) of the total working hours such employee would be scheduled to work during an entire federal fiscal year, not taking into account any state or city holidays, paid medical leave, paid personal leave, military leaves, or other absences. 
Where officers and employees of the City of Newport News return from federally funded military duty and the eight-hour rest period required by Title 38, The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act, of the United States Code, overlaps such officers' and employees' scheduled work shift, the officers and employees shall receive paid military leave to the extent of such overlap. 
(2)  All non-temporary officers and employees of the City of Newport News who enter upon military active duty with the Armed Forces of the United States of America, other than as provided for in subsection (1) shall be granted military active duty leave, without pay, in accordance with applicable federal laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, Title 38, The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act, of the United States Code. 
(3)  In addition to the entitlements provided by state and federal law, employees of the City of Newport News eligible for military active duty leave under subsections (1) and (2) shall also be entitled to the following: 
a.  The right to elect to continue to participate in the city's existing medical insurance plan for a period of one (1) year following entry upon active duty in the same manner as before entry upon active duty. 
b.  The right to elect to continue to participate in the city's existing dental insurance plan for a period of one (1) year following entry upon active duty in the same manner as before entry upon active duty. 
c.  The right to elect to continue to participate in the city's existing vision plan for a period of one (1) year following entry upon active duty in the same manner as before entry upon active duty. 
d.  The right to be paid for all or a portion of their paid personal leave accrued prior to entry upon active duty and to allow the balance, if any, of such accrued paid personal leave to remain credited to that employee until later reemployment with the city or a subsequent request to be paid in full if reemployment is not effected. 
e.  Receipt of full payment for compensatory time accrued prior to entry upon active duty. Compensatory time shall not be carried over until reemployment by the city, nor shall compensatory time accrue during a period of military active duty leave. 
f.  Although paid personal leave shall not accrue during such time as an employee is on military active duty leave, such employee's paid personal leave accrual rate shall be calculated to include the period of active duty service upon reemployment with the city pursuant to the requirements of Title 38 of the United States Code. 
g.  Although unused paid medical leave shall be forfeited upon entry on military active duty leave, and no paid medical leave shall accrue during such period, prior unused paid medical leave shall be reinstated upon reemployment by the city pursuant to the requirements of Title 38 of the United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5737-02; Ord. No. 5973-03; Ord. No. 6286-06, § 1)  
Sec. 2-133.1. - Employees in regular full-time positions who are on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations. 
The following provisions of the City Code are hereby waived or amended as stated below for employees in regular full-time positions who are on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom, and other military operations designated by the city manager for inclusion in this ordinance ("designated military operations"): 
(1)  That the requirement of former City Code section 2-110 that an employee shall not carry over at the end of the fiscal year more than six hundred forty (640) hours of paid personal leave, or eight hundred sixty-four (864) hours of paid personal leave for firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts, is waived for fiscal year 2008 for those employees who have been on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations during fiscal year 2008. For fiscal year 2009 and thereafter, such employees shall be subject to the provisions of section 2-110.1 which became effective July 1, 2008. 
(2)  That the requirement of former City Code section 2-111(a) and (b) that an employee shall take a minimum of forty (40) hours of paid personal leave, or fifty-six (56) hours of paid personal leave for firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts, during the fiscal year in order to participate in the end of the fiscal year leave exchange program is waived for fiscal year 2008 for those employees who have been on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations during fiscal year 2008. For fiscal year 2009 and thereafter, such employees shall be subject to the provisions of section 2-111, as amended, which became effective July 1, 2008. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of City Code section 2-133(3) regarding the election to continue, for a period of one (1) year following entry upon active military duty, medical, vision and dental insurance for which an employee has been previously enrolled, those employees on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations may continue said insurance for a period of one (1) year following entry upon active duty or until December 31, 2008, whichever period is greater. In addition, the city shall pay the above employee's portion of the cost, for calendar years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008 for such previously enrolled medical, dental and vision insurance plans for those employees on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations. 
(4)  That the right of an employee under City Code section 2-133(3)d. and e. to be paid for all or a portion of the employee's accrued paid personal leave and all accrued compensatory leave prior to entry upon active military duty is waived for calendar years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008 so as to permit those employees on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations to receive payment, at the employee's option, of paid personal leave and compensatory leave, in increments so as to cause payment at regular intervals of the amount of the deductions normally made and in accord with federal laws and regulations, from employees' paychecks. 
(5)  That the right of an employee under City Code section 2-108 and 2-119 to only accrue paid personal leave and paid medical leave while "in active pay status" is waived for calendar years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008 for those employees on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations during 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008 subject to the following conditions. All such employees shall continue to accrue paid personal leave and paid medical leave, following entry upon active military duty, in the same manner as before entry upon active duty, while on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations. Such accrual of leave shall be applicable for calendar years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008. 
(6)  An employee on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations, who is injured or killed while on active military duty, shall not be eligible to receive from the City of Newport News, Virginia, workmen's compensation benefits as a result of said injury or death. 
(7)  An employee on military active duty leave for Operation Enduring Freedom and other designated military operations can not use paid medical leave. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5737-02; Ord. No. 5860-02; Ord. No. 5989-03; Ord. No. 6076-04; Ord. No. 6167-05; Ord. No. 6314-06; Ord. No. 6542-08)  
Sec. 2-134. - Unpaid personal leave of absence. 
(a)  A regular full-time employee who has satisfactorily completed one (1) year of employment may be granted a personal leave of absence, without pay, at the discretion of the department head, designated representative, or designated manager, provided the employee has no paid personal leave or compensatory leave available. The maximum personal leave of absence without pay shall be six (6) months. 
(b)  A leave of absence does not guarantee that the employee will be reinstated, except as required by the Family and Medical Leave Act. The city manager is authorized to promulgate policies and procedures governing unpaid personal leaves of absence. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4995-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6715-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6715-10 shall be in effect on and after September 1, 2010.  
Sec. 2-135. - Funeral leave. 
(a)  Requests for funeral leave shall be granted with pay to all regular full-time employees due to death in their immediate family. "Immediate family" for purposes of this section is defined as spouse, parent, child, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, including in-law, foster and step relationships, and any person for whom the employee or the employee's spouse has a primary care relationship. 
(b)  The respective department heads shall have the authority and discretion to approve requests for funeral leave for time periods not exceeding five (5) days for each such family death. The city manager is authorized to promulgate guidelines governing funeral leave. 
(c)  Proof of death may be required by the department head. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-136. - Unpaid medical leaves of absence. 
(a)  A regular full-time employee who has exhausted all paid medical leave or has used the maximum allowed, and exhausted all paid personal leave and compensatory leave, and who requires additional leave for medical situations may be granted an unpaid medical leave of absence at the discretion of the department head, designated representative, or designated manager. Medical leaves of absence may be granted for the period of time medically necessary, or as required by the Family and Medical Leave Act, but shall not exceed six (6) months. A leave of absence does not guarantee that the employee will be reinstated, except as required by the Family and Medical Leave Act. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to promulgate policies and procedures governing unpaid medical leaves of absence. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4995-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5159-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6715-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6715-10 shall be in effect on and after September 1, 2010.  
Secs. 2-137—2-141. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - GROUP LIFE INSURANCE 
 
Sec. 2-142. - To be provided. 
Group life insurance shall be provided for eligible regular full-time employees upon the terms and conditions set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-143. - Eligibility generally. 
All employees of the former cities of Newport News and Warwick, including constitutional officers and their employees, are eligible for group life insurance immediately upon employment by the city. Employees, including retired employees, who are already covered by group insurance by either of the two (2) former cities will be automatically insured as of July 1, 1958, in the same amounts under this insurance if such employees are employed by this city or, if not employed, are eligible for retirement. Employees of the school board will be eligible if coverage is requested by the school board within six (6) months of the date of consolidation of such former cities, provided seventy-five (75) percent of all school employees apply for such insurance, except that school board employees who have not elected to join the group life insurance plan prior to July 1, 1986, are no longer eligible. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-144. - Waiting period for new employees. 
For group life insurance under this division, the waiting period for new employees shall be until the first of the month following completion of one (1) month of continuous service. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-145. - Evidence of insurability. 
No evidence of insurability shall be required for group life insurance under this division, provided application is made within not less than thirty (30) days following the date of eligibility. Employees who do not apply within such period shall submit evidence of insurability satisfactory to the insurance carrier in order to obtain the insurance. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-146. - Schedule of amounts. 
Unless otherwise provided in this division, basic group life insurance under this division shall be made available to eligible employees in an amount equal to their annual salary, and rounded to the next higher one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if not an even multiple of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The amount of group life insurance available to employees shall be reduced by fifty (50) percent upon retirement, but to not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). School board employees participating in the group life insurance plan on June 30, 1986, may continue to participate but may not increase their level of participation higher than properly existing on June 30, 1986. As of July 1, 1986, participation by school board employees shall be closed. 
Except as hereinbefore provided, employees may purchase additional insurance coverage, if available; but such costs shall be paid solely by the employee at the rates specified by the insurer. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91; Ord. No. 4995-97, § 1)  
Sec. 2-147. - Payroll deductions generally; premium refunds payable to city. 
The school board coverage provided for in section 2-143, the additional insurance coverage provided for in section 2-146, and the retiree coverage provided for in section 2-151 shall only be available on a contributory payroll deduction basis, with premium refunds payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-148. - Amount and deduction of employee's share of premium. 
On and after July 1, 1986, no contributions by regular employees toward the premium cost of basic group life insurance shall be required. Those employees retiring, or retired, prior to July 1, 1986, and school board employees, shall continue to pay forty cents ($0.40) per month per thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of group life insurance under this division; and such shall be paid in equal monthly installments. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-149. - Individual certificates. 
Each employee insured under this division shall receive a certificate outlining his benefits under the group life insurance plan. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-150. - To remain in force when on authorized leave of absence. 
When an employee is on an authorized leave of absence, his group life insurance under this division will remain in force. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-151. - May be retained by retiring employees. 
Retiring employees may retain the group life insurance in force under this division at the date of their retirement. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Sec. 2-152. - Payment of benefits; beneficiaries. 
The amount of group life insurance for which the employee is enrolled under this division shall be paid to the beneficiary designated by the employee, in event of death by any cause at any time and any place, either in a lump sum or in equal monthly installments as may be desired. An employee may change the beneficiary at any time. 
(Ord. No. 4259-91)  
Secs. 2-153—2-157. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - GROUP MEDICAL AND DENTAL INSURANCE 
 
Sec. 2-158. - Authority to provide. 
The city may provide group medical and dental insurance for its regular employees and elected officials and for the employees of the Peninsula Airport Commission. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 1; Ord. No. 1760, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-75.1; Ord. No. 3180-84; Ord. No. 3405-85; Ord. No. 4587-94; Ord. No. 6924-12, § 1)  
Sec. 2-159. - Optional membership in plans; distribution of premium cost. 
(a)  In accordance with the plans' conditions of coverage, and at their option, city employees and elected officials may become members of a city group medical insurance plan, or the dental insurance plan, or both. The city and the participating city employees and elected officials may each pay a portion of the premium which amounts shall be determined annually by the city manager, or the city may pay the entire amount. The total of city and employees' and officials' contributions shall be sufficient, on a pro rata basis, to fund all claims, reserves and administration costs of the group health insurance contracts or plans and the dental insurance plan. 
(b)  In accordance with the plans' conditions of coverage, and at their option, Peninsula Airport Commission employees may become members of a city group medical insurance plan, or the dental insurance plan, or both. The commission and participating commission employees may each pay a portion of the premium or the commission may pay the entire amount. The total amount shall be determined annually by the city manager. The total of commission and employees' contributions shall be sufficient, on a pro rata basis, to fund all claims, reserves and administration costs of the group health insurance contracts or plans and the dental insurance plan. 
(c)  Any deficits in the city's self-funded plans shall be shared by the city and the Peninsula Airport Commission on a pro rata basis. 
(Ord. No. 992, § 1; Ord. No. 1760, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-75.1; Ord. No. 3180-84; Ord. No. 3405-85; Ord. No. 4587-94; Ord. No. 6924-12, § 1)  
Secs. 2-160—2-164. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, Code of Virginia, title 65.2. 
 
Sec. 2-165. - Establishment, composition, etc., of fund. 
(a)  A fund, to be known as the "Workmen's Compensation Fund" is hereby established and shall be used and drawn upon only to pay claims arising from injury or death compensable under the terms of the Virginia Workmen's Compensation Act. The funds on deposit in the "City of Newport News Compensation Fund" as of June 30, 1958, shall be set aside and held in reserve as a part of the fund to be established, and the council shall, in each annual budget and as necessary, make provision for and an appropriation with which to supplement such fund. 
(b)  Workmen's compensation insurance of the Newport News Waterworks Commission and in force in the City of Warwick on June 30, 1958, shall be cancelled. 
(c)  The unpaid claims of the City of Newport News Workmen's Compensation Fund, as of June 30, 1958, shall become liabilities of the fund established by this section. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-76; Ord. No. 3064-83)  
Sec. 2-166. - Settlement and payment of claims under article. 
The city manager shall have authority and he is hereby directed to settle and pay out of the workmen's compensation fund, in strict compliance with this article and the Virginia Workmen's Compensation Act, all claims under this article, and his findings, rulings and decisions shall be conclusive and binding in the allowance or refusal of claims hereunder or payments made in compliance with this article, except that all claims for death shall be paid only upon the approval of the council. 
(Ord. No. 14, §§ 2, 7; Code 1961, §§ 2-77, 2-78; Ord. No. 3064-83)  
Sec. 2-167. - Supplemental compensation during a period of temporary total disability and alternative employment. 
(a)  Any current employee of the city who is unable to perform his duties due to an occupational injury or disease and who is drawing temporary total disability benefits as provided by the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act shall be eligible to receive supplemental compensation during the two-year period immediately following the date of injury by accident or diagnosis of disease. Such supplemental compensation shall be calculated as the difference between his pre-injury or pre-diagnosis net rate of pay, at the date of his disability, and the workers' compensation indemnity benefit. The maximum number of hours for which such supplemental compensation may be paid is one thousand forty (1040) hours. 
(b)  The supplement provided for by this section shall be coordinated with any hours worked in the city's alternative employment program. Any employee who is assigned a light duty job under the alternative employment program due to a condition that would otherwise entitle him to indemnity benefits under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act within the two-year period immediately following the date of injury or diagnosis of disease may receive his pre-injury or pre-diagnosis net rate of pay for up to two thousand eighty (2080) hours of the alternative employment. The supplementation to net rate of pay provided by subsection (a) and (b) shall not exceed a combined total of two thousand eighty (2080) hours. The "net rate of pay" is defined as "gross pay, less federal tax, social security tax and state income tax deductions, calculated on an hourly basis." 
(c)  If an employee is eligible for and receiving workers' compensation indemnity benefits, he may not supplement the benefit with any accrued paid leave unless otherwise mandated by state law. No supplemental compensation provided by this section shall be paid for any period beyond two (2) years from the date of the injury by accident or diagnosis of disease. 
(d)  In the event an employee shall resign, abandon or be discharged from his employment, the compensation fixed by this section shall cease from and after such date, and thereafter the employee shall receive only such compensation as is prescribed by the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 3; Ord. No. 1760, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-79; Ord. No. 2534-79; Ord. No. 2839-81; Ord. No. 5512-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6510-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6510-08, adopted June 24, 2008, changed the title of section 2-167 from "Supplemental compensation during a portion of temporary total disability" to "Supplemental compensation during a period of temporary total disability and alternative employment."  
Sec. 2-168. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5512-00, § 2 repealed § 2-168, which pertained to compensation after six (6) weeks of disability. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-169. - Examination of employees claiming compensation. 
So long as any city employee shall remain off duty claiming compensation under disability resulting from injuries received in the actual discharge of his duties, he shall submit to an examination by the city physician, or such physician as the city designates, as often as it is deemed necessary or as the employee is requested so to do, and such physician shall report to the city manager his findings upon such examination, which finding and report shall be final and conclusive. Should the employee so off duty and claiming compensation refuse to submit to such examination, or should it be found that such employee is able to return to duty or perform other reasonable service and fails to do so, the compensation provided for in this article shall forthwith cease. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 6; Ord. No. 1760, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-82)  
Sec. 2-170. - Compensation to dependents in event of death. 
In the event of the death of a city employee from an injury received in the actual discharge of his duties, there shall be paid to such employee's dependents, as defined in the Virginia Workmen's Compensation Act, in addition to the amount set forth in such act, the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month; provided, however, that in no event shall this payment continue for a longer period than six (6) years from the date of the injury causing death. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 5; Ord. No. 1760, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-81)  
Sec. 2-171. - Definition. 
Wherever the words "workmen's compensation" are mentioned within the Code of the City of Newport News, it shall be taken to mean "worker's compensation" as used in the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 3064-83)  
Secs. 2-172—2-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE GRIEVANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4250-91, adopted Aug. 27, 1991, amended Art. V to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. V, §§ 2-181—2-187, 2-191—2-194, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3521-86 and Ord. No. 3701-88. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of Ord. No. 4250-91. 
State Law reference— Duty of city to establish employee grievance procedure, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1506. 
 
Sec. 2-181. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the City of Newport News to encourage resolution of employee problems and complaints in an environment wherein employees may freely discuss their concerns with immediate supervisors and upper management. However, to the extent that such concerns cannot be resolved by other means, a grievance procedure is established to afford an immediate method for the resolution of disputes which may arise between the city and its employees. An employee filing a grievance or participating in the grievance of another employee may follow the grievance procedure with complete freedom from reprisal. 
(Ord. No. 4250-91)  
Sec. 2-182. - Definition of grievance. 
A grievance is a complaint or dispute of an employee relating to his or her employment, including but not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  Disciplinary actions including disciplinary demotions, suspensions and dismissals, provided that dismissals shall be grievable when they result from formal discipline or unsatisfactory job performance; 
(2)  The application of personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations; 
(3)  Discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, political affiliation, age, disability, national origin or sex; and 
(4)  Acts of retaliation initiated as a result of the employee's use of or participation in the grievance procedure; or because the employee has complied with any law of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Virginia, has reported any violation of any such law to a government authority, has sought any change in law before the Congress of the United States or the General Assembly; or has reported an incidence of fraud, abuse or gross management. 
In grievances brought under paragraphs cited above, the employee must state specific facts and circumstances in the grievance to support his or her complaints of grievability. Mere allegation of such actions or circumstances will not support grievability. 
(Ord. No. 4250-91; Ord. No. 4925-96, § 1)  
Sec. 2-183. - Management rights and non-grievable issues. 
Management reserves the exclusive right to manage the affairs and operations of the city. Included are the rights to establish job duties, job descriptions and job requirements, to assign and direct the work of employees, to determine the methods, means and personnel by which work activities are to be carried out, to establish personnel and operating policies, procedures, rules and regulations, to hire, promote, transfer, assign and retain employees, to establish standards for acceptable performance and conduct, and to establish wages and salaries, position classifications and general benefits. Therefore the following complaints are not grievable: 
(1)  Establishment and revision of wages and salaries, position classifications or general benefits; 
(2)  Work activity accepted by the employee as a condition of employment or work activity which may reasonably be expected to be a part of job content; 
(3)  The content of ordinances, statutes or established personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations; 
(4)  Failure to promote except where the employee can show established promotional policies or procedures were not followed or applied fairly; 
(5)  The methods, means and personnel by which city operations are to be conducted; 
(6)  Except where such action affects an employee who has been reinstated within the previous six (6) months as the result of the final determination of a grievance, termination, layoff, dismissals or suspension from duties because of a lack of work, a reduction in work force, or job abolition; 
(7)  Employee performance evaluations; 
(8)  The hiring, promotion, transfer, assignment and retention of employees by the city; and 
(9)  The relief of employees from duties in emergencies. 
In any grievance brought under the exception in paragraph (6) above, the action shall be upheld upon a showing by the city that: (i) there was a valid business reason for the action and (ii) the employee was notified of such reason in writing prior to the effective date of the action. 
(Ord. No. 4250-91)  
Sec. 2-184. - Coverage of personnel. 
All regular full time and part-time employees covered by the Classification and Pay Plan of the City of Newport News are eligible to file grievances in accordance with this policy with the exception of: 
(1)  Employees in the employment probationary period or in a formal extension of the employment probationary period; 
(2)  Appointees of elected groups or individuals; 
(3)  Department heads and assistant city managers; 
(4)  Employees who have resigned may not have access to the grievance procedure after the effective date of the resignation unless the grievance was initiated prior to the effective date of the resignation; 
(5)  Law enforcement officers as defined by Chapter 5 (§9.1-500 et seq.) of Title 9.1 whose grievance is subject to the provisions of Chapter 5 and who have elected to proceed pursuant to those provisions in the resolution of their grievance. A law enforcement officer shall be given written notification of his/her rights to initiate a grievance under this procedure and shall be provided with a copy of this procedure upon request. The law enforcement officer may proceed under either this grievance procedure or under the provisions of Chapter 5 of Title 9.1 of the Code of Virginia, but not both. 
(6)  Temporary, limited term and seasonal employees are not eligible to file grievances under this grievance procedure. 
(7)  Employees of the Newport News Department of Social Services are included in this grievance procedure. 
(8)  Employees of constitutional officers are not covered by this procedure; however, these employees may be covered by this procedure if agreed to by both the constitutional officer and city council. 
(Ord. No. 4250-91; Ord. No. 7388-17; Ord. No. 7388-17; Ord. No. 7402-17)  
Sec. 2-185. - Determination of access, grievability and compliance. 
(a)  Determinations of access to the grievance procedure shall be made by the director of human resources in writing to the employee at any time prior to the panel hearing. 
(b)  Determinations of grievability are made by the city manager or designated representative in writing at any time prior to the panel hearing. A copy of the city manager or designee's ruling on the issue of grievability shall be sent to the grievant. 
(c)  Determinations on access and grievability may be appealed to the Circuit Court of Newport News for a hearing on the issues of whether the employee has access to the procedure, and whether the issue is grievable. Proceedings shall be initiated by the grievant by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager or director of human resources within ten (10) calendar days from the date of the receipt of the determination. Within ten (10) calendar days thereafter, the city manager or designee shall transmit to the clerk of the court a copy of the determination of the city manager or designee, a copy of the notice of appeal, and the exhibits. A list of the evidence furnished to the court shall also be furnished to the grievant. The failure of the city manager or designee to transmit the records shall not prejudice the rights of the grievant. The court, on motion of the grievant, may issue a writ of certiorari requiring the city manager or designee to transmit the record on or before a certain date. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of such record by the clerk, the court, sitting without a jury, shall hear the appeal on the record transmitted by the city manager or designee and such additional evidence as may be necessary to resolve any controversy as to the correctness of the record. The court, in its discretion, may receive such other evidence as the ends of justice may require. The court may affirm the determination, or may reverse or modify the determination. The decision of the court shall be rendered no later than the fifteenth day from the date of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the court is final and is not appealable. 
(d)  Failure of either party to comply with all substantial procedural requirements of the grievance procedure, without just cause will result in a decision in favor of the other party on any grievable issue, provided the party not in compliance fails to correct the noncompliance within five (5) work days of receipt of written notification by the other party of the compliance violation. Such written notification by the grievant shall be made to the director of human resources. The director of human resources or designated representative shall determine compliance and may require a clear written explanation of the basis for just cause extensions or exceptions. Compliance determinations made by the director of human resources or designated representative shall be subject to judicial review by filing a petition with the circuit court within thirty (30) calendar days of the compliance determination. 
(e)  The time periods outlined in this article constitute substantial procedural requirements. However, such time periods may be extended by mutual agreement between the grievant and the appropriate level of management to whom the time period is applicable. Whenever a person is required or permitted under this article to do an act within a prescribed time after receipt of a document, three (3) days shall be added to the prescribed time when the document is served by mail. In addition, if the due date for any act falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or city holiday, the next business day shall become the due date. Employees have the responsibility to report to their department head for disciplinary meetings when directed to do so. Employees shall make themselves available even when they are on administrative leave. 
(f)  The determination of a complaint as "non grievable" shall not be construed to restrict any employee's right to seek or management's right to provide customary administrative review of complaints outside the scope of the grievance procedure. 
(g)  The human resources department will provide procedural information and guidance to employees and management on issues of access, grievability and compliance. 
(h)  The issues of access and grievability shall be decided prior to the panel hearing or they shall be deemed to have been waived. 
(i)  Date of receipt is determined by the date of hand delivery or by the date indicated by a commercial carrier that delivery was made to the grievant's address on record with the city. 
(Ord. No. 4250-91; Ord. No. 6036-04; Ord. No. 6679-10; Ord. No. 7388-17)  
Sec. 2-186. - Grievance procedure. 
(a)  Management steps. The first four (4) steps of the grievance procedure provide an intermediate process for the resolution of complaints and disciplinary matters. 
(1)  General provisions. 
a.  The first two (2) management steps involve the employee's immediate supervisor. In departments with several levels of supervision, the department may specify the management level designated as the immediate supervisor for grievance purposes. 
b.  In disciplinary matters, Steps I, II and III may be waived by agreement of both the employee and the appropriate levels of management. 
c.  In grievances in which the action grieved (whether disciplinary or otherwise) was action taken by the department head, Steps I and II shall be waived. 
d.  In situations where the employee's immediate supervisor is also the department head, Steps II and III of the procedure shall be combined. 
e.  Personal face-to-face meetings between the appropriate level of management and the employee are required at all steps. 
f.  With the exception of Step IV, the only persons who may normally be present in the management step meetings are the grievant, the appropriate manager at the level at which the grievance is being heard and appropriate witnesses for each side. Witnesses shall be present in the management step meetings only while actually providing testimony. 
At Step IV, the grievant and management may each have present a representative of his or her choice. If the grievant is represented by legal counsel, management likewise has the option of being represented by counsel. When an employee is represented, any cost of representation is at the employee's expense. 
g.  All grievances processed through management Steps II, III, and IV shall be processed on forms provided by the city. The human resources department will provide procedural assistance to both parties in the completion of grievance forms. 
h.  Once a grievance has been reduced to writing, it may not be changed or amended unless agreed to by the grievant and the level of management at that step. Any different or additional grievance issues must be pursued through a separate grievance proceeding. 
i.  Date of receipt is determined by the date of hand delivery or by the date indicated by a commercial carrier that delivery was made to the grievant's address on record with the city. 
(2)  Step I. Any employee who feels aggrieved may bring the situation to the attention of his immediate supervisor, explaining the nature of the problem and his suggested solution. 
It is not necessary for a complaint to be reduced to writing; however, the supervisor should routinely document this action with the assumption that it could be the first step of a formal grievance. Any such complaint or grievance shall be made within twenty (20) calendar days after the event or action which is the basis for the grievance. The supervisor shall give his verbal or written response to the employee within seven (7) calendar days after the situation has been brought to his attention. If no response is given within that seven (7) day period, it shall be deemed denied. 
(3)  Step II. If discussion between the employee and the immediate supervisor fails to settle the matter, the grievance shall be reduced to writing on a grievance form provided by the human resources department. 
The employee must present the written grievance to his supervisor (or the department head when the event or action was taken by the department head) within seven (7) calendar days from the date the supervisor responded. If the supervisor failed to respond at Step I, the employee has seven (7) calendar days from the date the supervisor's response was due to present his written grievance. Once the employee reduces his grievance to writing, he must specify on the grievance form the specific relief he expects to obtain. 
The supervisor or his representative will acknowledge receipt of the grievance form by his dated signature and provide a date and time for the Step II grievance meeting. 
The supervisor or his representative shall then contact the human resources department to obtain a grievance number which he shall write on the grievance form, and then provide a copy of the grievance form to the human resources department. 
The immediate supervisor or his representative shall, within seven (7) calendar days, meet and discuss the grievance with the employee. Within seven (7) calendar days after such meeting, the supervisor or his representative shall respond to the employee in writing on the grievance form, and shall include the date of the meeting and the date of the decision. The immediate supervisor or his representative shall return the grievance form to the grievant who shall sign and date it. The immediate supervisor shall provide a copy of this signed grievance form to the human resources department. 
(4)  Step III. If the response of the immediate supervisor or his representative does not resolve the grievance the employee may appeal to the department head within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the written response of the immediate supervisor or his representative. 
The employee must submit the appeal to the department head in writing on the grievance form. Upon receipt of the grievance form, the department head or his representative should provide a date and time for the Step III grievance meeting, sign and date the form, and provide a copy to the human resources department. 
The department head within seven (7) calendar days, shall meet and discuss the grievance with the employee. Within seven (7) calendar days after such meeting, the department head shall respond to the grievance in writing on the grievance form and include the date of the meeting and the date of the decision. The department head or his representative shall return the grievance form to the grievant who shall sign and date the grievance form. The department head or his representative shall provide a copy of the signed grievance form to the human resources department. 
(5)  Step IV. If the department head's response does not resolve the grievance, the grievant may appeal to the city manager within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the department head's response. 
The employee must submit the appeal to the city manager in writing on the grievance form. Upon receipt of the grievance form, the city manager, an assistant city manager, or their designated representative, should provide a date and time for the Step IV grievance meeting, sign and date the form, and provide a copy to the human resources department. 
The city manager or his designated representative shall, within seven (7) calendar days, meet and discuss the grievance with the employee. Within seven (7) calendar days after such meeting, the city manager or his designated representative shall respond to the grievance in writing on the grievance form and include the date of the meeting and the date of the decision. The city manager or his designated representative shall send a copy of the grievance form to the grievant by hand delivery or by commercial carrier which shall provide delivery confirmation to the grievant's address on record with the city. 
If the city manager's response does not resolve the grievance, the employee may request a panel hearing. 
(b)  Panel hearing. 
(1)  Request for a panel hearing. 
a.  A panel hearing may be requested when the city manager's response in Step IV of the grievance procedure does not resolve the grievance. 
b.  The employee, within seven (7) calendar day of receipt of the decision of the city manager or designated representative, must make a request for a panel hearing to the director of human resources, in writing, on the grievance form and must also submit a panel hearing request form provided by the human resources department. The panel hearing request form shall include the name of the panel member selected by the grievant and the name of the grievant's legal counsel, if any. 
(2)  Panel selection. 
a.  Panel members shall be active, regular full-time employees and shall be selected in the following manner: one (1) selected by the grievant, one (1) selected by the city manager, and the remaining member selected by the two (2) appointees. Selection of the city manager's appointee shall be made within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the request for panel hearing. After the city manager has selected his appointee, the director of human resources or designated representative shall notify the two (2) appointees of their selection. The two (2) panel members shall select a third member within seven (7) calendar days after the notification of their selection as panel members, who shall serve as the chairperson; provided, however, this period may be extended an additional seven (7) calendar days by the two (2) appointees, if necessary. In the event that the agreement cannot be reached as to the final panel member, the Chief Judge of the Circuit Court of Newport News shall select such third panel member. 
b.  The panel is an impartial body selected to hear and decide the grievance on its merits. Therefore, in order to provide an impartial panel and to ensure the protection of city employees, the following persons may not serve as panel members: 
1.  The following relatives of any participant in the grievance process and the relatives of any participant's spouse: spouse, parent, child, descendants of a child, sibling, niece, nephew and first cousin. 
2.  Supervisors and managers who are in a direct line of supervision of a grievant. Employees in the same department as the grievant may not serve on the panel. 
3.  Any person having direct involvement with the grievance including any representative of the grievant and witnesses who have been involved at the management steps. 
4.  Any attorney having direct involvement with the subject matter or a partner, associate, employee, co-employee or client of such an attorney. 
5.  Employees of the human resources department, the city attorney's office, and the city manager's office. 
6.  Persons who are or have been residents of the same household as the grievant are also prohibited from serving on the panel. 
c.  Any person selected as a panel member may decline appointment in which case the appropriate party must make another selection within seven (7) calendar days of notice to the human resources director or designee that the selected person has declined appointment. 
(3)  Panel procedure. 
a.  The director of human resources, or designated representative, and full panel will coordinate a date and time for the panel hearing. 
b.  All panel hearings shall commence within six (6) months following the date of the Step IV decision unless the grievant and the director of human resources and the city attorney's office, if involved, mutually agree to extend the six (6) month period. 
c.  Parties to the grievance shall not discuss the substance of any grievance or the problem giving rise to the grievance with any panel members prior to the hearing. 
d.  The director of human resources, or designated representative, will coordinate the panel hearing and may correspond with panel members, grievants, the grievant's legal counsel, witnesses and others directly on behalf of the panel. 
e.  The director of human resources, or designated representative, will provide the panel with copies of the grievance record prior to the hearing and provide the grievant with a list of the documents furnished to the panel at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled panel hearing. Documents, exhibits, and a list of witnesses shall be exchanged between the grievant's legal counsel and management's legal counsel at least seven (7) days prior to the scheduled panel hearing, unless otherwise agreed. If the grievant is not represented by legal counsel, the parties shall provide such material to the human resources department at least seven (7) days prior to the scheduled panel hearing, and human resources will coordinate the exchange of the material. Upon the request of the grievant or his representative, the director of human resources, or designated representative, will also allow the grievant access to and copies of all relevant files intended to be used in the grievance proceeding. 
f.  The director of human resources, with the mutual agreement between the City's representative and the grievant, may extend the time periods applicable to the panel procedures. 
(4)  Conduct of the panel hearing. 
a.  At the request of either the grievant or the city, the hearing shall be private. If private, only the panel members, the grievant, the grievant's legal counsel or other representative, the management representative, management's legal counsel, the witness who is testifying, and the court reporter, if any, shall be present at the hearing. If open, the panel shall nevertheless have full power and authority to close portions of the hearing and to determine what persons not having a direct involvement in the proceedings may remain in the hearing room. Witnesses, other than the grievant and the management representative, shall remain in the hearing room only while giving their testimony. Employees of the human resources department will be present throughout any hearing except when the panel is deliberating. The panel may seek the advice of the director of human resources, or designated representative, on grievance procedure questions. 
b.  The grievant may be represented by legal counsel at his own expense. In the event that the grievant is represented by legal counsel, the city may likewise be represented by counsel. 
c.  The taking of photographs in the hearing room during the progress of the grievance proceedings and the broadcasting of grievance proceedings by radio or television are prohibited. 
d.  The panel shall conduct its hearing with its three (3) members present. 
e.  The panel has the authority to determine the admissibility of evidence without regard to the burden of proof, or the order of presentation of the evidence, so long as a full and equal opportunity is afforded to all parties for the presentation of their evidence. 
f.  At the option of each party, opening statements may be made at the beginning of the hearing setting forth the issue(s) and the panel may ask for such statements in order to clarify the issue(s) involved in the grievance. If opening statements are made, the grievant or the grievant's legal counsel shall begin, followed by the city's legal counsel or the city's designated representative. 
g.  There is no subpoena power to compel the attendance of witnesses in the grievance procedure. The panel may, however, at the request of either party or in its own discretion, request the voluntary appearance of witnesses. Witnesses shall be permitted in the hearing room only when giving their testimony. The sworn statement of an absent or unavailable witness shall be received as evidence by the panel. 
h.  The panel hearing is an administrative process and is not meant to be conducted like proceedings in court. Panels are not bound by technical rules of evidence and shall take into account all reliable and substantial evidence produced at the hearing. It is within the province of the panel to determine relevancy and materiality. The panel may require either party to demonstrate relevancy and materiality of any evidence and the need for any requested extensions of the hearing panel. 
i.  All evidence shall be presented in the presence of the panel and the parties unless by mutual consent of the parties. The grievant shall present his or her evidence first. 
j.  Evidence may be presented by the grievant along with any exhibits which shall be marked and made a part of the record. The panel may question any witness, including the grievant, and the grievant or his counsel may question any witnesses. The city's designated representative or counsel representing the city may also question witnesses and present evidence in the same manner afforded the grievant. 
k.  The panel shall deal with the grievance before them. Evidence and testimony as to how other employees or situations have been handled in the past are not relevant. No personnel file or record may be examined by the panel or introduced into evidence, except that of the grievant. 
l.  The grievant shall not be permitted to introduce any evidence before the panel which has not been previously presented or submitted during the management steps for management consideration. 
m.  The panel by majority vote may decide procedural questions and rule upon objections raised during the course of the hearing. 
n.  The parties shall produce such additional evidence as required by the panel. 
o.  After both parties have had the opportunity to present their evidence, the panel chairperson shall inquire of both parties whether they have further evidence. Upon receiving negative replies, the hearing shall be closed. Both parties shall be given the opportunity to make closing statements, following which the panel shall retire to begin its deliberation. If closing statements are made, the grievant or the grievant's legal counsel shall make his or her closing argument, followed by the city's legal counsel or the city's designated representative. 
p.  A court reporter shall record the grievance hearing, and the city shall bear the cost of the reporter's appearance fee. Any party ordering a copy of the transcript of the hearing shall bear the cost thereof. By agreement, the parties may waive having the hearing recorded by a court reporter. 
(5)  Panel decision. 
a.  The panel shall render its decision in writing within five (5) working days of the conclusion of the hearing unless the panel by majority vote extends the time period. 
b.  The panel shall state in writing the reasons for its decision on the panel hearing response form. Copies of the decision shall be transmitted to the city manager, the director of human resources, the department head, the grievant, the grievant's supervisor, and the attorneys for the parties by a representative of the human resources department. 
c.  The panel shall decide the case on the merits, not on whether there has been compliance with the procedural requirements of this article. 
d.  The panel does not have the authority to formulate policies or procedures nor to alter existing policies and procedures. The panel is not empowered to establish or modify job standards, job requirements, or performance standards nor may the panel determine or change an employee's evaluation rating. The panel shall make its decision within the following standards of review: 
1.  The panel shall uphold the city if the evidence shows that the charges brought pursuant to the Standards of Conduct were reasonable. If the panel finds that the charges were not reasonable, the panel has the same authority and limitations as management to determine the appropriate charges and disciplinary action in accordance with applicable city policy. 
2.  In grievances involving termination for unsatisfactory work performance, failure to meet job standards, unacceptable attendance and job abandonment, the panel shall uphold the city's action if it determines that the action was reasonable under the circumstances. 
3.  In grievances involving complaints regarding application of policy, discrimination and other non-disciplinary issues, the panel will determine if policies and procedures have been appropriately applied. The panel is not empowered to promote, assign or transfer employees, to establish salaries nor to take any other action which is in the purview of management rights. 
4.  The panel does not have the authority to consider determinations of grievability, determinations of access to the grievance procedure, or compliance determinations, made in accordance with section 2-185. 
5.  The majority decision of the panel, acting within the scope of its authority, shall be final, subject to existing policies, procedures and law. In cases of law enforcement officers who have elected to proceed pursuant to § 9.1-504 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the panel decision is advisory only to the city manager, but shall be accorded significant weight. 
6.  The panel may not award back pay or benefits, damages, or attorney's fees. 
e.  The city manager, after consultation with the director of human resources, has discretion to order all or some back pay and/or benefits to the grievant if the panel finds that the charges or action taken by the city were not reasonable. 
f.  The director of human resources may on his own action remand a decision which appears to be inconsistent with law and written policy to the panel for further consideration. All parties will be notified when a decision is remanded. All three (3) panel members must participate in the decision-making process. 
g.  If either party refuses to implement a panel decision, the other party may petition the Circuit Court of Newport News to enforce the decision. 
(Ord. No. 4250-91; Ord. No. 6036-04; Ord. No. 6679-10; Ord. No. 7189-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7388-17)  
Secs. 2-187—2-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Department of law, Ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 2-206. - Deputy and assistant city attorneys—Establishment of positions; qualifications. 
In the department of law, there shall be such number of deputy and assistant city attorneys as are authorized by the city council. All such deputy and assistant city attorneys shall be attorneys-at-law, licensed to practice under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 12; Ord. No. 271; Ord. No. 1026, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-107; Ord. No. 6705-10, § 1)  
Sec. 2-207. - Same—To be employed on full-time basis. 
The deputy and assistant city attorneys referred to in section 2-206 shall be employed on a full-time basis and shall not engage in the private practice of law. 
(Ord. No. 12; Ord. No. 271; Ord. No. 1027, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-108; Ord. No. 6705-10, § 1)  
Sec. 2-208. - Legal stenographers and clerical help. 
In the department of law, there shall be one (1) legal stenographer and such other legal stenographers and clerical help as may be authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12; Ord. No. 271; Code 1961, § 2-109)  
Sec. 2-209. - Legal assistance to city employees in matters connected to such persons' employment. 
(a)  If any person employed by the city shall be made the defendant in any civil action for damages arising out of any matter connected with such person's employment, such person may, in the discretion of the city attorney, be represented in such action by the city attorney, a deputy city attorney or an assistant city attorney. If, in the opinion of the city attorney, it is impractical or uneconomical for such legal service to be rendered, the city attorney may employ special counsel for such purposes, whose compensation shall be fixed by the city manager. The compensation for special counsel employed pursuant to this subsection shall be paid out of funds specially appropriated for this purpose by the council. 
(b)  If any officer or employee of the city is investigated and no charges are brought, or is arrested or indicted or otherwise prosecuted on any criminal charge arising out of any act committed in the discharge of his official duties, and the charge is subsequently dismissed, or upon trial he is found not guilty, the council may reimburse the officer or employee for reasonable legal fees and expenses incurred by him in defense of the investigation or charge, from funds specially appropriated for this purpose by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1; Ord. No. 1960, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-109.1; Ord. No. 6705-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6705-10 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2010.  
Secs. 2-210—2-219. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFICE OF RISK MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 2-220. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established an office of risk management, which shall consist of the risk manager and such other officers and employees, organized into branches, sections or other units, as may be provided by orders or directives of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 7044-14)  
Sec. 2-221. - Responsibilities. 
The office of risk management shall be responsible for the establishment, administration, direction and supervision of comprehensive programs which will result in the preservation of the city's assets and public service capabilities. It will further manage the city's general liability, automobile, workers' compensation and all other self-insurance programs, and be responsible for the determination, placement and management of other required insurance coverages. 
(Ord. No. 7044-14)  
Sec. 2-222. - General powers of risk manager. 
The risk manager shall be appointed by the city manager. Such risk manager shall be the head of the office of risk management and shall have general management and control of the several branches, sections or other units of the office. Whenever the term "self-insurance administrator" is used in any ordinance, resolution, policy, or other document, such shall mean the risk manager. 
(Ord. No. 7044-14)  
Secs. 2-223—2-326. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5537-00, adopted Oct. 10, 2000, amended Art. VIII, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. VIII pertained to the department of data processing. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-327. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of information technology, which shall consist of the director of information technology and such other officers and employees, organized into branches, sections or other units, as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 5537-00)  
Sec. 2-328. - Responsibilities. 
The department of information technology shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Development and operation of automated information systems for the purpose of providing efficient data handling. The department shall provide services to departments, divisions and agencies of the city, as well as the Newport News School Board. 
(2)  Management and control of voice and radio communications, including telephone services and electronics maintenance functions. 
(Ord. No. 5537-00)  
Sec. 2-329. - General powers of director. 
The director of information technology shall be appointed by the city manager. The director of information technology shall be the head of the department of information technology and shall have general management and control of the several branches, sections or other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 5537-00)  
Secs. 2-330—2-347. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5826-02, § 1, amended Art. IX, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 2-348—2-350. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IX pertained to the department of planning and development. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-348. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of planning, which shall consist of the director of planning, to be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders of the director consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 5826-02, § 1)  
Sec. 2-349. - Responsibilities. 
The department of planning shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Planning, programming and coordinating activities concerning the physical, economic and social development of the city; and 
(2)  Such other functions concerning the overall planning of the city as may be assigned to the department. 
(Ord. No. 5826-02, § 1)  
Sec. 2-350. - General powers of director. 
The director of planning shall be the head of the department of planning and, under the supervision of the city manager, shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. Whenever the phrase "director of planning and development" appears in any ordinance (including without limitation conditional use permit and conditional zoning approval ordinances), resolution, site plan or landscaping plan, that phrase will be interpreted to mean the director of planning. 
(Ord. No. 5826-02, § 1)  
Secs. 2-351—2-385. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3110-83, adopted Dec. 12, 1983, effective Jan. 1, 1984, amended Art. X to read as set forth in §§ 2-386—2-388. Formerly Art. X also contained provisions relative to the division of traffic and transportation, §§ 2-394—2-396. These functions are now performed by the division of traffic engineering of the department of engineering pursuant to § 2-671. 
 
Sec. 2-386. - Established; composition; appointment of director. 
There is hereby established a department of public works, which shall consist of the director of public works, to be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders of the director consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 3110-83) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, § 4.02B.  
Sec. 2-387. - Functions. 
The department of public works shall be responsible for the maintenance of all public streets, roads, bridges, drains, sewers, garbage and refuse collection and disposal and all other public works and constructions; the custody of such equipment and supplies as the council may require; and such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department. 
(Ord. No. 3110-83; Ord. No. 7619-20, § 1) 
Cross reference— Garbage, litter and other solid wastes, Ch. 19; repair of buildings, drives and walks in parks by department of public works, § 29-9; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 38.  
Sec. 2-388. - General powers of director. 
The director of public works shall be the head of the department of public works and shall, under the supervision of the city manager, have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 3110-83)  
Secs. 2-389—2-430. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - WATERWORKS DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-431. - Established; composition; appointment of director. 
There is hereby established a waterworks department, which shall consist of the director of waterworks, to be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders or directives consistent therewith. Whenever the phrase "department of public utilities" appears in any ordinance, resolution, agreement, or site plan, that phrase will be interpreted to mean the waterworks department. 
(Ord. No. 7204-15)  
Sec. 2-432. - Functions. 
The waterworks department shall be responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of the waterworks system of the city and such other public utilities as may be acquired and operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 7204-15) 
Cross reference— Water supply, Ch. 42.  
Sec. 2-433. - General powers of director. 
The director of waterworks shall be the head of the waterworks department and shall, under the supervision of the city manager, have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. Whenever the phrase "director of public utilities" appears in any ordinance, resolution, agreement or site plan, that phrase will be interpreted to mean the director of waterworks. 
(Ord. No. 7204-15)  
Secs. 2-434—2-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 7148-15 specifies an effective date of July 1, 2015. 
 
Sec. 2-451. - Established; composition; appointment of director. 
There is hereby established a department of communications, which shall consist of the director of communications, to be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 7148-15, § 1)  
Sec. 2-452. - Functions. 
The department of communications shall be responsible for internal communications between and within city departments, external communications with the public, media relations, managing citizen engagement and community relations, emergency communications, Newport News Television, 311 Call Center operations; and such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department. 
(Ord. No. 7148-15, § 1)  
Sec. 2-453. - General powers of director. 
The director of communications shall be the head of the department of communications and shall, under the supervision of the city manager, have general management control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 7148-15, § 1)  
Secs. 2-454—2-461. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - PLANNING COMMISSION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, Ch. 45; subdivision regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference— Local planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-462. - Created; definition. 
(a)  A local planning commission is hereby created in and for the city, to be known as the city planning commission, pursuant to Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term "commission" shall mean the city planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 1; Code 1961, § 29-1; Ord. No. 5291-99; Ord. No. 5295-99) 
State Law reference— Duty to create local planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210.  
Sec. 2-463. - Composition; appointment and qualifications of members. 
The commission shall consist of nine (9) voting members. The members appointed by the city council, all of whom shall be residents of the city, shall be freeholders qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. In addition to the voting members, the city manager or someone from the administrative branch of the government designated by the city manager, shall be an ex officio member of the commission, with the right to participate in discussions, but with no right to vote. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 2; Code 1961, § 29-2; Ord. No. 2738-81; Ord. No. 3625-87, § 1; Ord. No. 3674-87, § 1; Ord. No. 4013-90, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-464. - Terms of members. 
Appointments to the commission shall be for terms of four (4) years each, except as to the term of the city manager or his designee. The term of office on the commission of the city manager or his designee shall be coextensive with the term of office to which he has been appointed unless the city council, at the first regular meeting in January of each year, appoints another to serve as that representative. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 2; Code 1961, § 29-2; Ord. No. 2738-81; Ord. No. 3625-87, § 1) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to provide for staggered terms for members of boards and commissions and limitation on length of service by such members, § 17.02. 
State Law reference— Terms of members of local planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-465. - Filling vacancies. 
Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term only. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 2; Code 1961, § 29-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-466. - Oath of members. 
Members of the commission shall take the oath of office required of city officers. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 2, Code 1961, § 29-7) 
State Law reference— Authority to require oath, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-467. - Compensation of members. 
Members of the commission shall receive as compensation for their services one hundred dollars ($100.00) per meeting, not to exceed two (2) meetings per month; except that the city manager or his designee shall not receive any compensation for serving on the commission. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 2; Ord. No. 1175, § 1; Code 1961, § 29-6; Ord. No. 2523-79; Ord. No. 3178-84; Ord. No. 3625-87, § 1; Ord. No. 6143-05) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for compensation of planning commission members, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-468. - Removal of members. 
Members of the commission may be removed for malfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 2; Code 1961, § 29-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-469. - Election and terms of officers. 
The commission shall elect, from the appointed members, a chairman and a vice-chairman, whose terms shall be for one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 3; Code 1961, § 29-8) 
State Law reference— similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2217.  
Sec. 2-470. - Appointment of employees and staff; limitation on expenditures. 
The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it deems necessary for its work; provided that, the expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts or grants, shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purpose by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 3; Code 1961, § 29-9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2217.  
Sec. 2-471. - General duties. 
The commission shall perform the duties prescribed for local planning commissions in Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 6; Code 1961, § 29-12; Ord. No. 5291-99; Ord. No. 5296-99)  
Sec. 2-472. - Meetings generally. 
(a)  The commission shall fix the time for holding regular meetings, but it shall meet at least every two (2) months. The commission, by resolution adopted at a regular meeting, may also fix the day or days to which any meeting shall be continued if the chairman, or vice chairman if the chairman is unable to act, finds and declares that weather or other conditions are such that it is hazardous for members to attend the meeting. Such finding shall be communicated to the members and the press as promptly as possible. All hearings and other matters previously advertised for such meeting shall be conducted at the continued meeting and no further advertisement is required. The commission shall cause a copy of such resolution to be inserted in a newspaper having general circulation in the locality at least seven (7) days prior to the first meeting held pursuant to the adopted schedule. 
(b)  Special meetings of the commission may be called by the chairman or by two (2) members, upon written request to the secretary. The secretary shall mail to all members, at least five (5) days in advance of a special meeting, a written notice fixing the time and place of the meeting and the purpose thereof. 
(c)  Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the time of the special meeting has been fixed at a regular meeting or if all members are present at the special meeting or file a written waiver of notice. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 4; Code 1961, § 29-10; Ord. No. 5942-03, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2214.  
Sec. 2-473. - Quorum; majority vote required. 
A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and no action of the commission shall be valid unless authorized by a majority of those present and voting. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 4; Code 1961, § 29-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2215.  
Sec. 2-474. - Adoption of rules; records to be kept. 
The commission shall adopt rules for the transactions of business and shall keep a record of its transactions, which shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 4; Code 1961, § 29-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 15.2-2217.  
Sec. 2-475. - Cooperation and assistance from department of planning; contracts with consultants. 
(a)  The department of planning shall work in close cooperation with the commission and shall serve as its technical staff for the purpose of effectuating the work of the commission. The department of planning shall be responsible to the commission for such special surveys or studies as may be requested by the commission from time to time. 
(b)  The commission may recommend to the city council the services of consulting, planning, engineering or architectural firms for special studies and reports from time to time. The city manager may contract with such firms as the planning commission may recommend; provided, that funds therefor are first appropriated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 471, § 5; Code 1961, § 29-11; Ord. No. 2793-81)  
Secs. 2-476—2-485. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES 
 
Sec. 2-486. - Established; composition; appointment of director. 
There is hereby established a department of general services, which shall consist of the director of general services, to be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may [be] provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 7619-20, § 2)  
Sec. 2-487. - Functions. 
The department of general services shall be responsible [for] the supervision and management of intra-government services of the city, and such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department by the council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 7619-20, § 2)  
Sec. 2-488. - General powers of director. 
The director of general services shall be the head of the department of general services and shall, under the supervision of the city manager, have general management control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department, and the authority to make rules and regulations therefor with the approval of the city manager. The director shall also perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 7619-20, § 2)  
Secs. 2-489—2-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 2-500. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of development, which shall consist of the director of development, to be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders of the director consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 5827-02, § 1)  
Sec. 2-501. - Responsibilities. 
The department of development shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Activities related to community development, economic development and port development; and 
(2)  Such other functions concerning the overall development of the city as may be assigned to the department. 
(Ord. No. 5827-02, § 1)  
Sec. 2-502. - General powers of director. 
The director of development shall be the head of the department of development and, under the supervision of the city manager, shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 5827-02, § 1)  
Secs. 2-503—2-509. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - CITY SUPPORT FOR YOUTH DEVELOPMENT[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6266-06, adopted June 27, 2006, amended Art. XVI, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. XVI pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-510. - Finding; vision; purpose. 
The city council has found and determined that support of the city's youth should be a high priority of city government. In particular, the council's vision for youth development in the city is that individuals, neighborhoods, businesses, schools, the faith community, civic organizations, youth and government need to work collaboratively to foster an environment where the city's young people are healthy, educated, respected, valued and empowered so that they may become responsible citizens. The council further has found that in order to provide for the healthy growth and development of children and youth, the city must make families central to its development effort. This article, therefore, implements that judgment and vision by establishing a commission on youth and a mayor's youth commission. 
(Ord. No. 6266-06; Ord. No. 6683-10, § 1)  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6683-10, § 4, effective July 1, 2010, repealed Div. 2, §§ 2-511—2-513, which pertained to the office on children, youth and families and derived from Ord. No. 6266-06. 
 
Secs. 2-511—2-514. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7092-14, adopted September 9, 2014, repealed Ch. 2, Art. XVI, Div. 3, §§ 2-515—2-520 in its entirety. Formerly said division pertained to commission on youth and derived from Ord. No. 6266-06; Ord. No. 6638-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6683-10, § 1. 
 
Secs. 2-515—2-520. - Reserved.  
Secs. 2-521—2-526. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MAYOR'S YOUTH COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-527. - Created. 
There is hereby created in and for the city a mayor's youth commission. 
(Ord. No. 6266-06)  
Sec. 2-528. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
(a)  The commission shall be composed of forty (40) members and up to twenty (20) alternates. Members shall be age eighteen (18) years of age or younger with the exception that high school students older than eighteen (18) years of age may serve. 
(b)  Appointments shall be made pursuant to a city council approved selection process. 
(c)  Terms shall be for two (2) years or until graduation from high school except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 6266-06)  
Sec. 2-529. - Staff support. 
Staff support for the mayor's youth commission shall be provided by the department of human services. 
(Ord. No. 6266-06; Ord. No. 6683-10, § 1)  
Sec. 2-530. - Organization; quorum. 
The mayor's youth commission shall choose from its members a chairman, vice chairman, secretary and a treasurer. Sixteen (16) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The commission shall adopt procedures for conducting its affairs, except that the commission shall meet at least once a month. 
(Ord. No. 6266-06)  
Sec. 2-531. - Compensation. 
Members of the mayor's youth commission shall serve on said commission without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 6266-06)  
Sec. 2-532. - Duties; expenditures. 
The mayor's youth commission shall serve as an advisory body to the city council and commission on youth. Expenditures by the commission shall be limited to the sums allotted for such purposes by the city council in the operating budget and such additional sums received from public or private sources, subject to the approval of the council. 
(Ord. No. 6266-06)  
Sec. 2-533. - Purpose and functions. 
The mayor's youth commission shall serve as a body which provides direct input about youth services to the council and commission on youth from city youth. Subject to available funding, the commission may initiate projects to provide or support youth services in the city. The commission is therefore charged with the following: 
(a)  To establish and maintain a communication system between youth and the mayor, city council, and youth serving agencies; 
(b)  To participate and provide leadership in community and governmental initiatives related to youth; 
(c)  To participate on certain city council designated boards and committees throughout city government and the community while recruiting others to do the same; 
(d)  To create opportunities for youth to develop leadership skills; and 
(e)  To expand youth involvement in community service programs and positive youth development activities. 
(Ord. No. 6266-06; Ord. No. 6683-10, § 1)  
ARTICLE XVII. - RESERVED[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7093-14, adopted September 9, 2014, repealed Ch. 2, Art. XVII, §§ 2-534—2-537 in its entirety. Formerly said article pertained to Newport News Mayor's Committee on Disabilities and derived from Ord. No. 3953-89; Ord. No. 4552-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4600-94. 
 
Secs. 2-534—2-539. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - DEPARTMENT OF JUVENILE SERVICES[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5069-97, adopted Oct. 14, 1997, amended Art. XVIII, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, said Art. XVIII pertained to the department of juvenile detention. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-540. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of juvenile services, which shall consist of the director of juvenile services and such other officers and employees, organized into branches, sections or other units, as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 5069-97)  
Sec. 2-541. - Responsibilities. 
The department of juvenile services shall be responsible for providing temporary care, custody and supervision to youth ordered to be held by a court of law or to youth placed by an entrustment arrangement with other agencies responsible for youth services, in either a secure or nonsecure environment, pending the disposition of the charges that the youth has before the court. 
(Ord. No. 5069-97)  
Sec. 2-542. - General powers of director. 
The director of juvenile services shall be appointed by the city manager. Such director shall be the head of the department of juvenile services and shall, under the administrative supervision of the city manager or his assistant, have the general management and control of the various branches, sections or other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 5069-97)  
Secs. 2-543—2-545. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - RESERVED[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7174-15, adopted May 12, 2015, repealed Ch. 2, Art. XIX, §§ 2-546—2-548 in its entirety. Formerly said article pertained to Department of Adult Corrections and derived from Ord. No. 2784-81. 
 
Secs. 2-546—2-551. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - OFFICE OF PURCHASING[18] 
Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1, adopted March 11, 2014, amended Art. XX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XX, §§ 2-552—2-566.2, 2-569—2-570.2, 2-573—2-573.3, 2-576—2-577.2, 2-580—2-584, pertained to similar subject matter. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-552. - Establishment, composition and general responsibilities of the office of purchasing. 
(a)  There is hereby established an office of purchasing, which shall consist of the purchasing agent and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, sections and units as may be provided by ordinance or by the direction of the city manager consistent therewith. 
(b)  The office of purchasing shall be responsible for buying, in the best interest of the city, all materials, supplies, services and equipment for all city departments and agencies. In addition, it shall be responsible for centralized control and disposal of excess, obsolete and salvageable materials and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-552.1. - Appointment, general powers and duties of the purchasing agent. 
The purchasing agent shall be appointed by the city manager. The purchasing agent shall be the head of the office of purchasing and shall, under the supervision of the city manager, or his designee, have general management and control of the office. The purchasing agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty to: 
(1)  Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
(2)  Establish and amend, when necessary, such rules and regulations as he deems necessary for the internal management and operation of the office of purchasing. 
(3)  Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendor's catalog file. The catalog shall be filed according to materials and services and contain descriptions of vendor's commodities, prices and discounts, if available. 
(4)  Maintain a bidders' list containing the names of all responsible prospective suppliers, including small businesses and businesses owned by women and minorities, who have requested their names to be included on such list and to remove prospective bidders from such list when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(5)  Exploit the possibilities of buying "in bulk" so as to take full advantage of discounts. 
(6)  Disqualify vendors who default on their quotations from receiving any business from the city. 
(7)  Participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a joint or cooperative procurement agreement on behalf of or in conjunction with one (1) or more other public bodies, or public agencies or institutions or localities of the several states, territories of the United States or the District of Columbia, for the purpose of combining requirements to increase efficiency or reduce administrative expenses in any acquisition of goods and services. A joint procurement agreement may also include construction. Except for certain contracts identified in § 2.2 4304B of the Code of Virginia, a public body may purchase from another public body's contract even if it did not participate in the request for proposal or invitation to bid, if the request for proposal or invitation to bid specified that the procurement was being conducted on behalf of other public bodies. In entering into a cooperative procurement agreement with a county, city or town whose governing body has adopted alternative policies and procedures pursuant to the Virginia Public Procurement Act, the purchasing agent shall comply with said alternative policies and procedures so adopted by said governing body of such county, city or town as designated in the cooperative agreement. 
(8)  Control and supervise the storerooms and warehouses within the office of purchasing. 
(9)  Standardize and establish specifications to reduce commodities to a minimum and assure the quality of goods. 
(10)  Award contracts within the purview of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5805-02; Ord. No. 5938-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 6700-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7194-15, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6700-10 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 2-553. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  Best value. As predetermined in the solicitation, the overall combination of quality, price, and various elements of required services that in total are optimal relative to the city's needs. 
(2)  Brand name specification. A specification limited to one (1) or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
(3)  City council. The City Council of the City of Newport News. 
(4)  Competitive negotiation. A method of contractor selection utilizing a written request for proposal, followed by discussions with responsive, responsible offerors. 
(5)  Competitive sealed bidding. A method of contractor selection utilizing a written invitation to bid, public opening and announcement of all bids received, evaluation of bids based upon the requirements set forth in the invitation and award to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder. 
(6)  Construction. Building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any structure, building or highway, and any draining, dredging, excavating, grading or similar work upon real property. 
(7)  Contract. All types of agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of goods, services, insurance or construction. 
(8)  Contractor. Any person having a contract with the city. 
(9)  Direct or indirect participation. Involvement through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or acting in any other similar capacity. 
(10)  Employment services organization. An organization that provides employment services to individuals with disabilities that is an approved Commission on the Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF) accredited vendor of the Department of Rehabilitative Services. 
(11)  Goods. All material, equipment, supplies, printing and automated data processing hardware and software. 
(12)  Informality. A minor defect or variation of a bid or proposal from the exact requirements of the invitation to bid, or the request for proposal, which does not affect the price, quality, quantity or delivery schedule for the goods, services or construction being procured and does not give a competitive advantage as a result thereof. 
(13)  Insurance. A contract whereby, for a stipulated consideration, one (1) party undertakes to compensate the other for loss on a specified subject by specified perils. 
(14)  Invitation for bids. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. 
(15)  Job order contracting. A method of procuring construction by establishing a book of unit prices and then obtaining a contractor to perform work as needed using the prices, quantities, and specifications in the book as the basis of its pricing. The contractor may be selected through either competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation depending on the needs of the public body procuring the construction services. A minimum amount of work may be specified in the contract. 
(16)  Multiphase professional services contract. A contract for the providing of professional services where the total scope of work of the second or subsequent phase of the contract cannot be specified without the results of the first or prior phase of the contract. 
(17)  Nominal value. So small, slight or the like, in comparison to what might properly be expected, as scarcely to be entitled to the name, but in no case to be more than ten dollars ($10.00). 
(18)  Nonprofessional services. Any services not specifically identified as professional services. 
(19)  Professional services. Work performed by an independent contractor within the scope of the practice of accounting, actuarial services, architecture, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, dentistry, medicine, optometry, pharmacy or professional engineering. 
(20)  Person. Any corporation, partnership, business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization or group of individuals. 
(21)  Public contract. An agreement between the city and a nongovernmental source that is enforceable in a court of law. 
(22)  Purchasing agent. The purchasing agent of the City of Newport News, or his designee. The purchasing agent shall be the head of the office of purchasing. Whenever the words director of purchasing or department of purchasing are used in any ordinance, resolution, policy, contract or other document, such shall mean the purchasing agent, or his designee, or the office of purchasing, respectively. 
(23)  Request for proposals. All documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
(24)  Responsible bidder or offeror. A person who has the capability, in all respects, to perform fully the contract requirements and the moral and business integrity and reliability which will assure good faith performance and who has been prequalified, if required. 
(25)  Responsive bidder. A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation to bid. 
(26)  Services. Any work performed by an independent contractor wherein the service rendered does not consist primarily of acquisition of equipment or materials or the rental of equipment, materials and supplies. 
(27)  Specification. Any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a good, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a good, service or construction item for delivery. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5467-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 6885-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7079-14; Ord. No. 7194, § 1)  
Sec. 2-553.1. - Requisitions and estimates from departments. 
All city departments, either by or with the authorization of the head of the department, shall file with the purchasing agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services in such manner, at such times and for such future periods as the purchasing agent shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-553.2. - Department reports of obsolete or unused property; sale, transfer or trade of such property. 
(a)  All departments shall submit to the purchasing agent at such times and in such form as such agent shall prescribe reports showing stocks of all supplies, materials and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn or scrapped. The purchasing agent may sell such property by competitive bidding or at public auction, may transfer it to other departments or governmental agencies, or may exchange it for or trade it in on new supplies or equipment. 
(b)  All sales of such property, when the estimated value is not expected to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), may be sold by the purchasing agent in accordance with rules and regulations established by him; these sales need not follow the competitive bidding or public auction process and such property may be sold without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedures prescribed by divisions 2 and 3 of this article, unless the purchasing agent determines that the public interest demands such procedure. 
(c)  Not withstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b), and in lieu thereof, library books, tapes, CDs and any other library materials which have been identified by the director of the department of libraries and information services as surplus to the needs of the Newport News Public Library System may be donated by the city manager or his designee, on behalf of the city, to the Friends of the Newport News Public Library for its use in support of the Newport News Public Library System. Funds generated by the Friends of the Newport News Public Library from the sale of donated library materials or any other funding source may be accepted from the Friends of the Newport News Public Library by the city manager on behalf of the city for use by the Newport News Public Library System. 
Furthermore, any law books or research materials which have been identified by the city attorney as surplus to the needs of the office of the city attorney may be donated to the city farm or the city jail for use in the law libraries of those facilities. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5636-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 6056-04; Ord. No. 6806-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6806-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 2-553.3. - Methods of procurement. 
(a)  All city contracts for nongovernmental contractors for the purchase or lease of goods, or for the purchase of services, insurance, or construction, shall be awarded after competitive sealed bidding, or competitive negotiation as provided in this article, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(b)  Professional services, whether for single or term contracts, may, but need not, be procured by competitive negotiation when the aggregate or sum of all phases is not expected to exceed eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00). Such small purchase procedures shall provide for competition wherever practicable. Professional services shall be procured by competitive negotiation where the cost of the professional service is expected to exceed eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00). 
(c)  Upon a written determination made in advance by the purchasing agent that competitive negotiation is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous, insurance may be procured through a licensed agent or broker selected in the manner provided for the procurement of things other than professional services in section 2-570.2. The basis for this determination shall be documented in writing. 
(d)  Upon a determination in writing by the purchasing agent that there is only one (1) source practicably available for that which is to be procured, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that source without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
(e)  Construction may be procured only by competitive sealed bidding, except that competitive negotiation may be used in the following instances upon a determination made in advance by the purchasing agent and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public, which writing shall document the basis for this determination: (i) for the construction, alteration, repair, renovation or demolition of buildings or structures when the contract is not expected to cost more than one and one-half million dollars ($1,500,000.00); or (ii) for the construction of highways and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. 
(f)  Upon a determination made in advance by the purchasing agent and set forth in writing that the purchase of goods, products or commodities from a public auction sale is in the best interests of the public, such items may be purchased at the auction, including online public auctions. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. However, bulk purchases of commodities used in road and highway construction and maintenance, and aggregates shall not be made by online public auction. 
(g)  The purchasing agent may provide for incentive contracting that offers a contractor whose bid is accepted, the opportunity to share in any cost savings realized by the locality when the projects costs are reduced by such contractor, without affecting project quality, during the construction of the project. The fee, if any, charged by the project engineer or architect for determining such cost savings shall be paid as a separate cost and shall not be calculated as part of any cost savings. Such provisions, including the percentage of cost sharing, shall be included in the language of the contract or may be added by change order with the agreement of both parties. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5046-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 6046-04; Ord. No. 6511-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6615-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6700-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6894-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7194-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7487-18, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6894-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Sec. 2-553.4. - Alternative method of procurement; reverse auctioning. 
(a)  The purchase of goods or nonprofessional services, but not construction or professional services, may be made by reverse auctioning. However, bulk purchases of commodities used in road and highway construction and maintenance, and aggregates shall not be made by reverse auctioning. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "reverse auctioning" means a procurement method wherein bidders are invited to bid on specified goods or nonprofessional services through real-time electronic bidding, with the award being made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. During the bidding process, bidders' prices are revealed and bidders shall have the opportunity to modify their bid prices for the duration of the time period established for electronic bidding. 
(Ord. No. 5636-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5938-03; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-553.5. - Job order contracting; limitations. 
(a)  A job order contract may be awarded for multiple jobs, provided (i) the jobs require similar experience and expertise, (ii) the nature of the jobs is clearly identified in the solicitation, and (iii) the contract is limited to a term of one (1) year or when the cumulative total project fees reach the maximum authorized in this section, whichever occurs first. Contractors may be selected through either competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation. 
(b)  Such contracts may be renewable for two (2) additional one-year terms at the option of the city. The fair and reasonable prices as negotiated shall be used in determining the cost of each job performed, and the sum of all jobs performed in a one-year contract term shall not exceed six million dollars ($6,000,000.00). Individual job orders shall not exceed five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, any unused amounts from one (1) contract term shall not be carried forward to any additional term. 
(d)  Order splitting with the intent of keeping a job order under the maximum dollar amounts prescribed in subsection (b) is prohibited. 
(e)  No job order shall be issued or used under a job order contract, solely for the purpose of receiving professional architectural or engineering services that constitute the practice of architecture or the practice of engineering as those terms are defined in § 54.1-400 of the Code of Virginia. However, professional architectural or engineering services may be included on a job order where such professional services (i) are incidental and directly related to the job, (ii) do not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per job order, and (iii) do not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) per contract term. 
(f)  Job order contracting shall not be used for construction, maintenance, or asset management services for a highway, bridge, tunnel, or overpass. 
(Ord. No. 7194-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7559-19, § 1)  
Sec. 2-554. - General procedure. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to enunciate the public policies pertaining to governmental procurement from nongovernmental sources, to include governmental procurement which may or may not result in monetary consideration for either party. This article shall apply whether the consideration is monetary or nonmonetary and regardless of whether the city, the contractor, or some third party is providing the consideration. 
(b)  All single or term contracts for goods and services other than professional services when the estimated cost is expected to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be purchased from the lowest responsive, responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids. 
(c)  Construction of improvements estimated to cost more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be procured only by competitive sealed bidding except that at the option of the city, non-transportation related construction not expected to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) may be procured through the small purchase procedures as described in section 2-554.1. 
(d)  Transportation related construction, if the aggregate or sum of all phases is not expected to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) may be procured through the small purchase procedures described in section 2-554.1. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5046-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6396-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7079-14; Ord. No. 7194-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7306-16)  
Sec. 2-554.1. - Open market procedure for purchases of one hundred thousand dollars, or less. 
(a)  All purchases of goods and services other than professional services, and non-transportation related construction, when the estimated value is not expected to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), may be made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedures prescribed by divisions 2 and 3 of this article, unless the purchasing agent determines that the public interest demands such procedure. Purchases of non-transportation related construction shall not waive compliance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code. Purchases under this subsection that are expected to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall require, whenever possible, the informal solicitation of a minimum of four (4) bidders or offerors and shall be awarded to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder in accordance with the standards set forth in section 2-563. 
(b)  Small purchases in an amount up to, but not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may be purchased directly by a department in accordance with rules and regulations established by the purchasing agent; these purchases need not follow the competitive bidding process. Maximum limits may be established for each department by the purchasing agent up to, but not exceeding, five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(c)  In making a purchase under this section, when bidding is required, the purchasing agent shall solicit bids by mail, electronic means, telephone, or in person from prospective vendors. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4793-95; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 6396-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6433-07; Ord. No. 6806-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7079-14; Ord. No. 7194-15, § 1)  
Sec. 2-554.2. - Competitive bidding state-aid projects. 
No contract for the construction of any building or for an addition to or improvement of an existing building by the city for which state funds of not more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in the aggregate or for the sum of all phases of a contract or project either by appropriation, grant-in-aid or loan, are used or are to be used for all or part of the cost of construction shall be let except after competitive sealed bidding or after competitive negotiation as provided under section 2-553.3. The procedure for the advertising for bids and for letting of the contract shall conform to this article. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5046-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6700-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6700-10 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 2-554.3. - Contracts or purchases not to be subdivided to avoid requirements of article. 
No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-554.4. - Certain contracts and expenditures prohibited. 
No officer, department or agency shall, during any budget year, expend or contract to expend any money or incur any liability, or enter into any contract which by its terms involves the expenditure of money, for any purpose, in excess of the amounts appropriated for that general classification of expenditure pursuant to the City Charter. Any contact, verbal or written, made in violation of the Charter shall be null and void. Any officer or employee of this city who shall violate this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, thereof, shall cease to hold his office or employment. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall prevent the making of contracts or the spending of money for capital improvements to be financed in whole or in part by the issuance of bonds, nor the making of contracts of lease or for services for a period exceeding the budget year in which such contract is made, when such contract is permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-555. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  In case of an emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to secure, by the open market procedure set forth in section 2-554.1, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services, regardless of the amount of the expenditure. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase so made shall be filed by the purchasing agent in the contract file. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall prescribe, by rules and regulations, the procedure under which emergency purchases by heads of departments may be made outside of normal city business hours. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-555.1. - Modification of contract. 
(a)  A contract may include provisions for modification of the contract during performance, but no fixed price contract which has been approved by the city council, the city manager, or his designee, may be modified or changed by amendment, change order, or any other agreement without the prior approval of the city council, the city manager, or his designee, unless (i) such modifications, in the aggregate, do not increase the amount of the contract by more than twenty-five (25) percent of the original amount of the contract or fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), whichever is greater, (ii) such changes are the result of unforeseen circumstances or changed conditions encountered during the progress of the performance of the contract, and (iii) such changes are directly related to the performance of the purpose of the contract. The city manager, or his designee, may extend the term of an existing contract for services to allow completion of any work undertaken but not completed during the original term of the contract. In no event shall the aggregate of all modifications increase the cost of the contract beyond the amount appropriated for the project. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not limit the amount a party to a city contract may claim or recover against the city pursuant to section 2-577 or any other applicable ordinance or regulation. Modifications made by the city that fail to comply with this section are voidable at the discretion of the city, and the unauthorized approval of a modification cannot be the basis of a contractual claim as set forth in section 2-577. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7194-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7559-19, § 1)  
Sec. 2-556. - Inspection and testing of supplies or contractual services. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall inspect or supervise the inspection of all deliveries of supplies or contractual services to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to authorize departments having the staff and facilities for adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such departments under rules and regulations which the purchasing agent shall prescribe. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples, submitted with bids and samples of deliveries, which are necessary to determine the quality and conformance of such samples with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any department of the city government or any outside laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-557. - Discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  In the solicitation or awarding of contracts, the city shall not discriminate against a bidder or offeror because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, status as a service disabled veteran, or any other basis prohibited by state law relating to discrimination in employment. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "service disabled veteran" means a veteran who (i) served on active duty in the United States military ground, naval, or air service; (ii) was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable; and (iii) has a service-connected disability rating fixed by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6806-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6806-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 2-557.1. - Required contract provisions: unauthorized aliens; employment discrimination by contractor prohibited; drug-free workplace to be maintained by contractor. 
(a)  The city shall include in every contract, that the contractor does not, and shall not during the performance of the contract for goods and services in the Commonwealth, knowingly employ an unauthorized alien as defined in the federal Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, as amended. 
(b)  The city shall include in every contract of over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) the provisions in subsections (1), (2), and (3) herein: 
(1)  During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows: 
a.  The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, or any other basis prohibited by state law relating to discrimination in employment, except where there is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the contractor. The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
b.  The contractor, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, will state that such contractor is an equal opportunity employer. 
c.  Notices, advertisements and solicitations placed in accordance with federal law, rule or regulation shall be deemed sufficient for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section. 
(2)  The contractor will include the provisions of the foregoing paragraphs a., b. and c. in every subcontract or purchase order of over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) so that the provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
(3)  During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees to (i) provide a drug-free workplace for the contractor's employees; (ii) post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, a statement notifying employees that the unlawful manufacture, sale, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of a controlled substance or marijuana is prohibited in the contractor's workplace and specifying the actions that will be taken against employees for violations of prohibition; (iii) state in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor that the contractor maintains a drug-free workplace; and (iv) include the provisions of the foregoing clauses in every subcontract or purchase order of over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), so that the provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
For the purposes of this subsection, "drug-free workplace" means a site for the performance of work done in connection with a specific contract awarded to a contractor in accordance with this subsection, the employees of whom are prohibited from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, sale, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of any controlled substance or marijuana during the performance of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-557.2. - Public inspection of certain records. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, all proceedings, records, contracts and other public records relating to procurement transactions shall be open to the inspection of any citizen, or any interested person, firm or corporation, in accordance with the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (§ 2.2-3700 et seq., Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended). 
(b)  Cost estimates relating to a proposed procurement transaction prepared by or for the city shall not be open to public inspection. 
(c)  Any competitive sealed bidding bidder, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect bid records within a reasonable time after the opening of all bids but prior to award, except in the event that the purchasing agent decides not to accept any of the bids and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, bid records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(d)  Any competitive negotiation offeror, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect proposal records within a reasonable time after the evaluation and negotiations of proposals are completed but prior to award, except in the event that the purchasing agent decides not to accept any of the proposals and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, proposal records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(e)  Any inspection of procurement transaction records under this section shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. 
(f)  Trade secrets or proprietary information submitted by a bidder, offeror or contractor in connection with a procurement transaction or prequalification application submitted pursuant to section 2-560 shall not be subject to public disclosure under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act; however, the bidder, offeror or contractor must invoke the protections of this section prior to or upon submission of the data or other materials, and must identify the data or other materials to be protected and state the reasons why protection is necessary. Information leading to the decision to award, including prices and other factors, shall be made public. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-557.3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article, except for sections 2-554.4, 2-555.1, 2-557 and 2-557.1, and division 6, shall not be applicable to purchases of services for maintenance and cleaning of health care facilities, it being the conclusion of the council that considerations of health, safety and welfare warrant such action. 
(b)  The provisions of divisions 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article, except for section 2-554.4, shall not apply to contracts for the printing of ballots, statements of results or other materials essential to the conduct of an election. The provisions of division 6 of this article shall be applicable to such contracts. 
(c)  The following transactions are hereby exempt from the provisions of divisions 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this article, except for section 2-554.4: 
(1)  Purchases on state contracts, from the state penitentiary and from the state purchasing department warehouse. 
(2)  Legal services, law books and supplies for the city attorney and the commonwealth's attorney, and expert witnesses and other services associated with actual or potential litigation and administrative proceedings. 
(3)  Purchases for water, sewer, electric, telephone and other utility services and motor vehicle license plates. 
(4)  Purchases for special police work when the chief of police certifies to the city manager that items are needed for undercover police operations. 
(5)  Purchases of services or goods: (i) that are performed or produced by persons, or in schools or workshops, under the supervision of the Virginia Department for the Blind and Vision Impaired; or (ii) that are performed or produced by employment services organizations that offer transitional or supported employment services serving individuals with disabilities. 
(d)  The selection of services by the Board of Trustees of the Newport News Employees Retirement Fund, related to the management, purchase or sale of authorized investments, including but not limited to actuarial services shall be by the standards set forth in section 51.1-124.32, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and shall not be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(e)  In the administration of the public assistance program, the fuel assistance program, and for the purchase of services under the Comprehensive Services Act for At-Risk Youth and Families, for goods and personal services for direct use by the recipients of such programs without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiations if the procurement is made for an individual recipient. Contracts for the bulk procurement of goods or services for the use of recipients are not exempted from the requirements of this article. 
(f)  The city may enter into contracts without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation for insurance if purchased through an association of which it is a member if the association was formed and is maintained for the purpose of promoting the interest and welfare of and developing close relationships with similar public bodies, provided such association has procured the insurance by use of competitive principles and provided that the purchasing agent has made a determination in advance after reasonable notice to the public and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding and competitive negotiation are not fiscally advantageous to the public. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5290-99; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 6885-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7079-14)  
Sec. 2-558. - Purchase of handguns by retired officers. 
The purchasing agent is authorized and directed to allow any full-time sworn law enforcement officer who retires after at least twenty-five (25) years of service and any auxiliary police officer who has served the city as an auxiliary police officer for at least twenty-five (25) years to purchase the service handgun issued to him by the city at a cost of one dollar ($1.00) for the weapon. 
(Ord. No. 3964-89, § 1; Ord. No. 5981-03; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-559. - Purchase of boots or helmet by retired firefighters. 
The purchasing agent is authorized and directed to allow: 
(1)  Any full-time firefighter who retires after at least twenty-five (25) years of service to purchase the helmet and/or boots issued to the firefighter by the city at a cost of one dollar ($1.00) for the helmet and/or one dollar ($1.00) for the boots; and 
(2)  Any full-time firefighter who retires after at least ten (10) years of service, but fewer than twenty-five (25), to purchase the helmet and/or boots issued to the firefighter by the city at the fair market value of the helmet and/or boots. 
(Ord. No. 6815-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
DIVISION 2. - COMPETITIVE BIDDING 
 
Sec. 2-560. - Prequalification generally; prequalification for construction. 
(a)  Prospective contractors may be prequalified for particular types of supplies, services, insurance or construction, and consideration of bids or proposals limited to prequalified contractors. Any prequalification procedure shall be established in writing and sufficiently in advance of its implementation to allow potential contractors a fair opportunity to complete the process. 
(b)  Any prequalification of prospective contractors for construction shall be pursuant to a prequalification process for construction projects adopted by the purchasing agent. 
The application form used in such process shall set forth the criteria upon which the qualifications of prospective contractors will be evaluated. The application form shall request of prospective contractors only such information as is appropriate for an objective evaluation of all prospective contractors pursuant to such criteria. Such form shall allow the prospective contractor seeking prequalification to request, by checking the appropriate box, that all information voluntarily submitted by the contractor pursuant to this subsection shall be considered a trade secret or proprietary information subject to the provisions of section 2-557.2. 
In all instances in which the purchasing agent requires prequalification of potential contractors for construction projects, advance notice shall be given of the deadline for the submission of prequalification applications. The deadline for submission shall be sufficiently in advance of the date set for the submission of bids for such construction so as to allow the procedures set forth in this section to be accomplished. 
At least thirty (30) days prior to the date established for submission of bids or proposals under the procurement of the contract for which the prequalification applies, the purchasing agent shall advise in writing each contractor which submitted an application whether that contractor has been prequalified. In the event that a contractor is denied prequalification, the written notification to such contractor shall state the reasons for such denial of prequalification and the factual basis of such reasons. 
A decision by the purchasing agent denying prequalification under the provisions of this subsection shall be final and conclusive unless the contractor appeals the decision as provided in section 2-576. 
The purchasing agent may deny prequalification to any contractor only if he finds one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The contractor does not have sufficient financial ability to perform the contract that would result from such procurement. If a bond is required to ensure performance of a contract, evidence that the contractor can acquire a surety bond from a corporation included on the United States Treasury list of acceptable surety corporations in the amount and type required by the public body shall be sufficient to establish the financial ability of such contractor to perform the contract resulting from such procurement; 
(2)  The contractor does not have appropriate experience to perform the construction project in question; 
(3)  The contractor or any officer, director or owner thereof has had judgments entered against him within the past ten (10) years for the breach of contracts for governmental or nongovernmental construction, including, but not limited to, design-build or construction management; 
(4)  The contractor has been in substantial noncompliance with the terms and conditions of prior construction contracts with the city without good cause. If the city has not contracted with a contractor in any prior construction contracts, the purchasing agent may deny prequalification if the contractor has been in substantial noncompliance with the terms and conditions of comparable construction contracts with another public body without good cause. The purchasing agent may not utilize this provision to deny prequalification unless the facts underlying such substantial noncompliance were documented in writing in the prior construction project file and such information relating thereto given to the contractor at that time, with the opportunity to respond; 
(5)  The contractor or any officer, director, owner, project manager, procurement manager or chief financial official thereof has been convicted within the past ten (10) years of a crime related to governmental or nongovernmental construction or contracting, including, but not limited to, a violation of the following portions of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended: (i) Article 6, (§ 2.2-4367 et seq.) of Title 2.2, (ii) the Virginia Governmental Frauds Act (§ 18.2-498.1 et seq.) of Title 18.2, (iii) Chapter 4.2 (§ 59.1-68.6 et seq.) of Title 59.1, or (iv) any substantially similar law of the United States or another state; 
(6)  The contractor or any officer, director or owner thereof is currently debarred pursuant to an established debarment procedure from bidding or contracting by any public body, agency of another state or agency of the federal government; and 
(7)  The contractor failed to provide to the purchasing agent in a timely manner any information requested by the purchasing agent relevant to subdivisions 1 through 6 of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5805-02; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-560.1. - Use of brand names. 
Unless otherwise provided in the invitation to bid, the name of a certain brand, make or manufacturer does not restrict bidders to the specific brand, make or manufacturer named; it conveys the general style, type, character and quality of the article desired; and any article which the purchasing agent in his sole discretion determines to be the equal of that specified, considering quality, workmanship, economy of operation, and suitability for the purpose intended, shall be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-561. - Notice inviting bids. 
(a)  The notice inviting bids referred to in section 2-554 shall be posted on the city's website or the state's department of general services' central electronic procurement website, or both, and may be published in a newspaper of general circulation, at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the receipt of bids. Such notice shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold and shall state where bid forms and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. Such notice shall state the procedure for the withdrawal of a bid due to error. 
(b)  In addition to the notice referred to in subsection (a) above, the purchasing agent may solicit bids from vendors in the business of providing the commodity or service desired. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5938-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7306-16)  
Sec. 2-561.1. - Pre-bid conferences. 
For complex equipment, supplies, repairs or construction projects, pre-bid conferences with prospective bidders may be called, when deemed necessary, by the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-561.2. - Submission, opening and tabulation of bids. 
Bids shall be submitted, sealed, to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Such bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices, and a tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-561.3. - Bid evaluation. 
Evaluation of bids shall be based upon the requirements set forth in the invitation, which may include special qualifications of potential contractors, and any other criteria such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose, which are helpful in determining acceptability. The city may consider best value concepts when procuring goods and nonprofessional services, but not construction or professional services. The criteria, factors and basis for consideration of best value and the process for the consideration of best value shall be as stated in the procurement solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-561.4. - Withdrawal of bid due to error. 
(a)  A bidder for a public construction contract, other than a contract for construction or maintenance of public highways, may withdraw his bid from consideration if the price bid was substantially lower than the other bids due solely to a mistake therein, provided the bid was submitted in good faith, and the mistake was a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake, and was actually due to an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of the bid, which unintentional arithmetic error or unintentional omission can be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection of original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. The bidder shall give notice in writing of his claim of right to withdraw his bid within two (2) business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure and shall submit original work papers with such notice. Such mistake shall be proved only from the original work papers, documents and materials delivered as required herein. The work papers, documents, and materials submitted by the bidder shall, at the bidder's request, be considered trade secrets or proprietary information subject to the conditions of section 2-557.2(f). 
(b)  A bidder for a nonconstruction contract may withdraw his bid from consideration in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  No bid may be withdrawn under this section when the result would be the awarding of the contract on another bid of the same bidder or of another bidder in which the ownership of the withdrawing bidder is more than five (5) percent. 
(d)  If a bid is withdrawn under the authority of this section, the lowest remaining bid shall be deemed to be the low bid. 
(e)  No bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid shall, for compensation, supply any material or labor to or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for the person or firm to which the contract is awarded or otherwise benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project for which the withdrawn bid was submitted. 
(f)  The purchasing agent shall notify the bidder in writing within five (5) business days of his decision regarding the bidder's request to withdraw its bid. If the purchasing agent denies the withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of this section, he shall state in such notice the reasons for his decision and award the contract to such bidder at the bid price, provided such bidder is a responsible and responsive bidder. At the same time that the notice is provided, the purchasing agent shall return all work papers and copies thereof that have been submitted by the bidder. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 6806-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6806-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 2-562. - Bid bonds. 
(a)  Except in cases of emergency, all bids or proposals for nontransportation-related construction contracts in excess of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) or transportation-related projects authorized under Code of Virginia, 33.2-209 that are in excess of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) and partially or wholly funded by the Commonwealth shall be accompanied by a bid bond from a surety company selected by the bidder which is legally authorized to do surety business in Virginia, as a guarantee that if the contract is awarded to such bidder, that bidder will enter into the contract for the work mentioned in the bid. The amount of the bid bond shall not exceed five (5) percent of the amount bid. 
(b)  No forfeiture under a bid bond shall exceed the lesser of (i) the difference between the bid for which the bond was written and the next low bid, or (ii) the fact amount of the bid bond. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the purchasing agent from requiring bid bonds for construction contracts anticipated to be less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for nontransportation-related projects or two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for transportation-related projects authorized under § 33.2-209, Code of Virginia, and partially or wholly funded by the Commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 6806-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7403-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6806-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 2-562.1. - Bonds for other than construction contracts. 
(a)  At the discretion of the purchasing agent, bidders may be required to submit with their bid a bid bond, or a certified check, in an amount to be determined by the purchasing agent and specified in the invitation to bid, which shall be forfeited to the city as liquidated damages upon the bidder's failure to execute within ten (10) days a nonconstruction contract awarded to him or upon the bidder's failure to furnish any required performance or payment bonds in connection with a contract awarded to him as specified in the request for bids. 
(b)  The purchasing agent may require successful bidders to furnish a performance bond and a payment bond at the expense of the successful bidder, in amounts to be determined by the purchasing agent and specified in the invitation to bid, to ensure the satisfactory completion of the work for which a contract or purchase order is awarded. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-563. - Award of contract to lowest, responsive, responsible bidder. 
The purchasing agent shall award contracts governed by this division to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder. When the terms and conditions for multiple awards are provided in the invitation for bids, awards may be made to more than one (1) bidder. In determining the lowest responsive, responsible bidder, in addition to price, the agent shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or service. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service. 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-563.1. - Award of contract to other than low bidder. 
When the award of a contract under this division is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons therefor shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-563.2. - Negotiation with lowest responsible bidder. 
Unless canceled or rejected, a responsive bid from the lowest responsible bidder shall be accepted as submitted; except that if the bid from the lowest responsible bidder exceeds available funds, the purchasing agent may negotiate with the apparent low bidder to obtain a contract price within available funds. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-563.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4967-96, § 2, repealed § 2-563.3, which pertained to sale to the highest responsive, responsible bidder. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-563.4. - Bid deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of the surety where the purchasing agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the purchasing agent upon failure on his part to enter into a contract and provide all required documents within ten (10) days after the award or as otherwise provided by the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-564. - Cancellation, rejection of bids; waiver of informalities. 
(a)  An invitation to bid, a request for proposal, any other solicitation, and any and all bids or proposals, and parts thereof, may be cancelled or rejected. The reasons for cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the contract file. 
(b)  The purchasing agent may waive informalities in bids. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-564.1. - Tie bids. 
In the case of a tie bid, after taking into consideration cash discounts for early payment, if any, preference shall be given to goods produced in Newport News, goods or services or construction provided by Newport News persons; otherwise to a Virginia person; if no such choices are available, then the tie shall be decided by lot. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5938-03, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-565. - Performance and payment bonds. 
(a)  Upon the award of any (i) public construction contract exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) awarded to any prime contractor, or (ii) construction contract exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) awarded to any prime contractor requiring the performance of labor or the furnishing of materials for buildings, structures or other improvements to real property owned by the city, such contractor shall furnish to the city the following bonds: 
(1)  A performance bond in the sum of the contract amount conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract in strict conformity with the plans, specifications and conditions of the contract. 
(2)  A payment bond in the sum of the contract amount. Such bond shall be for the protection of claimants who have and fulfill contracts to supply labor or materials to the prime contractor to whom the contract was awarded, or to any subcontractors, in the prosecution of the work provided for in such contract, and shall be conditioned upon the prompt payment for all such material furnished or labor supplied or performed in the prosecution of the work. "Labor or materials" shall include public utility services and reasonable rentals of equipment, but only for periods when the equipment rented is actually used at the site. 
(b)  Each of such bonds shall be executed by one (1) or more surety companies selected by the contractor which are legally authorized to do surety business in Virginia. 
(c)  Such bonds shall be payable to the City of Newport News. 
(d)  Each of the bonds shall be filed with the City of Newport News, or a designated officer or official thereof. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the purchasing agent from requiring payment or performance bonds for construction contracts for one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or less. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall preclude such contractor from requiring each subcontractor to furnish a payment bond with surety thereon in the sum of the full amount of the contract with such subcontractor, conditioned upon the payment to all persons who have and fulfill contracts which are directly with the subcontractor for performing labor and furnishing materials in the prosecution of the work provided for in the subcontract. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5804-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-565.1. - Action on performance bond. 
No action against the surety on a performance bond shall be brought unless within one (1) year after (i) completion of the contract, including the expiration of all warranties and guarantees, or (ii) discovery of the defect or breach of warranty, if the action be for such. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-565.2. - Actions on payment bonds. 
(a)  Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with the contractor and who has performed labor or furnished material in accordance with the contract documents in the prosecution of the work provided in any contract for which a payment bond has been given, and who has not been paid in full therefor before the expiration of ninety (90) days after the day on which such claimant performed the last of such labor or furnished the last of such materials for which he claims payment, may bring an action on such payment bond to recover any amount due him for such labor or material, and may prosecute such action to final judgment and have execution on the judgment. The obligee named in the bond need not be named a party to such action. 
(b)  Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with any subcontractor from whom the contractor has not required a subcontractor payment bond under section 2-565(f) but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the contractor's payment bond only if he has given written notice to such contractor within ninety (90) days from the day on which the claimant performed the last of the labor or furnished the last of the materials for which he claims payment, stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the person for whom the work was performed or to whom the material was furnished. Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with a subcontractor from whom the contractor has required a subcontractor payment bond under subsection 2-565(f) but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the subcontractor's payment bond. Notice to the contractor shall be served by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to such contractor at any place where his office is regularly maintained for the transaction of business. Claims for sums withheld as retainages with respect to labor performed or materials furnished shall not be subject to the time limitations stated in this subsection. 
(c)  Any action on a payment bond must be brought within one (1) year after the day on which the person bringing such action last performed labor or last furnished or supplied materials. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 6806-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6806-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 2-565.3. - Alternative forms of security. 
(a)  In lieu of a bid, payment or performance bond, a bidder may furnish a certified check, cashier's check, or cash escrow in the face amount required for the bond. 
(b)  If approved by the city attorney, a bidder may furnish a bank or savings and loan association's irrevocable letter of credit on certain designated funds in the face amount required for the bid bond. Approval shall be granted only upon a determination that the alternative form of security proffered affords protection to the city at least equivalent to a corporate surety's bond. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 6980-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6980-13, § 1, adopted June 25, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2013  
Sec. 2-565.4. - Construction contract provisions barring damages for unreasonable delays declared void. 
(a)  Any provision contained in any public contract for construction entered into on or after July 1, 1991, that purports to waive, release, or extinguish the rights of a contractor to recover costs or damages for unreasonable delay in performing such contract, either on his behalf or on behalf of his subcontractor if and to the extent such delay is caused by acts or omissions of the city, its agents or employees and due to causes within their control is against public policy and is void and unenforceable. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not be construed to render void any provision of a public contract for construction that: 
(1)  Allows the city to recover that portion of delay costs caused by the acts or omissions of the contractor, or its subcontractors, agents or employees; 
(2)  Requires notice of any delay by the party claiming the delay; 
(3)  Provides for liquidated damages for delay; or 
(4)  Provides for arbitration or any other procedure designed to settle contract disputes. 
(c)  A contractor making a claim against the city for costs or damages due to the alleged delaying of the contractor in the performance of its work under any public contract for construction shall be liable to the city and shall pay it for a percentage of all costs incurred by the city in investigating, analyzing, negotiating, litigating and arbitrating the claim, which percentage shall be equal to the percentage of the contractor's total delay claim which is determined through litigation or arbitration to be false or to have no basis in law or in fact. 
(d)  If the city denies a contractor's claim for costs or damages due to the alleged delaying of the contractor in the performance of work under any public contract for construction, it shall be liable to and shall pay such contractor a percentage of all costs incurred by the contractor to investigate, analyze, negotiate, litigate and arbitrate the claim. The percentage paid by the city shall be equal to the percentage of the contractor's total delay claim for which the city's denial is determined through litigation or arbitration to have been made in bad faith. 
(Ord. No. 5636-01, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-566. - Retainage on construction contracts. 
(a)  In any public contract for construction which provides for progress payments in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion, the contractor shall be paid at least ninety-five (95) percent of the earned sum when payment is due, with not more than five (5) percent being retained to assure faithful performance of the contract. All amounts withheld may be included in the final payment. 
(b)  Any subcontract for a public project which provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to the same limitations. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-566.1. - Deposit of certain retained funds on certain contracts; penalty for failure to timely complete. 
(a)  Commencing January 1, 1990, the city, when contracting directly with contractors for public contracts of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), or more, for construction of highways, roads, streets, bridges, parking lots, demolition, clearing, grading, excavating, paving, pile driving, miscellaneous drainage structures, and the installation of water, gas, sewer lines and pumping stations where portions of the contract price are to be retained, shall include in the bid proposal an option for the contractor to use an escrow account procedure for utilization of the city's retainage funds by so indicating in the space provided in the proposal documents. In the event the contractor elects to use the escrow account procedure, the "escrow agreement" form included in the bid proposal and contract shall be executed and submitted to the city within fifteen (15) calendar days after notification. If the "escrow agreement" form is not submitted within the fifteen-day period, the contractor shall forfeit his rights to the use of the escrow account procedure. 
(b)  In order to have retained funds paid to an escrow agent, the contractor, the escrow agent, and the surety shall execute an "escrow agreement" form. The contractor's escrow agent shall be a trust company, bank or savings institution with its principal office located in the Commonwealth. The "escrow agreement" and all regulations promulgated by the city entering into the contract shall be substantially the same as those used by the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Transportation. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to public contracts for construction for railroads, public transit systems, runways, dams, foundations, installation or maintenance of power systems for the generation and primary and secondary distribution of electric current ahead of the customer's meter, the installation or maintenance of telephone, telegraph or signal systems for public utilities and the construction or maintenance of solid waste or recycling facilities and treatment plants. 
(d)  Any such public contract for construction with the city, which includes payment of interest on retained funds, may require a provision whereby the contractor, exclusive of reasonable circumstances beyond the control of the contractor stated in the contract, shall pay a specified penalty for each day exceeding the completion date stated in the contract. 
(e)  Any subcontract for such public project which provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-566.2. - Multi-term contracts. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for goods, services or insurance may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interest of the city provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefor. 
(b)  When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be cancelled. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Secs. 2-567, 2-568. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COMPETITIVE NEGOTIATION 
 
Sec. 2-569. - Competitive negotiation generally. 
Competitive negotiation is a method of source selection which involves individual discussions between the city and the offeror on the basis of responses to the city's request for proposals. The source selection methods of competitive negotiation incorporate sections 2-557.2, 2-560, 2-560.1 and 2-561.1, 2-564 and 2-566.1, in addition to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-569.1. - Request for proposals. 
A request for proposals shall be in writing and indicate in general terms that which is sought to be procured, specifying the factors which will be used in evaluating the proposal and containing or incorporating by reference the other applicable contractual terms and conditions, including any unique capabilities or qualifications which will be required of the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-569.2. - Public notice. 
At least ten (10) days prior to the date set for receipt of proposals, public notice shall be given by posting on the city's website and the state's department of general services' central electronic procurement website and may be published in a newspaper or newspapers of general circulation in the area in which the contract is to be performed so as to provide reasonable notice to the maximum number of offerors that can be reasonably anticipated to submit proposals in response to the particular request. In addition, proposals may be solicited directly from potential contractors. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7306-16; Ord. No. 7559-19, § 1)  
Sec. 2-569.3. - Receipt of proposals. 
No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the identity of any offeror or the contents of any proposal during the process of negotiation. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-569.4. - Evaluation factors. 
The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-569.5. - Discussion with responsible offerors and revision of proposals. 
As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-570. - Award. 
Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposal. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. When the terms and conditions for multiple awards are provided in the request for proposal, awards may be made to more than one (1) offeror. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-570.1. - Contracting for professional services. 
(a)  Competitive negotiation procedure. The purchasing agent shall engage in individual discussions with all offerors deemed fully qualified, responsible and suitable on the basis of initial responses and with emphasis on professional competence to provide the required services. Repetitive informal interviews shall be permissible. Such offerors shall be encouraged to elaborate on their qualifications and performance data or staff expertise pertinent to the proposed project as well as alternative concepts. The request for proposal shall not, however, request that offerors furnish estimates of man-hours or cost for services. These discussions may encompass nonbinding estimates of total project costs, including where appropriate, design, construction and life cycle costs. Methods to be utilized in arriving at price for services may also be discussed. Proprietary information from competing offerors shall not be disclosed to the public or to competitors. At the conclusion of discussions, outlined herein, on the basis of evaluation factors published in the request for proposals and all information developed in the selection process to this point, the purchasing agent shall select in the order of preference two (2) or more offerors whose professional qualifications and proposed services are deemed most meritorious. Negotiations shall then be conducted, beginning with the offeror ranked first. If a contract satisfactory and advantageous to the city can be negotiated at a price considered fair and reasonable, the award shall be made to that offeror. Otherwise, negotiations with the offeror ranked first shall be formally terminated and negotiations conducted with the offeror ranked second, and so on until such a contract can be negotiated at a fair and reasonable price. Should the purchasing agent determine in writing and in his sole discretion that only one (1) offeror is fully qualified, or that one (1) offeror is clearly more highly qualified and suitable than the others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. Once formally terminated, negotiations may not be reopened with any offeror. 
(b)  Multiphase contracts. Multiphase professional services contracts satisfactory and advantageous to the city for environmental, location, design and inspection work regarding construction infrastructure projects may be negotiated and awarded based on qualifications at a fair and reasonable price for the first phase only, when completion of the earlier phases is necessary to provide information critical to the negotiation of a fair and reasonable price for succeeding phases. Prior to the procurement of any such contract, the city shall state the anticipated intended total scope of the project and determine in writing that the nature of the work is such that the best interests of the city require awarding the contract. 
(c)  Contracting for multiple projects. A contract for architectural or professional engineering services relating to multiple construction projects may be negotiated by the city, for multiple projects provided (i) the projects require similar experience and expertise, (ii) the nature of the projects is clearly identified in the request for proposals, and (iii) the contract term is limited to one (1) year or when the cumulative total project fees reach the maximum cost authorized in this paragraph, whichever occurs first. Such a contract may be renewable for four (4) additional one-year terms at the option of the city. Under such contract, (a) the fair and reasonable prices, as negotiated, shall be used in determining the cost of each project performed; (b) the sum of all projects performed in one (1) contract term shall not exceed six million dollars ($6,000,000.00); and (c) the project fee of any single project shall not exceed two million five hundred thousand dollars ($2,500,000.00). Any unused amounts from the first contract term shall not be carried forward to the additional term. Competitive negotiations for such contracts may result in awards to more than one (1) offeror provided (1) the request for proposals so states and (2) the city has established procedures for distributing multiple projects among the selected contractors during the contract term. Such procedures shall prohibit requiring the selected contractors to compete for individual projects based on price. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5636-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5938-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 6513-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6615-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6980-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7194-15, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6980-13, § 1, adopted June 25, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2013.  
Sec. 2-570.2. - Contracting for other than professional services. 
Selection shall be made of two (2) or more offerors deemed to be fully qualified and best suited among those submitting proposals, on the basis of the factors involved in the request for proposal, including price if so stated in the request for proposal. Negotiations shall then be conducted with each of the offerors so selected. Price shall be considered, but need not be the sole determining factor. After negotiations have been conducted with each offeror so selected, the purchasing agent shall select the offeror which, in his opinion, has made the best proposal, and shall award the contract to that offeror. When the terms and conditions for multiple awards are provided in the request for proposal, awards may be made to more than one (1) offeror. Should the purchasing agent determine in writing and in his sole discretion that only one (1) offeror is fully qualified, or that one (1) offeror is clearly more highly qualified than the others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Secs. 2-571, 2-572. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DEBARMENT 
 
Sec. 2-573. - Authority to debar or suspend. 
After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the purchasing agent is authorized to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall not be for a period of more than three (3) years. The purchasing agent is authorized to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in any activity which might lead to debarment. The suspension shall not be for a period of more than three (3) months. The causes for debarment include: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract; 
(2)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility as a city contractor; 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals; 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the purchasing agent to be so serious as to justify debarment action: 
(a)  Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or 
(b)  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one (1) or more contracts; provided, that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment; or 
(5)  Any other cause the purchasing agent determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause mentioned in this section, or for violation of the ethical standards set forth in division 6 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-573.1. - Decision to debar or suspend. 
If the purchasing agent shall debar or suspend a person, the purchasing agent shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the debarred or suspended person involved of his rights concerning judicial or administrative review. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-573.2. - Notice of decision. 
A copy of the decision required by section 2-573.1 of this division shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended person. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-573.3. - Finality of decision. 
A decision under section 2-573.1 of this division shall be final and conclusive, unless the debarred or suspended person within ten (10) days after receipt of the decision appeals to the purchasing agent pursuant to section 2-577.2. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Secs. 2-574, 2-575. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - APPEALS AND REMEDIES FOR BID PROTESTS 
 
Sec. 2-576. - Ineligibility of bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(a)  Any bidder, offeror or contractor, other than one (1) who has been debarred pursuant to Division 4 of this article, refused permission to, or disqualified from participating in public contracts shall be notified in writing. Such notice shall state the reasons for the action taken. This decision shall be final unless the bidder, offeror or contractor appeals within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof by invoking the administrative appeal procedure established by the purchasing agent, if any, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-577.1 of this division. 
(b)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the action taken was arbitrary or capricious, or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, statutes or regulations, the sole relief shall be restoration of eligibility. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-576.1. - Appeal of denial or withdrawal of bid. 
(a)  A decision denying withdrawal of bid under the provisions of section 2-561.4 shall be final and conclusive unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten (10) days after receipt of the decision by invoking the administrative procedures established by the purchasing agent, if any, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-577.1 of this division. 
(b)  If no bid bond was posted, a bidder refused withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of section 2-561.4 prior to appealing shall deliver to the purchasing agent a certified check or cash bond in the amount of the difference between the bid sought to be withdrawn and the next lowest bid. Such security shall be released only upon a final determination that the bidder was entitled to withdraw the bid. 
(c)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the decision refusing withdrawal of the bid was arbitrary or capricious, the sole relief shall be withdrawal of the bid. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-576.2. - Determination of nonresponsibility. 
(a)  Following public opening and announcement of bids received on an invitation to bid, the purchasing agent shall evaluate the bids. At the same time the purchasing agent shall determine whether the apparent low bidder is responsible. If the purchasing agent so determines, then he may proceed with an award in accordance with the provisions of section 2-563. If the purchasing agent determines that the apparent low bidder is not responsible, he shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a written determination of nonresponsibility, the purchasing agent shall (i) notify the apparent low bidder in writing of the results of the evaluation, (ii) disclose the factual support for the determination, and (iii) allow the apparent low bidder an opportunity to inspect any documents which relate to the determination, if so requested by the bidder within five (5) business days after receipt of the notice. 
(2)  Within ten (10) business days after receipt of the notice, the bidder may submit rebuttal information challenging the evaluation. The purchasing agent shall issue his written determination of responsibility based on all information in his possession, including any rebuttal information, within five (5) business days of the date he received such rebuttal information. At the same time, the purchasing agent shall notify the bidder in writing of his determination. 
(3)  Such notice shall state the basis for the determination, which shall be final unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten (10) days by invoking the administrative procedures as provided in section 2-577.2, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-577.1. 
(4)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to procurements involving the prequalification of bidders and the rights of any potential bidders under such prequalification to appeal a decision that such bidders are not responsible. 
(b)  If, upon appeal pursuant to section 2-577.1 or section 2-577.2, it is determined that the decision of the purchasing agent was arbitrary or capricious, and the award of the contract in question has not been made, the sole relief shall be a finding that the bidder is a responsible bidder for the contract in question. If it is determined that the decision of the purchasing agent was arbitrary or capricious, the relief shall be as set forth in subsection 2-576.3(b). 
(c)  A bidder contesting a determination that he is not a responsible bidder for a particular contract shall proceed under this section, and may not protest the award or proposed award under section 2-576.3 of this division. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the city when procuring by competitive negotiation to furnish a statement of the reasons why a particular proposal was not deemed to be the most advantageous. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5046-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-576.3. - Protest of award or decision to award. 
(a)  Any bidder or offeror may protest the award or decision to award a contract by submitting such protest in writing to the purchasing agent no later than ten (10) days after the award or the announcement of the decision to award, whichever occurs first. No protest shall lie for a claim that the selected bidder or offeror is not a responsible bidder or offeror. The written protest shall include the basis for the protest and the relief sought. The purchasing agent shall issue a decision in writing within ten (10) business days stating the reasons for the action taken. This decision shall be final unless the bidder or offeror appeals within ten (10) days of the written decision by invoking the administrative procedures established by the purchasing agent, if any, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-577.1 of this division. 
(b)  If prior to an award it is determined that the decision to award is arbitrary or capricious, then the sole relief shall be a finding to that effect. The awarding authority (city council or purchasing agent) shall cancel the proposed award or revise it to comply with the law. If, after an award, it is determined that an award of a contract was arbitrary or capricious, then the sole relief shall be as hereinafter provided. Where the award has been made but performance has not begun, the performance of the contract may be enjoined. Where the award has been made and performance has begun, the awarding authority (city council or purchasing agent) may declare the contract void upon a finding that this action is in the best interest of the public. Where a contract is declared void, the performing contractor shall be compensated for the cost of performance up to the time of such declaration. In no event shall the performing contractor be entitled to lost profits. A decision to award shall be deemed to be arbitrary and capricious if it is not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable law or regulation, or the terms and conditions of the invitation to bid or request for proposal. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit a bidder to challenge the validity of the terms and conditions of the invitation to bid or request for proposal. 
(c)  Where the awarding authority (city council or purchasing agent) determines, after a hearing held by it, or its designee, following reasonable notice to all bidders, that there is probable cause to believe that a decision to award was based on fraud or corruption or on an act in violation of the ethics in public contracting as set forth in Division 6 of this article, the city council or the purchasing agent, as the case may be, shall not award the contract to the offending bidder. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5046-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5149-98; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7079-14)  
Sec. 2-576.4. - Effect of appeal upon contract. 
Pending final determination of a protest or appeal, the validity of a contract awarded and accepted in good faith in accordance with this chapter shall not be affected by the fact that a protest or appeal has been filed. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-576.5. - Stay of award during protest. 
An award need not be delayed for the period allowed a bidder or offeror to protest, but in the event of a timely protest, as provided in section 2-576.3, or the filing of a timely legal action as provided in section 2-577.1, no further action to award the contract shall be taken unless there is a written determination by the purchasing agent that proceeding without delay is necessary to protect the public interest or unless the bid or offer would expire. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5046-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-577. - Contractual disputes. 
(a)  Contractual claims, whether for money or other relief, shall be submitted in writing no later than sixty (60) days after final payment; however, written notice of the contractor's intention to file such claim shall have been given at the time of the occurrence or beginning of the work upon which the claim is based. Nothing herein shall preclude a contract from requiring submission of an invoice for final payment within a certain time after completion and acceptance of the work or acceptance of the goods. Pendency of claims shall not delay payment of amounts agreed due in the final payment. 
(b)  A procedure for consideration of contractual claims may be included in each contract. Such procedure, which may be incorporated into the contract by reference, shall establish a time limit for a final decision in writing by the purchasing agent. 
(c)  A contractor may not invoke the administrative procedures established by the purchasing agent, if any, or institute legal action as provided in section 2-577.1 of this division, prior to receipt of the decision on the claim, unless the purchasing agent fails to render such decision within the time specified in the contract. 
(d)  The decision of the purchasing agent shall be final and conclusive unless the contractor appeals within six (6) months of the date of the final decision on the claim by the purchasing agent by invoking the administrative procedures established by the purchasing agent, if any, or in the alternative by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-577.1 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-577.1. - Legal actions. 
(a)  A bidder or offeror, actual or prospective, who is refused permission or disqualified from participation in bidding or competitive negotiation, or who is determined not to be a responsible bidder or offeror for a particular contract, may bring an action in the circuit court for the City of Newport News challenging that decision, which shall be reversed only if the petitioner establishes that the decision was arbitrary or capricious, or, in the case of denial of prequalification, that the decision to deny prequalification was not based upon the criteria for denial of prequalification as set forth in subsection 2-560(b). 
(b)  A bidder denied withdrawal of a bid under section 2-576.1 of this Code may bring an action in the circuit court for the City of Newport News challenging that decision, which shall be reversed only if the bidder establishes that the decision was clearly erroneous. 
(c)  A bidder, offeror or contractor may bring an action in the circuit court for the City of Newport News challenging a proposed award or the award of a contract, which shall be reversed only if the petitioner establishes that the proposed award or the award is not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather is arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable law or regulation, or the terms and conditions of the invitation to bid or request for proposal. In the event the apparent low bidder, having been previously determined by the purchasing agent to be not responsible, is found by the court to be responsible, the court may direct the award of the contract to such bidder in accordance with the requirements of this section and the invitation to bid or request for proposal. The provisions of subsection 2-576.3(b) shall apply to any such award. 
(d)  If injunctive relief is granted, the court, upon request of the city, shall require the posting of reasonable security to protect the city. 
(e)  A contractor shall bring an action involving a contract dispute with the city in the circuit court for the City of Newport News. 
(f)  A bidder, offeror or contractor need not utilize the administrative procedures of section 2-577.2 of this Code; but if those procedures are invoked by the bidder, offeror or contractor, the procedures shall be exhausted prior to instituting legal action concerning the same procurement transaction unless the city agrees otherwise. 
(g)  Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the city from instituting legal action against a contractor. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5046-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-577.2. - Administrative appeals procedure. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall establish an administrative procedure for hearing protests of a decision to award or an award, appeals from refusals to allow withdrawal of bids, appeals from disqualifications and determinations of nonresponsibility, actions of debarment or suspension, and appeals from decisions on disputes arising during the performance of a contract, or any of these. Such administrative procedure shall provide for a hearing before a disinterested person or panel, the opportunity to present pertinent information and the issuance of a written decision containing findings of fact. The disinterested person shall not be an employee of the city and no member of the panel shall be an employee of the city. The findings of fact shall be final and conclusive and shall not be set aside unless the same are fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious, so grossly erroneous as to imply bad faith, or in the case of denial of prequalification, such findings were not based upon the criteria for denial of prequalification as set forth in subsection 2-560(b). No determination on an issue of law shall be final if appropriate legal action is instituted in a timely manner. 
(b)  Any party to the administrative procedure, including the city, shall be entitled to institute judicial review if such action is brought within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5476-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Secs. 2-578, 2-579. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING 
 
Sec. 2-580. - Purpose. 
The provisions of this division supplement, but do not supersede, other provisions of law, including, but not limited to, the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act (§ 2.2-3100 et seq.), the Virginia Governmental Frauds Act (§ 18.2-498.1 et seq.), and Articles 2 and 3 of Chapter 10 of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. The provisions of this division apply notwithstanding the fact that the conduct described may not constitute a violation of the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5805-02; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-581. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  City employee shall mean any person employed by the city, including elected officials or appointed members of governing bodies. 
(2)  Immediate family shall mean a spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters, and any other person living in the same household as the employee. 
(3)  Official responsibility shall mean administrative or operating authority, whether intermediate or final, to initiate, approve, disapprove or otherwise affect a procurement transaction, or any claim resulting therefrom. 
(4)  Pecuniary interest arising from the procurement shall mean a personal interest in a contract as defined in the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act (§ 2.2-3100 et seq., Code of Virginia). 
(5)  Procurement transaction shall mean all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any goods, services or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5805-02; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-582. - Proscribed participation by public employees in procurement transaction. 
Except as may be specifically allowed by of § 2.2-3112, subdivisions A2 and A3, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, no city employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall participate in that transaction on behalf of the city when the employee knows that: 
(1)  The employee is contemporaneously employed by a bidder, offeror or contractor involved in the procurement transaction; or 
(2)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family holds a position with a bidder, offeror or contractor such as an officer, director, trustee, partner or the like, or is employed in a capacity involving personal and substantial participation in the procurement transaction, or owns or controls an interest of more than five (5) percent; or 
(3)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family has a pecuniary interest arising from the procurement transaction; or 
(4)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family is negotiating, or has an arrangement concerning, prospective employment with a bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 5046-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5805-02; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-582.1. - Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. 
No city employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept from a bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal or minimal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. The city may recover the value of anything conveyed in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-582.2. - Disclosure of subsequent employment. 
No city employee or former city employee having official responsibility for procurement transactions shall accept employment with any bidder, offeror or contractor with whom the employee or former employee dealt in an official capacity concerning procurement transactions for a period of one (1) year from the cessation of employment by the city unless the employee or former employee provides written notification to the city council prior to commencement of employment by that bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-582.3. - Gifts by bidders, offerors, contractors or subcontractors. 
No bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor shall confer upon any city employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-582.4. - Kickbacks. 
(a)  No contractor or subcontractor shall demand or receive from any of his suppliers or his subcontractors, as an inducement for the award of a subcontractor or order, any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(b)  No subcontractor or supplier shall make, or offer to make, kickbacks as described in this section. 
(c)  No person shall demand or receive any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of value in return for an agreement not to compete on a city contract. 
(d)  If a subcontractor or supplier makes a kickback or other prohibited payment as described in this section, the amount thereof shall be conclusively presumed to have been included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the city and will be recoverable from both the maker and recipient. Recovery from one (1) offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-582.5. - Purchase of building materials, etc., from architect or engineer prohibited. 
(a)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for the city shall be sold by or purchased from any person employed as an independent contractor by the public body to furnish architectural or engineering services, but not construction, for such building or structure or from any partnership, association or corporation in which such architect or engineer has a personal interest as defined in § 2.2-3101, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for the city shall be sold by or purchased from any person which has provided or is currently providing design services specifying a sole source for such materials, supplies or equipment to be used in such building or structure to the independent contractor employed by the city to furnish architectural or engineering services in which such person has a personal interest as defined in § 2.2-3101, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply in cases of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 4967-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5805-02; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-583. - Penalty for violation. 
Willful violation of any provision of this division shall constitute a class I misdemeanor. Upon conviction, any city employee, in addition to any other fine or penalty provided by law, shall forfeit his employment. 
(Ord. No. 3910-89; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-584. - Participation in bid preparation; limitation on submitting bid for same procurement. 
No person who, for compensation, prepares an invitation to bid or request for proposal for or on behalf of the city shall (i) submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or any portion thereof or (ii) disclose to any bidder or offeror information concerning the procurement which is not available to the public. However, the purchasing agent may permit such person to submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or any portion thereof if the purchasing agent determines that the exclusion of such person would limit the number of potential qualified bidders or offerors in a manner contrary to the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5046-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5999-04; Ord. No. 7036-14, § 1)  
Sec. 2-585. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - DEPARTMENT OF INTERNAL AUDIT 
 
Sec. 2-586. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of internal audit, which shall consist of the director of internal audit and such other officers and employees organized into branches, sections or other units, as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 4161-91)  
Sec. 2-587. - Responsibilities. 
The department of internal audit shall be responsible for the development and execution of a comprehensive internal audit program for the city based on both long-range and short-range objectives; for assisting the external auditor in necessary field work for completion of the comprehensive annual audit report; for assisting the commissioner of the revenue in license tax, meals tax, personal property and business equipment audits; and for performance of such other duties as may be assigned to the department. 
(Ord. No. 4161-91; Ord. No. 4927-96, § 1)  
Sec. 2-588. - General powers of director. 
The director of internal audit shall be appointed by the city manager. Such director shall be the head of the department of internal audit and under the supervision of the city manager, shall have general supervision and control of the several branches, sections or other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 4161-91)  
Secs. 2-589—2-591. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXII. - RESERVED[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6594-09, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed Art. XXII, §§ 2-592—2-594, which pertained to department of management services. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 2-592—2-597. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIII. - DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES 
 
Sec. 2-598. - Establishment; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of human resources, which shall consist of the director of human resources, and such other officers and employees, organized into branches, sections or other units, as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. The department of human resources shall be responsible for the administration of a total personnel system, to include the recruitment, testing and placement of new employees, training, equal employment opportunity, employee relations, workers' compensation, medical services administration, substance abuse testing, employee personnel records, and the administration of the classification and pay plans and the affirmative action plan. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81; Ord. No. 6035-04) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to create departments, § 4.02B. 
Cross reference— Pensions and retirement, Ch. 31.  
Sec. 2-599. - Appointment and general powers and duties of director. 
The director of human resources shall be appointed by the city manager. The director of human resources shall be the head of the department of human resources and shall have general management and control of the several branches, sections or other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81; Ord. No. 6035-04)  
Sec. 2-600. - Preparation and adoption of personnel rules, affirmative action plan and pay plan administration policies. 
(a)  The human resources director shall be responsible for the preparation of rules and procedures for city manager approval and issuance as required to administer the following policies and plans: 
(1)  Policies established under Chapter 2, Administration, Article IV, Employee Benefits and Article V, Employee Grievances, of the City Code. 
(2)  The city's affirmative action plan. 
(3)  The city's classification and pay plan. 
(b)  The human resources director shall also be responsible for recommending to the city manager, for approval, other policies or practices deemed necessary to the administration of the personnel system. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81; Ord. No. 6035-04)  
Sec. 2-601. - Criminal history and other background checks of applicants, employees, and volunteers. 
(a)  It is the intent of the City Council in enacting this section to comply with the provisions of §§ 15.2-1503.1, 15.2-1505.1 and 19.2-389, Code of Virginia, as amended, to enable the city manager and the director of human resources, in the interest of public welfare and safety, to require fingerprinting and to access the state and national criminal history record information regarding applicants for certain positions and volunteers, as set forth below. The director of human resources shall determine the type and scope of the criminal history record checks and any other background checks required for the affected positions. 
(b)  The human resources department shall require a criminal history record information investigation on all applicants for police and fire department positions. Applicants shall include those for initial hire, and those current employees who laterally transfer, promote, or demote to such a position, and volunteers. 
(c)  In addition to (b) above, the human resources department shall require a criminal history record information investigation for finalists identified in the personnel selection and placement process for all applicants, including volunteers, in the following departments, and for individual positions or activities identified by the city manager which affect public welfare or safety. Applicants shall include finalists for initial hire, and those current employees who laterally transfer, promote, or demote to such a position, and volunteers: 
(1)  Waterworks department. 
(2)  Department of purchasing. 
(3)  Department of finance. 
(4)  Department of information technology. 
(5)  Department of human resources. 
(6)  Department of internal audit. 
(7)  Office of risk management. 
(8)  Department of adult corrections. 
(9)  Department of juvenile services. 
(10)  Department of planning. 
(11)  Department of development. 
(12)  Department of real estate assessment. 
(13)  Department of human services. 
(14)  Department of law. 
(15)  For individual positions or activities identified by the city manager which affect public welfare or safety. 
(d)  Current employees and volunteers. The director of human resources may require a periodic criminal history record information investigation and other background checks, and determine their type and scope, for current employees and volunteers when authorized by federal or state law. 
(e)  Any applicant, employee, or volunteer described in this section shall, if required, submit to fingerprinting and provide personal descriptive information and any other necessary paperwork to be forwarded along with the fingerprints through the Virginia State Police Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining state and national criminal history record information regarding such applicant, employee, or volunteer. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81; Ord. No. 3098-83; Ord. No. 4936-96; Ord. No. 5537-00; Ord. No. 6035-04; Ord. No. 6595-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6762-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6878-12; Ord. No. 7045-14; Ord. No. 7204-15) 
Cross reference— Criminal history investigation of applicants for employment in educational system, § 14-1.  
Secs. 2-602—2-604. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIV. - DEPARTMENT OF CODES COMPLIANCE 
 
Sec. 2-605. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of codes compliance, which shall consist of the director of codes compliance and such other officers and employees, organized into branches, sections or other units, as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to create departments, § 4.02(B).  
Sec. 2-606. - Responsibilities. 
The department of codes compliance shall be responsible for the enforcement of the building, electrical, mechanical, property maintenance, plumbing codes, the zoning ordinance and the performance of such other duties as may be assigned to the department. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81) 
Cross reference— Adoption of Uniform Statewide Building Code, § 13-23; zoning ordinance, Ch. 45.  
Sec. 2-607. - General powers of director. 
The director of codes compliance shall be appointed by the city manager. Such director shall be the head of the department of codes compliance and shall have general management and control of the several branches, sections or other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81)  
Secs. 2-608—2-610. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXV. - DEPARTMENT OF REAL ESTATE ASSESSMENT[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Charter reference— Assessment of real estate for taxation, Ch. 12. 
Cross reference— Annual assessment required, general powers and duties of assessor, § 40-13. 
 
Sec. 2-611. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of real estate assessment, which shall consist of the real estate assessor and such other officers and employees, organized into branches, sections or other units, as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to create departments, § 4.02B.  
Sec. 2-612. - Responsibilities. 
The department of real estate assessment shall be responsible for: 
(1)  The appraisal of all real estate, including exempt property, at its fair market value. 
(2)  The interpretation and administration of all laws pertaining to real estate assessments. 
(3)  The preparation and maintenance of city tax maps. 
(4)  The administration of the land use program. 
(5)  The annual publication of land books, which are the official real estate tax rolls. 
(6)  The maintenance of records and providing information on each parcel of real estate in the city. 
(7)  The conduct of hearings and review of assessments with the public. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81)  
Sec. 2-613. - General powers of real estate assessor. 
The real estate assessor shall be appointed by the city manager. Such assessor shall be the head of the department of real estate assessment and shall have general management and control of the several branches, sections or other units of the division. 
(Ord. No. 2784-81)  
Sec. 2-614. - Compensation for the board of review of real estate assessments. 
Each member of the board of review of real estate assessments shall receive per diem compensation, for the time actually engaged in the duties of the board, at the rate of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per day. The Newport News City Council shall, each year, after the board of review of real estate assessments has determined the number of applicants that have requested a hearing before the board, set the number of days, as in the council's opinion, that is sufficient for the completion of the work of the board. 
(Ord. No. 5330-99)  
Secs. 2-615—2-619. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVI. - DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND EVALUATION[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4160, adopted March 12, 1991, amended Art. XXVI to read as herein set out in §§ 2-620—2-622. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. XXVI pertained to the department of budget and financial management, including the division of budget and evaluation and the division of internal affairs, and derived from Ord. No. 2968-82. 
 
Sec. 2-620. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of budget and evaluation, which shall consist of the director of budget and evaluation and such other officers and employees, organized into branches, sections or other units, as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 4160-91)  
Sec. 2-621. - Responsibilities. 
The department of budget and evaluation shall be responsible for coordination of the development of the annual city budget and the capital improvement program and for the performance of such other duties as may be assigned to the division. 
(Ord. No. 4160-91)  
Sec. 2-622. - General powers of director. 
The director of budget and evaluation shall be appointed by the city manager. Such director shall be the head of the department of budget and evaluation and, under the supervision of the city manager, shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 4160-91)  
Secs. 2-623—2-644. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVII. - RESERVED[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6595-09, § 3, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed Art. XXVII, §§ 2-645—2-648, which pertained to office of emergency management. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 2-645—2-650. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVIII. - RESERVED[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4875-96, § 2, repealed Art. XXVIII, §§ 2-651—2-656, which pertained to the elected school board. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 2-651—2-658. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIX. - DEPARTMENT OF VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT SERVICES 
 
Sec. 2-659. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of vehicle and equipment services which shall con-sist of the director of vehicle and equipment services and such other officers and employees, organized into branches, sections or other units as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent herewith. 
(Ord. No. 3053-83)  
Sec. 2-660. - Responsibilities. 
The department of vehicle and equipment services shall be responsible for the centralized maintenance and repair of vehicles and other motorized equipment, the coordination of equipment procurement, the administration of motor pool operations and the performance of such other duties as may be assigned to the department. 
(Ord. No. 3053-83)  
Sec. 2-661. - General powers of vehicle and equipment services director. 
The director of vehicle and equipment services shall be appointed by the city manager. Such director shall be the head of the department of vehicle and equipment services and shall have general management and control of the several branches, sections and other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 3053-83)  
Secs. 2-662, 2-663. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXX. - RESERVED[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7094-14, adopted September 9, 2014, repealed Ch. 2, Art. XXX, §§ 2-664—2-667 in its entirety. Formerly said article pertained to Newport News Cable Television Advisory Commission and derived from Ord. No. 3065-83; Ord. No. 3205-84; Ord. No. 6202-06. 
 
Secs. 2-664—2-669. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXI. - DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING 
 
Sec. 2-670. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby established a department of engineering which shall consist of a director of engineering to be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the order of the director consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 3109-83)  
Sec. 2-671. - Functions. 
The department of engineering shall be responsible for the design, construction administration and construction inspection of all public buildings, roads, bridges, drainage facilities, sewers and other public improvements to be owned by the city, and such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department. The department, through its division of traffic engineering, shall also be responsible for the planning, geometric design and traffic operations of roads, streets and highways, their networks, terminals, abutting land and relationships with other modes of transportation to include responsibility of on- and off-street public parking. 
(Ord. No. 3109-83)  
Sec. 2-672. - General powers of director. 
The director of engineering shall be the head of the department of engineering and shall, under the supervision of the city manager, have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. 
(Ord. No. 3109-83) 
Cross reference— Director of engineering to serve as administrator of mobile home parks, § 25-4.  
Secs. 2-673—2-675. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXII. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Cross reference— Powers and duties of board of zoning appeals, § 45-3201. 
State Law reference— Local board of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2308 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-676. - Creation; membership; qualifications, appointment and term of office of members; filling of vacancies. 
There is hereby created a board of zoning appeals, which shall consist of five (5) members who are residents of the City of Newport News appointed by the circuit court of the city. The term of office of board members shall be for five (5) years each. The secretary of the board shall notify the court at least thirty (30) days in advance of the expiration of any term of office and shall notify the court promptly if any vacancy occurs. Appointment to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may be reappointed to succeed themselves. Members of the board shall hold no other public office in the city except that one (1) member may be a member of the city planning commission. A member whose term expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed and qualifies. 
(Ord. No. 3374-85, § 1) 
State Law reference— Duty to create board and number, appointment and terms of members, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2308.  
Sec. 2-677. - Officers; rules of procedure; personnel and services; removal of members. 
(a)  The board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. 
(b)  The board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedures consistent with ordinances of the City of Newport News and general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The board shall keep a full, public record of its proceedings and shall submit a report of its activities to the city council at least once each year. 
(c)  Within the limits of funds appropriated by the city council, the board may engage secretarial, clerical, technical or legal services. 
(d)  Any board member may be removed for malfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by the court which appointed him after a hearing held after at least fifteen (15) days' notice. 
(Ord. No. 3374-85, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2308.  
Sec. 2-678. - Compensation of members. 
Members of the board shall receive as compensation for their services fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting, not to exceed two (2) meetings per month. 
(Ord. No. 3374-85, § 1; Ord. No. 5001-97)  
Sec. 2-679. - Procedure for conducting meetings; quorum. 
(a)  Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine except that meetings shall be held monthly when appeals, variances or special exceptions are to be acted upon under conditions prescribed in this Code. The board by resolution may fix a schedule of regular meetings, and may also fix the day or days to which any meeting shall be continued if the chairman, or vice chairman is unable to act, finds and declares that weather or other conditions are such that it is hazardous for members to attend the meeting. Such finding shall be communicated to the members and the press as promptly as possible. All hearings and other matters previously advertised for such meeting in accordance with § 15.2-2311 et seq. shall be conducted at the continued meeting and no further advertisement is required. 
(b)  The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(c)  All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(d)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the secretary of the board and shall be a public record. 
(e)  A quorum shall consist of not less than three (3) members. 
(f)  The concurring vote of not less than three (3) members shall be necessary to reserve any order, requirement, decision or determination of the department of codes compliance or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the zoning ordinance or to effect a variation from the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3374-85, § 1; Ord. No. 5944-03, § 1; Ord. No. 7404-17)  
Secs. 2-680—2-684. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXIII. - RESERVED[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3840-89, adopted March 14, 1989, repealed Art. XXXIII, §§ 2-685—2-688, which pertained to the citizen's advisory committee and derived from Ord. No. 3424-86, § 1. 
 
Secs. 2-685—2-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXIV. - RESERVED[27] 

Footnotes: 
--- (27) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5703-01, adopted Oct. 9, 2001, repealed Art. XXXIV, §§ 2-700—2-702, which pertained to the council liaison office. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 2-700—2-705. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXV. - RESERVED[28] 

Footnotes: 
--- (28) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5567-01, adopted Jan. 9, 2001 repealed Art. XXXV, §§ 2-706—2-710, which pertained to the Newport News Cadre Committee. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 2-706—2-724. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXVI. - ADMINISTRATION OF SELF-INSURANCE FUNDS  
DIVISION 1. - AUTOMOBILE SELF-INSURANCE FUND 
 
Sec. 2-725. - Automobile liability claims defined. 
"Automobile liability claims" means 
(1)  Claims for bodily injury, death or property damage arising out of and caused by the maintenance, use or operation of a motor vehicle owned by the city, provided that the aforesaid use of the vehicle has been authorized, and 
(2)  Claims for bodily injury, death or property damage arising out of and caused by the operation of a motor vehicle owned by a person other than the city, provided that: 
a.  The use of such vehicle by an officer, employee or volunteer arises out of and in the course of the discharge of official duties on behalf of the city; and 
b.  The use of such vehicle by an officer, employee or volunteer in connection with such duties has been authorized. 
Traveling to and from work shall not be deemed to arise out of or in the course of the discharge of official duties on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-726. - Payments generally. 
The city will pay from the automobile self-insurance fund on behalf of officers, employees and volunteers of the city, such sums as they are legally obligated to pay arising out of automobile liability claims against such officers, employees and volunteers of the city, including costs and expenses for settlement, suit, or satisfaction of judgment. 
(1)  Such payments shall be made only to the extent that a commercial policy of insurance does not provide protection to pay the legal obligation in question. 
(2)  Payment of such claims as are described by section 2-725(2) above shall be made only for the excess over all other valid and collectible insurance providing the same protection (i.e. protection which is available to a person otherwise entitled to assert a claim to such protection by virtue of section 2-725(2)). 
(3)  Liability founded on intentional, willful or malicious misconduct by or at the direction of an officer, employee or volunteer of the city is expressly excluded from the provisions hereof. 
(4)  Claims between or among fellow officers, employees or volunteers are expressly excluded from the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-727. - Employee contributions; when. 
The city will pay from the automobile self-insurance fund all amounts required to be paid on behalf of the city for legal liability arising out of automobile liability claims against the city. The city shall not seek contribution from an officer, employee or volunteer except in a case in which liability is founded on intentional, willful or malicious misconduct by or at the direction of an officer, employee or volunteer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-728. - Uninsured and underinsured motorist claims. 
(a)  To the extent that they relate to the ownership, maintenance, use or operation of motor vehicles owned by the city, the city will pay from the automobile self-insurance fund within the limits described by section 2-728(c) such sums as its officer, employee or volunteer is legally entitled to recover as damages from the owner or operator of an uninsured or underinsured motor vehicle, as those terms are defined by Section 38.2-2206 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The city will pay from the automobile self-insurance fund within the limits described by section 2-728(c) such sums as any person who occupies a motor vehicle owned by the city as a guest is legally entitled to recover as damages from the owner or operator of an uninsured or underinsured motor vehicle, as those terms are defined by Section 38.2-2206 of the Code of Virginia, provided that such person occupies the vehicle with the express or implied consent of an officer, employee or volunteer of the city, and provided further that the giving of such consent has first been authorized. 
(c)  The amount required to be paid pursuant to section 2-728(a) and section 2-728(b) shall not exceed the minimum financial requirements established by Section 46.2-472 of the Code of Virginia. The city acknowledges that the foregoing amount is not equal to the amount of protection afforded under section 2-727, and it hereby expressly rejects limits of uninsured or underinsured coverage in any amount greater than the minimum financial requirements established by Section 46.2-472 of the Code of Virginia, all pursuant to Section 38.2-2206 of the Code of Virginia. Payment of such amounts shall be made only for the excess over all other valid and collectible insurance providing the same protection (i.e. protection which is available to a person otherwise entitled to assert a claim to such protection by virtue of section 2-728(a) and section 2-728(b)). The foregoing limit applies regardless of the number of (1) persons who are entitled to protection by the provisions hereof; (2) persons who sustain bodily injury, death or property damage; (3) claims made or suits brought on account of bodily injury, death or property damage; or (4) motor vehicles to which the provisions hereof apply. 
(d)  The amount required to be paid pursuant to sections 2-728(a) and 2-728(b) shall be reduced by the amount of any workers' compensation benefits which have been paid. 
(e)  The city will not pay amounts that a person protected under section 2-728(a) and section 2-728(b) is legally entitled to recover by reason of a settlement unless the city has first consented to the settlement in writing. 
(f)  Claims between or among fellow officers, employees or volunteers are expressly excluded from the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-729. - Punitive damages. 
The city will not pay punitive damages that an officer, employee or volunteer of the city is legally obligated to pay except pursuant to the protection provided by section 2-728. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-730. - Medical payment claims. 
Medical payments claims (as described by Section 38.2-124(B) of the Code of Virginia) are not provided except to the persons to whom such protection is mandated by Section 22.1-194 of the Code of Virginia, and then only to the maximum amount set forth in Section 22.1-194 as the minimum limit for such coverage. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Secs. 2-731—2-735. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL LIABILITY SELF-INSURANCE FUND 
 
Sec. 2-736. - General liability claims defined. 
"General liability claims" means claims for bodily injury, death, other nonphysical injury, or property damage arising out of and in the course of the discharge of the official duties of an officer, employee or volunteer of the city, other than automobile liability claims. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-737. - Payments generally. 
The city will pay from the general liability self-insurance fund on behalf of officers, employees and volunteers of the city, such sums as they are legally obligated to pay arising out of general liability claims against such officers, employees and volunteers of the city, including costs and expenses for settlement, suit, or satisfaction of judgment. 
(1)  Such payments shall be made only to the extent that a commercial policy of insurance does not provide protection to pay the legal obligation in question. 
(2)  The defense of certain general liability claims may constitute evidence of the existence of a pattern or practice of conduct by the city in violation of the U.S. Constitution or other federal law, or condonation of such conduct by officers, employees or volunteers of the city. The determination of whether a particular claim falls within the description of the preceding sentence lies in the sole discretion of the city attorney. If the city attorney so determines, such claims may be excluded from the provisions hereof. 
(3)  Liability founded on intentional, willful or malicious misconduct by or at the direction of an officer, employee or volunteer of the city is expressly excluded from the provisions hereof. 
(4)  Claims between or among fellow officers, employees or volunteers are expressly excluded from the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-738. - Employee contributions; when. 
The city will pay from the general liability self-insurance fund all amounts required to be paid on behalf of the city for legal liability arising out of general liability claims against the city. The city shall not seek contribution from an officer, employee or volunteer except in a case in which liability is founded on intentional, willful or malicious misconduct by or at the direction of an officer, employee or volunteer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-739. - Punitive damages. 
The city will not pay punitive damages that an officer, employee or volunteer of the city is legally obligated to pay. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Secs. 2-740—2-744. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RULES APPLICABLE TO BOTH FUNDS 
 
Sec. 2-745. - Notice to risk manager. 
An officer, employee or volunteer against whom an automobile liability claim or a general liability claim is asserted shall forthwith notify the risk manager or the office of the city attorney in writing. 
(1)  The notice so given shall not be deemed to make such officer, employee or volunteer an agent of the claimant for purposes of section 10.04 of the Charter of the city or § 15.2-209, Code of Virginia, nor shall it be deemed to constitute a waiver by the City of Newport News of such charter or statutory rights to notice. 
(2)  The notice so given shall contain sufficient particulars to identify the officer, employee or volunteer and to determine the time, place and circumstances of the occurrence, including the names and addresses of persons injured and witnesses. 
(3)  An officer, employee or volunteer of the city who is served with legal process shall forthwith deliver it to the office of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94; Ord. No. 5812-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6975-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7046-14)  
Sec. 2-746. - Defense of claims. 
(a)  The city attorney will defend any suit arising out of an automobile liability claim or a general liability claim, subject to the conditions set forth in this article and in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.03 of the Charter of the city and section 2-209 of the City Code, except in cases in which a defense is provided pursuant to a commercial policy of insurance. 
(b)  The city will pay from the relevant self-insurance fund to retain private counsel on behalf of an officer, employee or volunteer only if by reason of conflict of interest city attorney is unable to provide a defense, or if the city attorney determines that affording a defense is otherwise impracticable. The city attorney may enter into contractual arrangements for such legal services upon such terms as to reasonable fees, reasonable services, and reasonable expenses as the city attorney may deem advisable. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-747. - Applicability to volunteers. 
The provisions of section 2-746 shall apply to volunteers only to the extent that protection is unavailable through a volunteer's private insurance or other insurance providing coverage or defense. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-748. - Protection of officers void; when. 
Failure or refusal to cooperate or assist in the defense or settlement of any claim, or in the conduct of suits and enforcing of rights to contribution, indemnity or subrogation, and which results in prejudice to the city, voids the protection provided herein to any officer, employee or volunteer, including the right to be provided a defense and the right to uninsured and underinsured motorist protection. To cooperate or assist includes giving the notices required by section 2-745, attending hearings and trials, assisting in securing and giving evidence, obtaining the attendance of witnesses, and the truthful reporting by the officer, employee or volunteer of all facts known to him or her about the occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-749. - Payment of money in settlement. 
The power of city council to authorize payment of money in settlement of legal disputes is hereby delegated as follows: 
(1)  The risk manager shall have discretion to authorize payments of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) or less in settlement of liability claims in cases in which there is no genuine dispute of liability. 
(2)  The city attorney shall have discretion to authorize payments of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or less in settlement of liability claims of any kind. 
(3)  The risk management committee shall have discretion to authorize the city attorney to authorize payments of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or less in settlement of liability claims of any kind. 
(4)  The city retains the right to make such investigation and settlement of claims and suits as it deems expedient, even in cases where private counsel has been retained. 
(5)  All monetary payments authorized as herein provided from the self-insurance funds will be made by the risk manager. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94; Ord. No. 5812-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6235-06; Ord. No. 7046-14)  
Sec. 2-750. - Article deemed declarative of existing legal obligations. 
The provisions of this article are considered to be and are hereby deemed to be declarative of existing legal obligations and practices of the city, except for the dollar limits contained in section 2-749. References to provisions of the Code of Virginia, the City Charter and the City Code shall be deemed to refer to said provisions as they exist at the time of the adoption hereof and as they may hereafter be amended from time to time. Nothing contained in this article is intended to be nor shall it be construed as a waiver or abrogation of such sovereign or governmental immunity as may be enjoyed by the city or by any officer, employee or volunteer thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94)  
Sec. 2-751. - Definitions generally. 
For purposes of this article: 
(1)  City means the City of Newport News and any entity which the city attorney is empowered to represent pursuant to Section 10.03 of the City Charter. 
(2)  Officer, employee or volunteer means any person who at the time of the occurrence was engaged in the performance of official duties on behalf of an entity which the city attorney is empowered to represent pursuant to Section 10.03 of the City Charter. For purposes of division 1 and division 3 of this article XXXVI, officer, employee or volunteer includes any person who at the time of the occurrence was engaged in the performance of official duties on behalf of a constitutional officer of the city, but only with respect to automobile liability claims described by section 2-725(1); no such person shall be deemed to be an officer, employee or volunteer with respect to automobile liability claims described by section 2-725(2) or for purposes of division 2 of this article XXXVI. 
(3)  Risk management committee means the committee authorized to be created by Resolution 1932 (adopted January 12, 1976). 
(4)  Commercial policy of insurance means a policy of insurance purchased by the city from an entity licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia to engage in the business of selling insurance. 
(Ord. No. 4671-94; Ord. No. 5676-01; Ord. No. 6621-09)  
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Use of automobile graveyard fence for advertising purposes, § 8-8; stopping vehicle on street for purpose of advertising, § 26-110; advertising prohibited on city parking lots, §§ 26-165, 26-185; obscene advertising or advertising obscene exhibitions, performances, etc., §§ 27-5, 27-6; posting advertising matter in or on parks, squares or beaches, § 29-26; signs advertising garage sales, § 37-2; advertising fire, bankrupt, insurance, etc., sales, §§ 37-17, 37-25; advertising matter on sidewalk benches, § 38-170; liability insurance for signs overhanging public right-of-way, § 38-23. 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertising in sight of public highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-351 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Where no specific penalty is provided for a violation of any provision of this article, such violation shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor and shall be punishable as such.  
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Aircraft. The word "aircraft" shall mean any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation or flight in the air. Such word shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Commercial handbill. The term "commercial handbill" shall mean any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meetings, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state or under any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Handbill. The word "handbill" shall mean any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill. 
Newspaper. The word "newspaper" shall mean any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States postal service in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law, and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill. The term "noncommercial handbill" shall mean any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definition of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
Private premises. The term "private premises" shall mean any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
(Ord. No. 178, § 2; Ord. No. 1754, § 1; Code 1961, § 20-16)  
Sec. 3-3. - Posting advertising matter on public buildings, utility poles or trees. 
(a)  No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, on or to any public building or structure or any utility pole or tree located on any public street, alley, sidewalk or other way, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(b)  Signs or posters erected or placed by the police department or the public works department, notifying the public that trees have been sprayed, are excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to signs, posters, advertisements or flags erected or placed by charitable organizations during the period of fund raising campaigns, nor to special traffic safety posters distributed by the Tidewater Automobile Association, Peninsula Division, in connection with the opening of the public schools, if in the public interest, the city manager issues a permit to such organizations or association and provided written consent is secured from the owner of any pole or tree involved. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 1; Ord. No. 178, § 15; Ord. No. 232, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 3-1, 20-28)  
Sec. 3-4. - Distribution of advertising matter on or in street, sidewalk or public parking lot. 
No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any commercial handbill or circular, card, booklet, placard or other advertising matter whatsoever, in or upon any street or sidewalk or upon any public parking lot; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the delivery of any such matter by the United States postal service or prohibit the distribution of newspapers. This section is not intended to prevent the lawful distribution of anything other than commercial and business advertising matter. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 2; Code 1961, § 3-2) 
Cross reference— General prohibition against advertising on parking lots, §§ 26-165, 26-185.  
Sec. 3-5. - Deposit of advertising matter on street, sidewalk or public parking lot. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or otherwise deposit any handbill, poster or advertising matter upon the streets and sidewalks of the city or on any public parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 3; Code 1961, § 3-3)  
Sec. 3-6. - Painting or marking advertisements, signs, etc., on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, print, stamp, stain or otherwise mark upon or build or construct, on the paved portion of any street or sidewalk in the city, any advertisement or sign, or any words, marks, figures or letters for any purpose whatsoever. Each day's failure to remove any such paint, mark, or sign, so unlawfully placed in or upon the sidewalks or streets, and failure to repair the same, after notice thereof, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to traffic signals placed or painted on the streets and sidewalks under the direction of city authority. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any sign painted, printed, stamped or otherwise marked upon the paved portion of any street or sidewalk in the city by the proper authorities of the armed forces of the United States denoting and indicating "off limits" premises. Such signs are expressly permitted, provided the form, size and lettering are approved by the city manager. The placing of any such signs shall be done by the authorities of the armed forces of the United States. 
(d)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 7; Code 1961, § 3-7; Ord. No. 4626-94)  
Sec. 3-7. - Posting advertisements on property of another. 
No person shall put up any show bill, notice or advertisement, or brand or mark any sign, letters or characters upon any wall, building or fence or other property of another person, without first obtaining the consent of such other person. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 4; Code 1961, § 3-4)  
Sec. 3-8. - Depositing handbills on vacant premises. 
No person shall throw or otherwise deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Ord. No. 178, § 11; Code 1961, § 20-24)  
Sec. 3-9. - Distributing handbills on occupied private premises. 
(a)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case inhabited private premises are not posted, as provided in subsection (b) below, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, except that mailboxes may not be so used, when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to the distribution of newspapers. 
(b)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested, by any person thereon, not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbill left upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 178, §§ 12, 13; Code 1961, §§ 20-25, 20-26)  
Sec. 3-10. - Dropping handbills from aircraft. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any handbill. 
(Ord. No. 178, § Code 1961, § 20—27) 
Cross reference— Dropping litter from aircraft, § 19-29.  
Sec. 3-11. - Operation of aircraft for commercial sound advertising purposes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any aircraft for commercial sound advertising purposes in or over the city. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 8; Ord. No. 120; Ord. No. 230; Code 1961, § 3-10)  
Sec. 3-12. - Use of loudspeakers, communication systems, etc., for advertising purposes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any loudspeaker or communication system, for advertising purposes, whereby the sound therefrom may be heard beyond the boundary lines of the property upon which such loudspeaker or communication system is located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, in any building, or upon any premises, or in any vehicles driven, drawn or parked along the streets of the city, any radio device, mechanical musical instrument, loudspeaker or communication system, whereby the sound therefrom is cast directly upon the streets of the city, where the same is operated for advertising purposes. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) above, the city manager, in the public interest, may grant permits to radio and television mobile studios, operated by authorized radio or television stations, to originate off the street broadcasts and, in connection therewith, to operate outdoor loudspeakers, provided the sound, music or voice volume may not be heard beyond two hundred (200) feet from the loudspeaker and provided further that the broadcasts shall not be operated within five hundred (500) feet of any school, church or hospital. The city manager, in the public interest, shall designate the hours for such broadcasts, but in no event shall they be permitted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 8; Ord. No. 120; Ord. No. 230; Code 1961, §§ 3-9, 3-11, 3-12)  
Sec. 3-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4626-94, adopted June 28, 1994, repealed § 3-13 which pertained to advertising cures for venereal disease, lost vitality, etc. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 3-14—3-23. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FALSE AND MISLEADING ADVERTISING 
 
Sec. 3-24. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  Any person who, with intent to sell or in anywise dispose of merchandise, securities, service, or anything offered by such person, directly or indirectly, to the public for sale or distribution, or with intent to increase the consumption thereof, or to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation relating thereto, or to acquire title thereto, or any interest therein, makes, publishes, disseminates, circulates or places before the public, or causes, directly or indirectly to be made, published, disseminated, circulated or placed before the public, in a newspaper or other publication, or in the form of a book, notice, handbill, poster, blueprint, map, bill, tag, label, circular, pamphlet or letter or in any other way, an advertisement of any sort regarding merchandise, securities, service, land, lot or anything so offered to the public, which advertisement contains any promise, assertion, representation or statement of fact which is untrue, deceptive or misleading, or uses any other method, device or practice which is fraudulent, deceptive or misleading to induce the public to enter into any obligation, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The words "untrue, deceptive and misleading," as used in this section, shall be construed as including: 
(1)  The advertising in any manner by any person of any goods, wares, or merchandise as a bankrupt stock, receiver's stock or trustee's stock, or any sale as an insurance, fire damaged, water-damaged or going-out-of business sale, or any other sale generally known as a distress sale, if such stock contains any goods, wares or merchandise put therein subsequent to the date of the purchase by such advertiser of such stock, and if such advertisement of any such stock fails to set forth the fact that such stock contains other goods, wares or merchandise put therein, subsequent to the date of the purchase by such advertiser of such stock, in type as large as the type used in any other part of such advertisement, including the caption of the same; and 
(2)  The use of any writing or document which appears to be, but is not in fact, a negotiable check, negotiable draft or other negotiable instrument, notwithstanding the fact that its nonnegotiability is indicated on the writing or document. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 6; Code 1961, § 3-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-216.  
Sec. 3-25. - Failure to indicate articles to be sold are "seconds" "irregulars," "secondhand," etc. 
Any person who in any manner knowingly advertises or offers for sale to the public any merchandise, goods, commodity or thing which is defective, blemished, secondhand or used, or which has been designed by the manufacturer thereof as "seconds," "irregulars," "imperfects," "not first class," or words of similar import, without clearly and unequivocally indicating in the advertisement or offer of the merchandise, goods, commodity or thing, or the articles, units or parts thereof, so advertised or offered for sale to the public is defective, blemished, secondhand or used or consists of "seconds," "irregulars," "imperfects" or "not first class," shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 6; Code 1961, § 3-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-218.  
Sec. 3-26. - Misuse of word "wholesale" or "wholesaler." 
Any person who in any manner in any advertisement or offer for sale to the public of any merchandise, goods, commodity or thing uses the words "wholesale" or "wholesaler" to represent or describe the nature of the business shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, unless such person is actually engaged in selling at wholesale the merchandise, goods, commodity or thing advertised or offered for sale. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-220.  
Sec. 3-27. - Misuse of words "government," "Navy," "Army," etc.; misrepresentation of source of articles as being government-connected. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, not an agency or instrumentality of the United States government, selling or offering for sale goods, wares or merchandise, to use or cause or permit to be used in the corporate or trade name, or description of the seller or the place where the goods, wares or merchandise are offered for sale, any of the following words or expressions, viz, "Army," "Navy," "Marine Corps," "Marines," "Coast Guard," "Government," "Post Exchange," "P-X," or "G.I." 
(b)  No person selling or offering for sale any article or merchandise shall in any manner represent, contrary, to fact, that the article was made for, or acquired directly or indirectly from, the United States government or its military or naval forces or any agency of the United States government, or that it has been disposed of by the United States government. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-222.  
Sec. 3-28. - Unauthorized use of name or picture of person. 
A person who knowingly uses, for advertising purposes, or for the purpose of trade, the name, portrait or picture of any person resident in the city, without having first obtained the written consent of such person, or if dead, of such person's surviving consort, or if none, the next of kin, or, if a minor, of such minor's parent or guardian, as well as that of such minor, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-216.1.  
Sec. 3-29. - Advertising former or comparative prices. 
(a)  No person shall in any manner knowingly advertise a former or comparative price of the merchandise, goods, commodity, service or thing advertised, unless such price is the current price at or above which substantial sales of merchandise substantially of the same kind, quality, quantity and with substantially the same service are made in the offeror's or advertiser's trade area or was the price at which the merchandise, etc., of substantially the same kind, quality, quantity and with substantially the same service was openly and actively offered for sale by the offeror or advertiser for a period of at least thirty (30) consecutive days within the four (4) months immediately next preceding the date of the advertisement, honestly, in good faith and not for the purpose of establishing a fictitious higher price on which a deceptive comparison might be based. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the advertisement of any former or comparative price, when the date on which substantial sales were made at the former or comparative price so advertised is clearly and conspicuously stated in the advertisement. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "substantial sales" shall mean a substantial aggregate volume of sales of such merchandise at or above the advertised comparative price in the advertiser's trade area. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of this section are punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 3-30. - Advertising with intent not to sell or not to sell at stated price or under stated conditions. 
(a)  Any person who in any manner advertises or offers for sale to the public any merchandise, goods, commodity, service or thing with intent not to sell, or with intent not to sell at the price or upon the terms advertised or offered, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In any prosecution or civil action under this section, the refusal by any person, or any employee, agent or servant of such person, to sell, or the refusal to sell at the price or upon the terms advertised or offered, any merchandise, goods, commodity, service or thing advertised or offered for sale to the public, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section; provided, that this subsection shall not apply when it is clearly stated in the advertisement or offer by which such merchandise, goods, commodity, service, or thing is advertised or offered for sale to the public, that the advertiser or offeror has a limited quantity or amount of such merchandise, goods, commodity, service or thing for sale, and the advertiser or offeror, at the time of such advertisement or offer, did in fact have at least such quantity or amount for sale. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-217.  
Sec. 3-31. - Advertising by motor vehicle dealers. 
Any person engaged in selling new or used automobiles or trucks to the public shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, if such person in any manner advertises or offers for sale to the public any such automobile or truck: 
(1)  Without stating in such advertisement or offer the make, year, model, body, style, manufacturer's series and number of cylinders of such automobile or truck. 
(2)  If reference is made to equipment, without itemizing in such advertisement or offer the optional equipment physically attached to the automobile or truck and stating whether each item is included in the price. 
(3)  If the manufacturer's suggested retail price is stated, without stating in such advertisement or offer whether such price is an F.O.B. factory or delivered price. 
(4)  If a price other than the manufacturer's price is stated, without stating in such advertisement or offer whether it is the cash, delivered price. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-221.  
Chapter 4 - AIR POLLUTION CONTROL (RESERVED)[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 13; smoking, Ch. 33.1; tax exemption for certified pollution control equipment, facilities and property, § 40-1. 
State Law reference— Air pollution control board, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1300 et seq.; local ordinances relating to air pollution, § 10.1-1321. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL (RESERVED)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2785-81, adopted June 22, 1981, repealed Ch. 4, Art. I, §§ 4-1—4-5, derived from Ord. No. 55, §§ 1, 5, 6, 10—12, 16; and Code 1961, §§ 33-1, 33-7, 33-11, 33-12, 33-14, 33-15, 33-18, 33-19. 
 
Secs. 4-1—4-5. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2785-81, adopted June 20, 1981, repealed Ch. 4, Art. II, relating to standards and regulations, §§ 4-6—4-14, derived from Ord. No. 55, §§ 2, 3, 6—9, 13—15; and Code 1961, §§ 33-1—33-6, 33-8—33-10, 33-16, 33-17. 
 
Secs. 4-6—4-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Article III, §§ 4-20—4-26, which pertained to smoking prohibited in certain public places, has been omitted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 3872-89, codified herein as Ch. 33.1. Former Art. III derived from Ord. No. 2446-78 and Ord. No. 2622-80. 
 
Secs. 4-20—4-26. - Reserved.  
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Watercraft, docks, piers and waterways, Ch. 11; obscene exhibitions and performances, § 27-4; parks, squares and recreational facilities, Ch. 29; admissions tax, § 40-230 et seq.; gunnery ranges and shooting areas, § 43-21 et seq.; archery ranges, § 43-45 et seq. 
State Law reference— Charitable gaming, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.15 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor and shall be punishable as such.  
Sec. 5-2. - Bond required for carnivals, circuses and trained animal shows. 
No person shall operate or exhibit any carnival, circus or trained animal show licensed pursuant to Chapter 23 of this Code without first posting, with the commissioner of the revenue, a surety bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which bond shall assure faithful compliance by the licensee with all applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Lic. Tax Ord. of 1977, § 47; Ord. No. 4626-94; Ord. No. 5518-00)  
Sec. 5-3. - Boxing and wrestling matches or exhibitions. 
(a)  Strictly amateur boxing matches or exhibitions, as defined in section 9-35 of the Code of Virginia,* shall be permitted within the confines of the city to which an admission fee may be charged; provided, however, that this subsection is subject to the provisions, exceptions and limitations set forth in sections 9-16 to 9-48 of the Code of Virginia. [2] 
(b)  Wrestling, boxing or sparring matches or exhibitions may be conducted in the city under the direction, management and control of the state wrestling and boxing commission by such clubs, corporations or associations as may be formed and licensed under the provisions of sections 9-27 and 9-28 of the Code of Virginia.* 
(Ord. No. 173, §§ 5, 6; Code 1961, §§ 25-8, 25-9) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that these provisions were repealed by Acts 1988, c. 765, § 6, effective January 1, 1989. 
 
Sec. 5-4. - Hours of operation for miniature golf courses. 
No miniature golf course or enclosure or ground for the game or play of what is commonly known as miniature golf conducted for profit or compensation shall be open and no game shall be played thereon or therein between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following morning. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 34; Code 1961, § 25-26)  
Sec. 5-5. - Hours of operation for poolrooms and bowling alleys. 
(a)  No billiard room or poolroom or parlor or bowling alley or place open to the public where pool, billiards or ten (10) pins or similar games are played shall be kept open for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following morning. No poolroom or parlor or any place open to the public where pool or billiards are played shall be kept open for business from 12:00 midnight Saturday until 5:00 a.m. Monday morning. No games shall be started after midnight, and all games started prior to midnight shall stop and all patrons shall be out of the place where such games are played not later than 12:30 a.m., except on Saturdays, when all games shall stop and all patrons shall be out of the place not later than midnight. 
(b)  Where a poolroom or bowling alley is located in a room in which other business is conducted, the provisions of this section shall apply only to that portion of the room in which such games are played. 
(c)  The closing hours provided in this section for bowling alleys may be extended by written permission of the chief of police, if such extension will not disturb the quiet and peacefulness of a residential neighborhood, result in a disruption of public morals, in the opinion of the chief of police, or disturb a church or Sunday school service. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to coin-operated miniature pool tables licensed by the city as coin-operated machines; provided, that such coin-operated miniature pool tables are not in any licensed or public pool or billiard saloon or room in the city. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 47; Ord. No. 248; Ord. No. 517; Code 1961, § 25-32) 
Cross reference— License tax for bowling alleys, § 23-38.  
Sec. 5-6. - Minors prohibited in poolrooms. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted to play pool or billiards at any licensed or public pool or billiard hall or room in the city or to loiter around such place. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a licensed or public pool or billiard hall or room in the city to permit any person under eighteen (18) years of age to play pool or billiards in such hall or room or to loiter therein. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to coin-operated miniature pool tables licensed by the city as coin-operated machines; provide, that such coin-operated miniature pool tables are not in any licensed or public pool or billiard hall or room in the city. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 46; Ord. No. 517; Code 1961, § 25-33) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate presence of minors in places of amusement, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.  
Sec. 5-7. - Regulations governing family billiard centers. 
(a)  A "family billiard center" is an establishment or business whereon billiards, amusement games or games of like nature are played and where such establishment or business meets the following criteria: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverage is sold, kept or consumed on the premises. 
(2)  All provisions of the city's zoning ordinances are met. 
(3)  The premises is illuminated by a minimum interior lighting throughout at a level of forty (40) footcandles. 
(4)  The premises has a window or windows open to view from a public street, or a way open to the public, having a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet of transparent glass, which window or windows shall not be permanently covered or otherwise obstructed. 
(5)  The premises has at least ten (10) regulation size billiard tables (minimum measurements of four (4) feet by eight (8) feet). 
(6)  The premises closes for business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day; provided that on Sunday the establishment or business shall not be open until 1:00 p.m. 
(b)  When the chief of police finds that an establishment or business meets the criteria set out in subsection (a) above, a certificate of approval shall be issued by the chief of police. The chief of police may revoke such certificate based upon factual information that the family billiard center fails to meet the criteria set forth in this section. Prior to such revocation, the chief of police shall give the proprietor of the business written notice of the intention to revoke such certificate. The proprietor shall have ten (10) days from receipt of such notice to make written application to the chief of police for a hearing on such revocation. 
(c)  A family billiard center for which a certificate of approval has been issued under this section shall not be subject to the provisions of sections 5-5 and 5-6; provided, that upon revocation of such certificate, the provisions of such sections shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1751; Code 1961, § 25-33.1)  
Sec. 5-8. - Regulations for commercial table top recreation centers. 
(a)  A "commercial table top recreation center" is defined as any establishment where table football, table tennis, shuffleboard or any like game or device is displayed for public patronage and where three (3) or more tables for such activity are used. 
(b)  No person shall operate a commercial table top recreation center, unless a certificate of approval has been issued therefor by the chief of police and unless the following provisions are met: 
(1)  No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, kept or consumed on the premises, including the parking area belonging to and being a part of the commercial table top recreation center. 
(2)  All provisions of the city's zoning ordinances are met. 
(3)  No person under the age of fifteen (15) years shall be allowed to patronize the center's game tables. 
(4)  The center shall be closed for business between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.; provided, that on Sunday the center shall not be open until 1:00 p.m. 
(5)  The center shall be illuminated throughout its interior at a level of forty (40) footcandles. 
(6)  The center shall have and provide permanently maintained off-street parking for personnel and patrons at the rate of one and one-half (1½) parking spaces for each game table or machine displayed, whether in use or not. 
Cross reference— Off-street parking requirements of zoning ordinance, § 45-3001 et seq. 
(7)  The center shall have a window or windows open to view from a public street, or a way open to the public, having a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of transparent glass area, which window or windows shall not be permanently covered or otherwise obstructed. 
(c)  When the chief of police finds that a commercial table top recreation center meets the criteria of this section, a certificate of approval shall be issued by the chief of police. The chief of police may revoke the certificate based upon factual information that the commercial center fails to meet the criteria set forth in this section. Prior to such revocation, the chief of police shall give the proprietor of the center written notice of the intention to revoke such certificate. The proprietor shall have ten (10) days from receipt of such notice to make written application to the chief of police for a hearing on such revocation. 
(d)  Paragraphs (5), (6) and (7) of subsection (b) of this section shall not be required of any center operating lawfully prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and paragraphs (3) and (7) of subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to a center that is operating legally for a charitable or religious purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1758; Ord. No. 2259, § 2; Code 1961, § 25-33.2)  
Sec. 5-9. - Permit for amusement houses, fun houses, kiddie houses, etc. 
No person shall conduct or operate any houses commonly known as haunted houses, fun houses, kiddie houses, amusement houses or other like houses or places in the city, without having first obtained a permit therefor from the chief of police. If upon investigation, the chief of police is satisfied that the location of the house or place will not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this city, and that there has been compliance with other applicable provisions of this Code, the chief of police shall, upon the payment of a fee of three dollars ($3.00), issue such permit. Any permit issued hereunder shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance, which shall be reflected on the permit. The permit shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1712, § 1; Code 1961, § 25-56.1)  
Secs. 5-10—5-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC DANCE HALLS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1, adopted Sept. 10, 2013, effective Nov. 1, 2013, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Art. II was entitled "Public Dance Halls and Teenage Dance Clubs," and derived from Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 1065; Ord. No. 1075; Ord. No. 1820; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961; Ord. No. 4626-94; Ord. No. 4651-94. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate public dance halls, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.3 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-20. - Definition. 
Public dance hall. The term "public dance hall" means any place or event open to the general public where dancing is permitted; however, a restaurant located in the city licensed under Section 4.1-210 of the Code of Virginia to serve food and beverages having a dance floor with an area not exceeding ten (10) percent of the total floor area of the establishment shall not be considered a public dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 1065, § 1; Ord. No. 1075, § 1; Ord. No. 1820, § 1; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961, §§ 13-6.1, 13-6.2; Ord. No. 4626-94; Ord. No. 4651-94; Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1)  
Sec. 5-21. - Penalty for violation of article. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961, §§ 13-5, 13-11; Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1) 
State Law reference— Penalty for violation of ordinance regulating dance halls not to exceed that prescribed for Class 3 misdemeanor, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.3.  
Sec. 5-22. - Right of entry. 
The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this article, and for that purpose, any law enforcement officer of the city may enter a public dance hall for which a permit has been granted under this article at any time during the operation of the public dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961, § 13-21; Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1)  
Sec. 5-23. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to events sponsored by a charitable organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, governmental entity, religious organization or school. Nothing in this section exempts any charitable organization, governmental entity, religious organization, or school from the provisions of any other city or state law or regulation. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to a nightclub or non-conforming adult use, as defined in chapter 45 of this Code, operating in accordance with city and state law. 
(Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1)  
Sec. 5-24. - Police protection at public dance halls. 
One (1) police officer shall be furnished at public dance halls, at the expense of the operator, for every one hundred (100) patrons in attendance at such dance hall. A minimum of two (2) police officers shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961, § 13-22; Ord. No. 4626-94; Ord. No. 4651-94; Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1) 
Cross reference— Police, Ch. 32.  
Sec. 5-25. - Posting of business license; admissions records. 
The operator of a public dance hall shall: 
(1)  Have his business license present and available for inspection at the place of the public dance hall at all times during the operation of the public dance hall. 
(2)  Maintain an accurate count of the number of admittees to the public dance hall. 
(3)  Maintain an accurate daily record of the total admissions collected at the public dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1)  
Secs. 5-26—5-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 5-40. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a public dance hall in the city without a valid permit authorizing the operation of such dance hall. Such permit shall be present and available for inspection at the place of the public dance hall at all times during the operation of the dance hall. Any law enforcement officer, including a special conservator of the peace, may require patrons present at an unpermitted public dance hall to immediately disperse. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or lease a premises to any third party for the purpose of conducting or operating a public dance hall unless the third party has obtained the permit required under this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise set forth in this subsection, no permit for a public dance hall shall be issued for a period of more than three (3) consecutive days, the dates of which shall be specified on the face of the permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any applicant who owns the property upon which a public dance hall is to be operated or who is a tenant under a lease providing for the continuous and exclusive control and occupancy of such property may apply for a permit that may be valid for one (1) year. Rights exercised under the provisions of a one-year permit are not transferable to any third party. 
(Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961, § 13-11; Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority to require permit for operation of dance hall, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.3.  
Sec. 5-41. - Filing and contents of application. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit required by this article shall submit an application to the chief of police or his designee. To obtain a permit to operate a public dance hall the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Such application shall contain, or have appended to it, the following information: 
(1)  The street address and business name, if applicable, where the proposed public dance hall is to be located. 
(2)  The name and residence address of any person who is or who will be an owner, operator or manager of such public dance hall. 
(3)  If the applicant for the public dance hall permit in question is a corporation or other entity, then such application shall set forth the names and residence addresses of the officers and directors of such corporation or other entity, or if there are no such officers or directors, the names and addresses of all persons having an ownership interest therein of twenty (20) percent or more. 
(4)  If food or beverages are offered, a statement as to the type of food or drink to be offered and a description of the facilities to be utilized for the preparation and service thereof. The applicant will be required to obtain all required permits from the health department or other regulatory agency and provide proof thereof. 
(5)  A written certification by the zoning administrator that the proposed use of the property is not prohibited and that there is sufficient vehicular parking provided on the property to meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(6)  A written certification by the building official that the proposed structure or property is in compliance with the requirements of the uniform statewide building code for the proposed use. 
(7)  Certification from the commissioner of the revenue that required business license(s) has or have been obtained. 
(8)  The proposed dates of and hours of operation of the public dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961, § 13-7; Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1)  
Sec. 5-42. - Grant or denial; conditions. 
(a)  The application shall be granted if it contains all of the information and certifications required by section 5-41, and: 
(1)  There has been no misrepresentation or misstatement concerning, or omission of, any fact, material or otherwise, in the application, whether such misrepresentation, misstatement or omission is intentional or inadvertent; 
(2)  None of the individuals whose names are required to be set forth in the application have been convicted of any violation of this article within the last twelve (12) months; 
(3)  None of the individuals whose names are required to be set forth in the application have had a permit for a public dance hall revoked pursuant to section 5-44 of this Code within the last twelve (12) months; and 
(4)  The public dance hall is not located in a residential dwelling; including but not limited to single-family, duplex or multi-family dwellings. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall grant or deny the application within fourteen (14) days after receipt of a complete application; provided, however, that in the event the chief of police is unable to determine within such time whether or not the application complies with the requirements for granting a permit on the basis of the information provided, he may so notify the applicant and require the applicant to provide such additional information as may be necessary. 
(c)  The chief of police may attach such conditions to a permit as are reasonably related to the preservation and protection of the public peace and order. 
(d)  A permit shall not be issued to a person, nor shall a permit be deemed to authorize the operation of a public dance hall by any person, other than the applicant or applicants whose names are set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 1075, § 1; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961, §§ 13-6.1, 13-8; Ord. No. 2610-79; Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1)  
Sec. 5-43. - Procuring by fraud or false representations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to procure or attempt to procure, by fraud or false representations of facts, a permit for the operation of a public dance hall in the city. 
(Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961, § 13-9; Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1)  
Sec. 5-44. - Conditions and restrictions; revocation; violations. 
(a)  Every permit granted under this article shall be subject to the conditions and restrictions stated in the permit and to all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. Notwithstanding any privileges conferred by the permit, any imminent threat to public safety may be immediately abated by a law enforcement officer, including a special conservator of the peace. 
(b)  The granting of a permit required by this section shall not eliminate any requirement for any other permit(s) or license(s) which may be prescribed by any other federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations, or compliance with any other applicable federal, state or local statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall supersede the provisions of the city zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Upon the submission by the chief of police of a written complaint to the city manager, setting forth facts which, if proven, would constitute grounds for taking any of the actions set forth in subsection (f), the city manager shall promptly notify the permit holder, or his designee for receiving notice, of such complaint and schedule a hearing thereon. Such grounds shall be limited to those set forth in subsection (e). The notice shall be personally delivered or sent by certified or regular mail to the person designated to receive such notices and shall: 
(1)  Set forth the facts upon which the complaint is based or, alternatively, make reference to the complaint and contain a copy of such complaint as an attachment; 
(2)  State the actions which may be taken by the city manager pursuant to subsection (f) or, alternatively, make reference to this section and contain a copy thereof as an attachment; 
(3)  State the date, time and place of such hearing, which shall not be held less than seven (7) days after the date the notice is mailed or delivered; and 
(4)  State that the applicant is entitled to be present at the hearing, in person or by a representative, and to present evidence on his behalf. 
(e)  In cases involving one-year permits, the city manager may, after notice and hearing, take such action as is allowed pursuant to subsection (f) if he finds, by a preponderance of the evidence presented at such hearing, that: 
(1)  The establishment is a public nuisance; 
(2)  That the establishment is frequented by patrons engaged in disorderly, violent, indecent or unlawful conduct; 
(3)  The operation of the establishment is in violation of any of the provisions of the Virginia Fire Prevention Code, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, the city zoning ordinance, public health regulations or any provision of this article; 
(4)  The establishment or its operation is not in strict compliance with the terms of the permit; 
(5)  The application contains any misrepresentation, misstatement or omission, intentional or inadvertent, concerning any information required to be provided in, or in connection with, the application; or 
(6)  Controlled substances were sold or illegally consumed during the permitted event; or 
(7)  Patrons, employees or persons under the influence of illegal drugs or alcohol were allowed entrance into the permitted event. 
(f)  If the city manager finds, by a preponderance of the evidence presented at such hearing, that one (1) or more of the grounds alleged in the complaint have been proven, he may: 
(1)  Revoke the permit; 
(2)  Suspend the permit; 
(3)  Attach one (1) or more additional conditions or restrictions to the permit; or 
(4)  Require the posting of a bond, in an amount and form satisfactory to the city manager, securing to the city the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of the permit and compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. 
The city manager shall render a decision within ten (10) days of the date of the hearing and shall promptly notify the permit holder, or the person designated to receive notices, of the action taken by the city manager. Such notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail. 
(g)  Any permit holder aggrieved by a decision of the city manager may appeal such action to the circuit court within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision; provided, however, that the commencement of such appeal shall not stay the action of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 2149; Code 1961, § 13-10; Ord. No. 6997-13, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for revocation of dance hall permit, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.3.  
Secs. 5-45, 5-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOVIE ARCADES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-47. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the definitions ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Film or videotape viewing device. The term "film or videotape viewing device" means any electrical or mechanical device in a business, which projects or displays any film videotape or reproduction into a viewing area obscured by a curtain, door, wall or other enclosure which is designed for occupancy by no more than five (5) persons, and is not visible from a continuous main aisle. 
(2)  Movie arcade. The term "movie arcade" means any business wherein is operated a "film or videotape viewing device." 
(3)  Viewing area. The term "viewing area" means the area where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film or video viewing device. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83)  
Sec. 5-48. - Penalty for violation of article. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11(a)(1).  
Sec. 5-49. - Illegal behavior. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a movie arcade to permit, in such movie arcade, any illegal conduct by any person. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83)  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 5-50. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, a movie arcade in the city unless such person has an unrevoked permit issued pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83)  
Sec. 5-51. - Filing and contents of application. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit for the operation of a movie arcade in the city shall make written application therefor to the chief of police, who shall approve or disapprove such application. Such application shall contain the following information about the applicant, any person financially interested in the business to be licensed, any authorized local agents, and any managing employee of the business to be licensed: 
(1)  Full legal name and any name by which the person is or has been known. 
(2)  Date and place or birth. 
(3)  Driver's license if available. 
(4)  Fingerprints. 
(5)  A current photograph. 
(6)  Any prior felony or misdemeanor conviction except minor traffic violations. 
(7)  Home and business address and telephone number. 
(8)  Any revocation or suspension of a license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(9)  The names of any local authorized agent who will be managing or operating the amusement at the indicated location and proof of their authority to act on behalf of the corporation. 
(10)  When an agent or other authorized representative is making application on behalf of any prospective licensee, the name, address and telephone number of a local agent authorized to conduct daily business shall be required in addition to authority to act on behalf of the prospective licensee. 
(11)  An applicant from out of state shall be required to provide the name of a statutory agent. 
(12)  Except for corporations listed on the major stock exchanges, the names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business. 
(13)  Such information requested by the chief of police to determine the truth of the information required to be set forth in the application as set forth above. 
(14)  Any change in the information required to be provided above concerning the local authorized agent or the applicant shall be reported to the chief of police within ten (10) days of the change. All other information must be updated at the time of the renewal of the licensee. 
(15)  All persons regulated pursuant to this chapter must comply with this section within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the article [December 1, 1983]. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83)  
Sec. 5-52. - Procuring by fraud or false representations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to procure, by fraud or false representations of facts, a permit for the operation of a movie arcade in the city. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83)  
Sec. 5-53. - Transfer. 
A permit for the operation of a movie arcade shall not be transferable without the approval of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83)  
Sec. 5-54. - Revocation. 
Upon the violation of any of the provisions of this article, the chief of police shall have the right, in addition to any other remedies allowed by law, to revoke any permit granted under this division, after due hearing by him or his designate and upon not less than five (5) days' notice in writing to the permittee, such notice to be sent by registered letter or certified mail to the address given by the permittee when applying for such permit. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83)  
Sec. 5-55. - Viewing areas. 
All viewing areas in movie arcades must be visible from a continuous main aisle and must not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall or other enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83)  
Sec. 5-56. - Compliance deadline. 
All persons regulated pursuant to this article must comply with said article within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the article [December 31, 1983]. 
(Ord. No. 3094-83)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Domestic animals prohibited in food establishments, § 17-33; regulations for horses and ponies in parks or squares or on beaches, § 29-40; hunting on property surrounding Diascund Creek and Little Creek reservoirs, § 29-58. 
State Law reference— Comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq.; general authority of city to regulate animals and fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.94:1; hunting near schools and parks, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-527; estrays, Code of Virginia, § 55-202 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Violations of chapter generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in other sections of this chapter, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 6-1.1. - Definitions generally. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them: 
Abandon means to desert, forsake, or absolutely give up an animal without having secured another owner or custodian for the animal or by failing to provide the elements of basic care as set forth in section 6-62 for a period of five (5) consecutive days. 
Adequate care or care means the responsible practice of good animal husbandry, handling, production, management, confinement, feeding, watering, protection, shelter, transportation, treatment, and, when necessary, euthanasia, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size and type of the animal and the provision of veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering or impairment of health. 
Adequate exercise or exercise means the opportunity for the animal to move sufficiently to maintain normal muscle tone and mass for the age, species, size, and condition of the animal. 
Adequate feed means access to and the provision of food that is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain each animal in good health; is accessible to each animal; is prepared so as to permit ease of consumption for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal; is provided in a clean and sanitary manner; is placed so as to minimize contamination by excrement and pests; and is provided at suitable intervals for the species, age, and condition of the animal, but at least once daily, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species. 
Adequate shelter means provision of and access to shelter that is suitable for the species, age, condition, size, and type of each animal; provides adequate space for each animal; is safe and protects each animal from injury, rain, sleet, snow, hail, direct sunlight, the adverse effects of heat or cold, physical suffering, and impairment of health; is properly lighted; is properly cleaned; enables each animal to be clean and dry, except when detrimental to the species; during hot weather, is properly shaded and does not readily conduct heat; during cold weather, has a windbreak at its entrance and provides a quantity of bedding material consisting of hay, cedar shavings, or the equivalent that is sufficient to protect the animal from cold and promote the retention of body heat; and for dogs and cats, provides a solid surface, resting platform, pad, floormat, or similar device that is large enough for the animal to lie on in a normal manner and can be maintained in a sanitary manner. Under this chapter, shelters whose wire, grid, or slat floors: (i) permit the animals' feet to pass through the openings; (ii) sag under the animals' weight; or (iii) otherwise do not protect the animals' feet or toes from injury are not adequate shelter. The unattended tethering of an animal shall not constitute the provision of adequate shelter (a) unless the animal is safe from predators and well suited and well equipped to tolerate its environment; (b) during the effective period for a hurricane warning or tropical storm warning issued for the area by the National Weather Service; or (c)(1) during a heat advisory issued by a local or state authority, (2) when the actual or effective outdoor temperature is eighty-five (85) degrees Fahrenheit or higher or thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit or lower, or (3) during the effective period for a severe weather warning issued for the area by the National Weather Service, including a winter storm, tornado, or severe thunderstorm warning, unless an animal control officer, having inspected an animal's individual circumstances in clause (c)(1), (2), or (3), has determined the animal to be safe from predators and well suited and well equipped to tolerate its environment. 
Adequate space means sufficient space to allow each animal to: (i) easily stand, sit, lie, turn about, and make all other normal body movements in a comfortable, normal position for the animal; and (ii) interact safely with other animals in the enclosure. When an animal is tethered, "adequate space" means that the tether to which the animal is attached permits the above actions and is appropriate to the age and size of the animal; is attached to the animal by a properly applied collar, halter, or harness configured so as to protect the animal from injury and prevent the animal or tether from becoming entangled with other objects or animals, or from extending over an object or edge that could result in the strangulation or injury of the animal; is at least fifteen (15) feet in length or four (4) times the length of the animal, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, whichever is greater, except when the animal is being walked on a leash or is attached by a tether to a lead line or when an animal control officer, having inspected an animal's individual circumstances, has determined that in such an individual case, a tether of at least ten (10) feet or three (3) times the length of the animal, but shorter than fifteen (15) feet or four (4) times the length of the animal, makes the animal more safe, more suited, and better equipped to tolerate its environment than a longer tether; does not, by its material, size, or weight or any other characteristic, cause injury or pain to the animal; does not weigh more than one-tenth of the animal's body weight; and does not have weights or other heavy objects attached to it. The walking of an animal on a leash by its owner shall not constitute the tethering of the animal for the purpose of this definition. When freedom of movement would endanger the animal, temporarily and appropriately restricting movement of the animal according to professionally accepted standards for the species is considered provision of adequate space. The provisions of this definition that relate to tethering shall not apply to agricultural animals. 
Adequate water means provision of and access to clean, fresh, potable water of a drinkable temperature that is provided in a suitable manner, in sufficient volume, and at suitable intervals appropriate for the weather and temperature, to maintain normal hydration for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species; and is provided in clean, durable receptacles that are accessible to each animal and are placed so as to minimize contamination of the water by excrement and pests or an alternative source of hydration consistent with generally accepted husbandry practices. 
Adoption means the transfer of ownership of a dog or a cat, or any other companion animal, from a releasing agency to an individual. 
Agricultural animals means all livestock and poultry. 
Ambient temperature means the temperature surrounding the animal. 
Animal means any nonhuman vertebrate species except fish. For the purposes of section 6-58, animal means any nonhuman vertebrate species including fish except those fish captured and killed or disposed of in a reasonable and customary manner. 
Animal control officer means a person appointed as an animal control officer or deputy animal control officer. 
Aquaculture facility means any land, structure, or other appurtenance that is used for aquaculture, including any laboratory, hatchery, pond, raceway, pen, cage, incubator, or other equipment used in aquaculture. 
Boarding establishment means a place or establishment other than a public or private animal shelter where companion animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed, and watered in exchange for a fee. 
Collar means a well-fitted device, appropriate to the age and size of the animal, attached to the animal's neck in such a way as to prevent trauma or injury to the animal. 
Commercial dog breeder means any person who, during any twelve-month period, maintains thirty (30) or more adult female dogs for the primary purpose of the sale of their offspring as companion animals. 
Companion animal means any domestic or feral dog, domestic or feral cat, nonhuman primate, guinea pig, hamster, rabbit not raised for human food or fiber, exotic or native animal, reptile, exotic or native bird or any feral animal or any animal under the care, custody, or ownership of a person or any animal that is bought, sold, traded or bartered by any person. Agricultural animals, game species, or any animals regulated under federal law as research animals shall not be considered companion animals for the purposes of this chapter. 
Consumer means any natural person purchasing an animal from a dealer or pet shop or hiring the services of a boarding establishment. The term "consumer" shall not include a business or corporation engaged in sales or services. 
Dealer means any person who in the regular course of business for compensation or profit buys, sells, transfers, exchanges, or barters companion animals. The following shall not be considered dealers: 
(i)  Any person who transports companion animals in the regular course of business as a common carrier; or 
(ii)  Any person whose primary purpose is to find permanent adoptive homes for companion animals. 
Direct and immediate threat means any clear and imminent danger to an animal's health, safety or life. 
Dump means to knowingly desert, forsake, or absolutely give up without having secured another owner or custodian any dog, cat, or other companion animal in any pubic place including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another. 
Emergency veterinary treatment means veterinary treatment to stabilize a life-threatening condition, alleviate suffering, prevent further disease transmission, or prevent further disease progression. 
Enclosure means a structure used to house or restrict animals from running at large. 
Euthanasia means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death or by a method that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent that causes painless loss of consciousness, and death during such loss of consciousness. 
Exhibitor means any person who has animals for or on public display, excluding an exhibitor licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
Facility means a building or portion thereof as designed by the State Veterinarian, other than a private residential dwelling and its surrounding grounds, that is used to contain a primary enclosure or enclosures in which animals are housed or kept. 
Farming activity means consistent with standard animal husbandry practices, the raising, management, and use of agricultural animals to provide food, fiber, or transportation and the breeding, exhibition, lawful recreational use, marketing, transportation, and slaughter of agricultural animals pursuant to such purposes. 
Foster care provider means a person who provides care or rehabilitation for companion animals through an affiliation with a public or private animal shelter, home-based rescue, releasing agency, or other animal welfare organization. 
Foster home means a private residential dwelling and its surrounding grounds, or any facility other than a public or private animal shelter, at which site through an affiliation with a public or private animal shelter, home-based rescue, releasing agency, or other animal welfare organization or rehabilitation is provided for companion animals. 
Groomer means any person who, for a fee, cleans, trims, brushes, makes neat, manicures, or treats any animal for external parasites. 
Home-based rescue means an animal welfare organization that takes custody of companion animals for the purpose of facilitating adoption and houses such companion animals in a foster home or a system of foster homes. 
Humane means any action taken in consideration of and with the intent to provide for the animals' health and well-being. 
Humane investigator means a person who has been appointed by a circuit court as a humane investigator. 
Humane society means any incorporated, nonprofit organization that is organized for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals and promoting humane care and treatment or adoptions of animals. 
Immediate control means restrained either by leash, cord or chain, not exceeding eight (8) feet in length or under voice control of the owner. 
Incorporated means organized and maintained as a legal entity in the Commonwealth. 
Kennel means any establishment in which five (5) or more canines, felines, or hybrids of either are kept for the purpose of breeding, hunting, training, renting, buying, boarding, selling, or showing. 
Law enforcement officer means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of a police department or sheriff's office that is part of or administered by the Commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof and who is responsible for the prevention and detection of crime and the enforcement of the penal, traffic or highway laws of the Commonwealth. Part-time employees are compensated officers who are not full-time employees as defined by the employing police department of sheriff's office. 
Livestock includes all domestic or domesticated: bovine animals; equine animals; ovine animals; porcine animals; cervidae animals; capradae animals; animals of the genus Lama; ratites; fish or shellfish in aquaculture facilities; enclosed domesticated rabbits or hares raised for human food or fiber; or any other individual animal specifically raised for food or fiber, except companion animals. 
Ordinance means any law, rule, regulation or ordinance adopted by the governing body of any locality. 
Other officer includes all other persons employed or elected by the people of Virginia, or by any locality, whose duty it is to preserve the peace, to make arrests, or to enforce the law. 
Owner means any person who: 
(i)  Has a right of property in an animal; 
(ii)  Keeps or harbors an animal; 
(iii)  Has an animal in his care; or 
(iv)  Acts as a custodian of an animal. 
Pet shop means an establishment where companion animals are bought, sold, exchanged, or offered for sale or exchange to the general public. 
Poultry includes all domestic fowl and game birds raised in captivity. 
Primary enclosure means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, cage, compartment, or hutch. For tethered animals, the term includes the shelter and the area within reach of the tether. 
Private animal shelter means a facility that is used to house or contain animals and that is owned or operated by an incorporated, nonprofit, and nongovernmental entity, including a humane society, animal welfare organization, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or any other organization operating for the purpose of finding permanent adoptive homes for animals. 
Properly cleaned means that carcasses, debris, food waste, and excrement are removed from the primary enclosure with sufficient frequency to minimize the animals' contact with the above-mentioned contaminants; the primary enclosure is sanitized with sufficient frequency to minimize odors and the hazards of disease; and the primary enclosure is cleaned so as to prevent the animals confined therein from being directly or indirectly sprayed with the stream of water, or directly or indirectly exposed to hazardous chemicals or disinfectants. 
Properly lighted (when referring to a facility) means sufficient illumination to permit routine inspections, maintenance, cleaning, and housekeeping of the facility, and observation of the animals; to provide regular diurnal lighting cycles of either natural or artificial light, uniformly diffused throughout the facility; and to promote the well-being of the animals. 
Properly lighted (when referring to a private residential dwelling and its surrounding grounds) means sufficient illumination to permit routine maintenance and cleaning thereof, and observation of the companion animals; and to provide regular diurnal lighting cycles of either natural or artificial light to promote the well-being of the animals. 
Public animal shelter means a facility operated by the Commonwealth, or any locality, for the purpose of impounding or sheltering seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, or surrendered animals or a facility operated for the same purpose under a contract with any locality. 
Releasing agency means: 
(i)  A public animal shelter; or 
(ii)  A private animal shelter, humane society, animal welfare organization, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other similar entity or home-based rescue that releases companion animals for adoption. 
Research facility means any place, laboratory, or institution licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture at which scientific tests, experiments, or investigations involving the use of living animals are carried out, conducted, or attempted. 
Sanitize means to make physically clean and to remove and destroy, to a practical minimum, agents injurious to health. 
Service animal means a dog trained to accompany its owner with a disability for the purpose of carrying items, retrieving objects, pulling a wheelchair or other such activities of service or support. 
Shelter means both public animal shelters and private animal shelters as defined herein. 
Sore means, when referring to an equine, that an irritating or blistering agent has been applied, internally or externally, by a person to any limb or foot of an equine; any burn, cut, or laceration that has been inflicted by a person to any limb or foot of an equine; any tack, nail, screw, or chemical agent that has been injected by a person into or used by a person on any limb or foot of an equine; any other substance or device that has been used by a person on any limb or foot of an equine; or a person has engaged in a practice involving an equine, and as a result of such application, infliction, use, or practice, such equine suffers, or can reasonably be expected to suffer, physical pain or distress, inflammation, or lameness when walking, trotting, or otherwise moving, except that such term does not include such an application, infliction, injection, use or practice in connection with the therapeutic treatment of an equine by or under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, nothing shall preclude the shoeing, use of pads, and use of action devices as permitted by the Code of Federal Regulations (9 C.F.R. Part 11.2.) 
Sterilize or sterilization means a surgical or chemical procedure performed by a licensed veterinarian that renders a dog or cat permanently incapable of reproducing. 
Treasurer includes the treasurer and his assistants of each county or city or other officer designated by law to collect taxes in such county or city. 
Treatment or adequate treatment means the responsible handling or transportation of animals in the person's ownership, custody or charge, appropriate for the age, species, condition, size and type of the animal. 
Vertebrate means any animal that has a backbone or spinal column. 
Veterinary treatment means treatment by or on the order of a duly licensed veterinarian. 
Weaned means that an animal is capable of and physiologically accustomed to ingestion of solid food or food customary for the adult of the species and has ingested such food, without nursing, for a period of at least five (5) days. 
Wild animal means any animal except those defined as companion animals, livestock or poultry. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16; Ord. No. 7565-19, § 1; Ord. No. 7631-20, § 1)  
Sec. 6-2. - Location and maintenance of poultry and animal yards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain in the city any poultry or animal yard within one hundred seventy-five (175) feet of any buildings used for residential purposes, or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any church or school building; provided, however, that the person maintaining such a yard may do so within one hundred seventy-five (175) feet of such person's own personal residence, and further provided, that this subsection shall not apply to the keeping of pigeons. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the requirements contained in subsection (a) above, keeping up to six (6) chickens shall be allowed under the following conditions: 
(1)  Chickens shall be kept and raised for domestic purposes and no commercial activity such as selling eggs or selling chickens for meat shall be allowed; 
(2)  No roosters shall be allowed; 
(3)  Chickens shall be provided with a covered, predator-proof shelter that is thoroughly ventilated, provides sun, shade, protection from the elements and is designed to be easily accessed and cleaned; 
(4)  All pens, coops or cages shall be located in the rear yard only; 
(5)  Pens, coops or cages shall be situated at least twenty-five (25) feet from adjoining property lines; 
(6)  Pens, coops or cages shall be kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times. No person shall store, stockpile or permit any accumulation of chicken litter and waste in any manner whatsoever that, due to odor, attraction of flies or other pests, or for any other reason diminishes the rights of adjacent property owners to enjoy reasonable use of their property; 
(7)  All feed for the chickens shall be kept in a secure container or location to prevent the attraction of rodents and other animals; and 
(8)  Any person desiring to keep chickens pursuant to this subsection shall obtain a permit to do so from the Department of Codes Compliance for a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, the term "poultry or animal yard" shall include every yard, pasture, enclosure, shed or structure used to house: 
(1)  Live fowl, including in the term "fowl" chickens, ducks, geese and other poultry, except as provided otherwise herein; or 
(2)  One (1) or more of the following animals: Cattle, horses, sheep, goats or other domestic animals, other than cats or dogs. 
(d)  Every person maintaining a poultry or animal yard shall keep the same clean and sanitary, and free from all refuse, decaying food and excrement. 
(e)  Every poultry or animal yard, except when located in an area zoned agricultural under any existing zoning ordinance, shall be adequately enclosed and free from any rodents. The presence of any rodent in any poultry or animal yard shall be prima facie evidence that such yard is maintained in violation of this section. 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, Ch. 45. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize the keeping of animals of any kind at any place, irrespective of distances from any buildings, when the keeping of such animals is prohibited by any other ordinance. Conversely, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the keeping of animals of any kind at any place, irrespective of distances from any buildings, when the keeping of such animals is permitted by any other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1443, § 1; Ord. No. 1587, § 1; Code 1961, § 4-3; Ord. No. 7185-15)  
Sec. 6-3. - Maintenance of cow stables. 
The maintenance of cow stables shall be prohibited within city limits. 
(Ord. No. 60, §§ 2, 13; Code 1961, § 4-2; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-4. - Removal of manure at stables. 
(a)  The word "premises," wherever used in this section, shall be taken to mean the land used in connection with any stable. 
(b)  The premises shall be properly cleaned and at all times the premises shall be kept in such condition as not to become a nuisance by the breeding of flies or a menace to public health, and the escape of any disagreeable odor therefrom shall be prevented, so far as possible. 
(c)  All manure shall be removed from all stockyards as often as may be necessary to prevent their becoming a nuisance by the breeding of flies, or becoming otherwise a menace to public health. 
(Ord. No. 60, §§ 9, 13; Code 1961, § 4-10; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-5 which pertained to the maintenance of premises where fowl are kept and derived from Ord. 60 § 5; and the 1961 Code, § 4-6.  
Sec. 6-6. - Livestock running at large. 
(a)  No person shall permit any livestock owned or controlled by such person to run at large within the city limits. 
(b)  Any livestock found running at large in violation of this section shall be taken up by the animal control officer or other officer and impounded at a place provided by the city for such purpose. Such animal shall be held for a period of five (5) days, during which time the owner may redeem the animal, by proving ownership and paying the costs incurred by the city in impounding and caring for such animal. Such costs shall be established by the city manager, but in no event shall they be less than those established by subsection 6-25(b)(2) for impounded dogs. Such costs shall be paid to the person in charge of the place of impoundment and then turned over to the city treasurer who shall report the same to the auditor at the end of the month. 
(c)  If an animal is not redeemed by its owner in accord with subsection (b) above, it shall be sold to the highest bidder, after five (5) days' notice of sale posted at the courthouse door and two (2) other conspicuous places in the city. The proceeds of such sale shall be paid to the city treasurer and reported to the auditor at the end of the month. 
(d)  Neither the impoundment or the sale of any animal under this section shall relieve any person from the payment of any fine imposed for allowing the animal to run at large in the city. 
(Ord. No. 60, §§ 1, 8; Code 1961, §§ 4-1, 4-8; Ord. No. 7299-16) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prohibit and impound animals running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544.  
Sec. 6-7. - Poultry running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of poultry to permit, fail to prevent or allow them to range, fly or run at large on or in the streets, parks, squares or other public property of the city. 
(b)  It shall be deemed a trespass on the part of the owner of the poultry to permit or allow them to range or run on the lands or property of another, without such other's consent or permission, and the owner thereof shall be liable for any damage done by such chickens or other fowl while on the property of another. 
(Ord. No. 60, § 4; Ord. No. 172, § 18; Code 1961, §§ 4-4, 4-5, 26-23; Ord. No. 7299-16) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prohibit the running at large of fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544.  
Sec. 6-8. - Keeping of wild animals or unconfined pigeons regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any wild animal within the city limits, except as herein provided. It shall also be unlawful to maintain pigeons within the city limits which are at large and not under the control of the owner. 
(b)  Wild animals may be kept in proper enclosures for public display as an accessory use to a public or private park, animal shelter, or nature related educational facility; provided, however, such park or facility is owned and operated by a governmental body or a nonprofit organization; and further provided, that such park or facility occupies a land area of not less than two (2.0) acres. 
(c)  Wild animals may be kept in the city by any person licensed as a wildlife rehabilitator by the Commonwealth of Virginia. No such wildlife rehabilitator shall keep more than four (4) such animals, unless such animals are from the same litter, at any one (1) time; nor shall any such animal be kept by a wildlife rehabilitator for more than one hundred twenty (120) days or until the animal is returned to health sufficient for its return to the wild, whichever is shorter. 
(Ord. No. 1443, § 1; Ord. No. 1587, § 1; Code 1961, § 4-3; Ord. No. 3328-85; Ord. No. 5019-97)  
Sec. 6-9. - Noisy animals or birds. 
Any person who shall own, allow, permit, keep or harbor, on or about any premises, any animal(s) or bird(s) which creates sound (i) that is plainly audible across property boundaries or inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house or apartment of another person between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; (ii) that is plainly audible inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house or apartment of another person at least once a minute for ten (10) consecutive minutes; (iii) that is plainly audible at fifty (50) or more feet from the animal(s) or bird(s) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; or (iv) that is plainly audible at fifty (50) or more feet from the animal(s) or bird(s) at least once a minute for ten (10) consecutive minutes, shall be deemed to have caused or permitted a public nuisance, which is unlawful, and shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor for each occurrence the nuisance may continue, after due notice has been given to remove, correct or abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 7367-17)  
Sec. 6-10. - Disposal of dead animals generally. 
The owner or occupant of the premises upon which any dead animal is found shall bury or otherwise dispose of it so that the same shall not become offensive to the inhabitants of any part of the city or of the suburbs thereof, within eight (8) hours after the death of any such animal; provided, however, that the period between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the next succeeding day shall not be taken into consideration in computing such time. During the whole period from the death of any such animal to the time of the disposal of its body, while in any street, lane or public alley, it shall be, by the owner thereof, kept entirely covered or otherwise hidden from view. No such dead animal shall be dragged or carried through or along any street or alley, except when so carried as to prevent the exposure to view of the same or any part thereof. In the event the owner of a deceased animal fails to dispose of it, as required by this subsection, the city manager or the manager's designee shall have authority to dispose of such carcass at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 60, §§ 10, 11, 13; Ord. No. 125, §§ 14, 17; Code 1961, §§ 4-11, 4-12; Ord. No. 7299-16) 
State Law reference— Allowing dead animal to remain unburied, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-323; responsibility of owner, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-510.  
Sec. 6-11. - Depositing dead animal on street or sidewalk or allowing it to remain unburied. 
If any person casts or otherwise deposits any dead animal into a road, alley, or sidewalk, or knowingly permits any dead animal to remain unburied upon his or her property, when offensive to the public, such person shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 12; Ord. No. 1381, § 1; Code 1961, § 4-13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-323.  
Sec. 6-12. - Sterilization of dogs and cats obtained from any animal shelter. 
(a)  Every person residing in the city receiving a dog or cat placed to or with such person by any animal shelter located in the city or receiving funding of any kind from the city shall, within thirty (30) days of receiving such dog or cat, or in the case of a dog or cat less than six (6) months old, within thirty (30) days of the earliest date determined by the placing shelter as safe for sterilization of such dog or cat, have such dog or cat spayed or neutered by a duly licensed veterinarian. Each day such animal is allowed to go unsterilized shall be considered a separate offense. Second and subsequent violations shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor; and the animal shelter utilized by the city may additionally revoke the placement and take possession of the unsterilized dog or cat. 
(b)  Every animal shelter located in the city or receiving funding of any kind from the city shall furnish every person residing in the city with whom a dog or cat is placed, at the time of placement, a form approved by the animal control officer, which shall contain or recite the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person with whom the dog or cat is placed. 
(2)  The name and address of the shelter making the placement. 
(3)  A description sufficient for identification of the dog or cat placed. 
(4)  The date of placement. 
(5)  In the case of a female dog or cat less than six (6) months old or male dog or cat less than ten (10) months old, the earliest date upon which sterilization is determined to be safe for such dog or cat. 
(6)  A recitation of the responsibility under this section of the person receiving placement for the sterilization of the dog or cat. 
(7)  A recitation of the responsibility of the person receiving placement of reporting the sterilization of the dog or cat. 
(8)  An acknowledgment that the placed dog or cat has been spayed or neutered, along with a signature and date line for signature by a duly licensed veterinarian who performs the sterilization procedure. 
(9)  The name and address of the public animal shelter. 
Any placement facility not complying with this subsection shall be subject to a fine of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each violation. 
(c)  Every person residing in the city receiving a dog or cat placed with such person by an animal shelter located in the city or receiving funding of any kind from the city shall have the form provided to him pursuant to subsection (b) above signed and dated by the fully licensed veterinarian neutering or spaying such dog or cat and shall file such form with the pound being utilized by the city, within thirty-seven (37) days of the date he received the animal, or in the case of a female dog or cat less than six (6) months old or a male dog or cat less than ten (10) months old, within thirty-seven (37) days of the date designated upon which sterilization may first be safely performed. Any person violating this subsection shall be subject to a fine of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 3619-87; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-13. - Animal traps. 
(a)  The animal services division shall maintain an inventory of various-sized live animal traps, which may be made available to the citizens of Newport News. The director of parks, recreation and tourism shall set a deposit and usage fee for the use of any animal trap. 
(b)  When a trap is destroyed, lost or damaged, those persons responsible for the trap shall reimburse the city for the full cost of the repair or replacement of the trap. 
(c)  Prior to utilizing any trap set for the capture of any wild or fur bearing animal, the person acquiring such trap must first present any required permit issued by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries pursuant to Virginia Code, § 29-300.1, as amended. 
(d)  No person may interfere with the lawful use of an animal trap. Tampering shall include, releasing any animal contained therein, damaging or otherwise preventing proper operation of the trap, and removal/relocation of the trap. This subsection will not apply to the animal control officer, the director of public health or his designee, any city employee dealing with a trap placed upon city property without the consent of the city, or a state or federal game warden. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-14. - Keeping and display of reptiles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any reptile or type of reptile not native to the Commonwealth of Virginia, to keep the reptile in any manner that will permit its escape or to knowingly permit the reptile to run at large. 
(b)  The owner of any reptile found running at large shall pay a fee to cover the actual cost in locating and capturing or otherwise disposing of the reptile. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or wear any live snake or reptile in public unless such snake or reptile is securely placed in an acceptable animal carrier so as to prevent escape or injury to the snake or reptile, another animal or human being. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Secs. 6-15—6-21. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS GENERALLY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Regulations for dogs in recreational facilities, § 29-50. 
State Law reference— Comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-22. - Definitions. 
At large. "At large" shall mean any dog or cat which is roaming, running or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian, and not under its owner's or custodian's immediate control. 
Immediate control. "Immediate control" shall mean restrained either by a leash, cord or chain, not exceeding eight (8) feet in length or under voice control of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 2; Ord. No. 759, § 1; Code 1961, § 4-15; Ord. No. 4070-90; Ord. No. 4112-90; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6020-04, § 1)  
Sec. 6-23. - Animal control officer and animal shelter generally. 
(a)  The city manager shall employ an officer to be known as the "animal control officer", who shall have the power to enforce this chapter and other ordinances and state laws for the protection of domestic animals. Within the limits of the appropriations therefor, the city manager may also employ one (1) or more deputy animal control officers to assist the animal control officer in animal inspection activities and in animal law enforcement. 
(b)  A public animal shelter shall be established and maintained in the city in accordance with the requirements deemed necessary by the city council and Code of Virginia 1950, § 3.2-6546, as amended, and of a type approved by the state veterinarian. The city need not own such public animal shelter but may contract for its establishment with a private group or in conjunction with one (1) or more other local political subdivisions of the state. 
(c)  The public animal shelter provided for in this section shall be accessible to the public at reasonable hours during the week. 
(d)  The city manager may, subject to the approval of city council, contract with a society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or some other qualified entity to provide animal control and/or public animal shelter services. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 8; Code 1961, § 4-16; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6020-04, § 1; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-24. - Dogs and cats deemed personal property; rights relating thereto. 
All dogs and cats shall be deemed personal property and may be the subject of larceny and malicious or unlawful trespass, and the owners thereof may maintain any action for the killing of any such dogs or cats, or injury thereto, or unlawful detention or use thereof, as in the case of other personal property. The owner of any dog or cat which is injured or killed contrary to the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be entitled to recover the value thereof or the damage done thereto in an appropriate action at law from such person. The animal control officer or other officer finding a stolen dog or cat, or a dog or cat held or detained contrary to law, shall have authority to seize and hold such dog or cat pending action before the general district court or other court. If no such action is instituted within seven (7) days, the animal control officer or other officer shall deliver the dog or cat to its owner. The presence of a dog or cat on the premises of a person other than its legal owner shall raise no presumption of theft against the owner of such premises and the animal control officer or other officer may take such dog in charge and notify its legal owner to remove the dog or cat. The legal owner of the dog or cat shall pay a reasonable charge for the keep of such dog or cat while in the possession of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6020-04, § 1; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-25. - Running at large; disposal of impounded animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or other person in charge or control of any dog to permit or allow such animal to be at large within the city limits or to negligently fail to prevent such animal from being at large within the city limits. If a dog attacks a person or another companion animal while at large, the owner shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Section 29-50 requires dogs be leashed in public parks. The owner or custodian of any dog found running at large in a pack shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per dog so found. For the purpose of this section, a dog shall be deemed to be running at large in a pack if it is running at large in the company of one (1) or more other dogs that are also running at large. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any cat owned or kept by him or her to run or go at large within the city unless said cat is spayed or neutered; this provision shall not apply to kittens who are less than six (6) months of age. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or other officer who may find any dog that is running at large or any cat as identified in paragraph (b) above that is running at large to forthwith take said animal into custody. If the owner or keeper is known, or if such animal has upon it the name and address of the owner, and the owner thereof can be reasonably ascertained, then such owner shall be notified within forty-eight (48) hours after such impound. 
(d)  The animal control officer or other officer may also impound any other stray or feral animal that he finds. If a dog or cat is found without the license required by this article, it shall be presumed that the dog or cat is stray or feral, unless the animal control officer or other officer has reason to know that it is not stray or feral. 
(e)  The animal shall be impounded in the public animal shelter, or other appropriate holding facility for a period of at least five (5) days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the animal is initially confined in the facility. An animal bearing a collar, tag, license, tattoo or other form of identification shall be held for an additional five (5) days. The owner may, upon proof of ownership redeem the animal immediately. 
(f)  Any person claiming to be the owner of an impounded animal shall provide adequate proof of ownership prior to redeeming the animal. Proof of ownership shall consist of a current city license, veterinary documentation, bills of sale or other adequate documentation. It shall be unlawful for any person to present false evidence of ownership in order to redeem or gain possession of an impounded animal. Violations of this subsection shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(g)  If at the end of such period as described in subsection (e) such animal shall not have been redeemed, it may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state or a licensed federal dealer, or any approved animal rescue agency or organization. No provision herein shall prohibit the destruction of a critically injured or critically ill animal for humane purposes. 
(h)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate euthanasia or disposal by the methods listed in subdivisions 1 through 5 of subsection D of Section 3.2-6546 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, an animal that has been released by the animal's rightful owner after the rightful owner has read and signed a statement: 
(1)  Surrendering all property rights in such animal; 
(2)  Stating that no other person has a right of property in the animal; and 
(3)  Acknowledging that the animal may be immediately euthanized or disposed of in accordance with subdivisions 1 through 5 of subsection D of Section 3.2-6546 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(i)  This section does not apply to law enforcement animals engaged in the performance of their duties or to animals confined within an area of public property designated by the director of parks, recreation and tourism or private property designated by the owner for having animals off leash. 
(Ord. No. 760, § 1; Code 1961, § 4-15.2; Ord. No. 2549-79, § 1; Ord. No. 2577-79; Ord. No. 3208-84; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6020-04, § 1; Ord. No. 6204-06; Ord. No. 7299-16; Ord. No. 7575-19)  
Sec. 6-25.1. - Removal of dog excrement required; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or having custody or control of a dog to fail to remove immediately the dog's excrement from any public or private property other than property owned or occupied by the person owning, keeping or having custody or control of said dog. Any person who shall violate this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The provisions of this section shall not apply to service animals where the owner is unable to remove the excrement due to their disability or to dogs used by police officers for law enforcement or tracking purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3549-87; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-26, which pertained to dogs killing or injuring livestock or poultry, and derived from Ord. No. 6020-04, § 1.  
Sec. 6-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-27, which pertained to the disposal of dead dogs and cats, and derived from Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6020-04, § 1.  
Sec. 6-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4073-90, adopted July 10, 1990, repealed § 6-28, which pertained to vicious or dangerous animals and derived from Ord. No. 2521-79.  
Sec. 6-29. - Female dogs in heat. 
No person shall permit any female dog in heat to go at large. Any such dog shall be confined in accordance with section 6-62 to a building, pen, fenced area or other structure built to prevent the escape of such dog and prevent the intrusion of any other dog. It shall be unlawful to tether a female dog in heat. Each day such animal is allowed to go at large or remain improperly confined as described above, shall be considered a separate offense. Second and subsequent violations shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2521-79; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-30, which pertained to guilt of owner, etc., as affecting disposition of dogs; failure of owner, etc., to know dog is vicious, and derived from Ord. No. 2521-79.  
Sec. 6-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-31, which pertained to kennels for more than 50 dogs, and derived from Ord. No. 3955-89.  
Sec. 6-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-32, which pertained to fees, and derived from Ord. No. 6102-05.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 23. 
 
Sec. 6-33. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog or cat four (4) months old or older in this city, unless such dog or cat is licensed under the provisions of this division. Each day such animal is allowed to go unlicensed shall be considered a separate offense. Second and subsequent violations shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 1; Code 1961, § 4-21; Ord. No. 3955-89; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-34. - Application; applicant must be city resident. 
(a)  Any person may obtain a dog or cat license by making oral or written application to the city treasurer, accompanied by the license tax and evidence of vaccination required by this division. The city treasurer shall only have authority to license dogs and cats of resident owners or custodians who reside within the limits of the city and may require information to this effect from any applicant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in or present any false evidence with an application submitted under this section, in order to secure a dog or cat license to which such person is not entitled. 
(Ord. No. 601, § 5; Code 1961, § 4-21.5; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1)  
Sec. 6-35. - Tax imposed (other than kennel operations). 
(a)  A license tax is hereby imposed on dogs and cats required to be licensed under this division in the following amounts: 
(1)  Unsexed dogs and cats (neutered or spayed) .....$5.00 
(2)  Male or female dogs and cats .....$10.00 
(3)  Dangerous or vicious dogs .....$50.00 
(b)  No license tax shall be levied under this section on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog or aid dog for the blind or visually impaired, a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing impaired person or that is trained and serves as a service dog for a mobility impaired person. 
(c)  A written veterinarian's certification showing that a dog or cat has been spayed or neutered shall be presented at the time of purchase of the license when the lower tax is applied for. Said certificate shall show the species, breed, name, age, and color of said animal and name, address, and signature of a licensed veterinarian. If such certification is not so presented, the dog or cat shall be taxed the fee levied on unneutered and unspayed dogs or cats. 
(d)  Any person giving false information in the procurement of a dog, cat or kennel license shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 1; Ord. No. 2246; Code 1961, § 4-21.2; Ord. No. 2548-79, § 1; Ord. No. 3955-89; Ord. No. 4071-90; Ord. No. 4081-90; Ord. No. 5878-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-35.1. - Concealing a dog or cat. 
It shall be a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to conceal or harbor any dog or cat on which any required license tax has not been paid. 
(Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 1722-16; Ord. No. 7299-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-35.1, which pertained to the tax imposed on kennel operations and dogs kept or housed at kennel operations, and derived from Ord. No. 3955-89; and Ord. No. 5059-97. Said Ord. No. 7299-16 directed the renumbering of § 6-35.2 as § 6-35.1.  
Sec. 6-36. - When tax due and payable. 
The license tax imposed on dogs and cats by sections 6-35 and 6-35.1 shall be due and payable as follows: 
(1)  On or before January first and not later than January 31 of each year, the owner of any dog four (4) months or older shall pay such tax. 
(2)  If a dog shall become four (4) months of age or come into the possession of any person between January 1 and November 1 of any year, the license tax for the current calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner. 
(3)  If a dog shall become four (4) months of age or come into the possession of any person between October 31 and December 31 of any year, the license tax for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner, and such license shall protect such dog from the date of purchase. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 2; Code 1961, § 4-21.3; Ord. No. 3955-89; Ord. No. 5877-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1)  
Sec. 6-37. - Failure to pay tax when due. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to pay the dog or cat license tax when the same is due. Payment of the license tax subsequent to a summons to appear before a court for failure to do so within the time required shall not operate to relieve such owner from the penalties provided for such failure. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 3; Code 1961, § 4-21.4; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1)  
Sec. 6-38. - Disposition of taxes; records and reports of city treasurer. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall deposit all money collected for dog and cat license taxes in a separate account from which the city may use this money annually for any and all of the purposes identified in Section 3.1-796.101 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  The treasurer shall enter, in a dog and cat license sales record, the date of the sale of dog and cat tags, the names and addresses of persons to whom sold, and the serial number and shall keep an account of the amount of the license tax paid. The treasurer shall keep a copy of such dog and cat license sales record in numerical order and at the close of the fiscal year file an annual report of such sales with the city manager and the city auditor; and the city auditor shall audit such records, accounts and unsold dog and cat license tags and authorize the treasurer to destroy unsold tags. 
(Ord. No. 2550-79; Ord. No. 3955-89; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1)  
Sec. 6-39. - Issuance, composition and contents of license. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a proper application and the prescribed license fee, the city treasurer shall issue a dog or cat license; provided, that no such license shall be issued for any dog or cat, unless there is presented to the city treasurer evidence satisfactory to the treasurer that the owner has complied with section 6-88 with respect to such dog or cat. 
(b)  Each dog or cat license shall consist of a license tax receipt and a city approved tag. Such receipt shall have recorded thereon the amount of the tax paid, the name and address of the owner or custodian of the dog, the date of payment, the year for which the license is issued, the serial number of the tag, and whether the license is for a male, female or unsexed dog or cat. The tag issued hereunder shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the name of the city and the calendar year for which issued and shall bear a serial number. 
(Ord. No. 610, §§ 5—7; Code 1961, §§ 4-21.5—4-21.7; Ord. No. 3955-89; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-40. - Preservation and exhibition of license receipt; tag to be worn by dog or cat; exceptions. 
(a)  Dog and cat license receipts shall be carefully preserved by the licensees and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by the animal control officer or other officer. Dog and cat license tags shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such dog or cat. The owner of the dog or cat may remove the collar and license tag required by this section when the dog or cat is engaged in lawful hunting; when the dog or cat is competing in a dog or cat show; when the dog or cat has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar and the owner possesses a written veterinarian's diagnoses of the condition; when the dog or cat is confined; or when the dog or cat is under the immediate control of its owner. 
(b)  Any dog or cat not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed, and in any proceedings under this division, the burden of proof of the fact that such dog or cat has been licensed or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time shall be on the owner of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 610, § 4; Code 1961, § 4-21.9; Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6020-04, § 1; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-41. - Removal of tag. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner of custodian, to remove a legally acquired license tag from a dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1)  
Sec. 6-42. - Duplicate tags. 
If a dog or cat license tag shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the city treasurer for a duplicate tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian, before the treasurer, that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, the treasurer shall issue a duplicate license tag, which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog or cat. The treasurer shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag for any dog or cat shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
(Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1)  
Sec. 6-43. - Substations and agents for collection of tax and issuance of license. 
The city treasurer may establish substations in convenient locations in the city and appoint agents for the collection of dog and cat license taxes and issuance of dog and cat licenses. 
(Ord. No. 5862-02, § 1)  
Sec. 6-44. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 6-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-45, which pertained to dangerous or vicious dogs to be confined, and derived from Ord. No. 4072-90.  
Sec. 6-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-46, which pertained to dangerous or vicious dogs off the premises, and derived from Ord. No. 4072-90.  
Sec. 6-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-47, which pertained to applicability to adult dogs only, and derived from Ord. No. 4072-90.  
Sec. 6-48. - Certain acts prohibited. 
No person shall own, harbor, care for, keep or utilize any dog for the purpose of dog fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purposes of causing or encouraging said dog to make unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals. 
(Ord. No. 4072-90)  
Sec. 6-49. - Sales of dangerous or vicious dogs prohibited. 
No person shall possess with intent to sell, or offer for sale, sell, breed, or buy or attempt to buy within the city any dangerous or vicious dog. 
(Ord. No. 4072-90)  
Sec. 6-50. - Dangerous or vicious dog determination hearing; appeal; license; notification of change in status. 
(a)  As used in this section, 
(1)  Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal or killed a companion animal; however, when a dog attacks or bites another dog, the attacking or biting dog shall not be deemed dangerous: 
(i)  If no serious physical injury as determined by a licensed veterinarian has occurred to the other dog as a result of the attack or bite; 
(ii)  Both dogs are owned by the same person; 
(iii)  If such attack occurs on the property of the attacking or biting dog's owner or custodian; or 
(iv)  For other good cause as determined by the court. No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking or inflicting injury on another dog while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. 
No dog that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person shall be found to be a dangerous dog if the court determines, based on the totality of the evidence before it, that the dog is not dangerous or a threat to the community. 
(2)  Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has: 
(i)  Killed a person; 
(ii)  Inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or 
(iii)  Continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(b)  Any animal control officer or law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. If a law enforcement officer successfully makes an application for the issuance of a summons, he shall contact the animal control officer and inform him of the location of the dog and the relevant facts pertaining to his belief that the dog is dangerous or vicious. The animal control officer or owner shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer determines that the owner or custodian can confine the animal in a manner that protects the public safety, he may permit the owner or custodian to confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this section. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.2-6562 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(c)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor is the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed prohibited. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was: 
(1)  Committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; 
(2)  Committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or 
(3)  Provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. 
No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. No animal which, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, or its owner or owner's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
(d)  The owner of any animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten (10) days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the animal control officer for a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The animal control officer shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this subdivision shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. 
(e)  All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence: 
(1)  Of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable; 
(2)  That the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed; and 
(3)  That the owner has liability insurance coverage, to the value of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), that covers animal bites. 
In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that: 
(i)  Their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property; 
(ii)  The animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation; and 
(iii)  That the animal has been neutered or spayed. 
(f)  While on the property of its owner, an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure designed to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with shelter from the elements of nature. When off its owner's property, an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be under the direct supervision by an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older and kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(g)  If the owner of an animal, found by a court to be a dangerous dog, is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(h)  After an animal has been found by a court to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, notify the animal control officer if the animal: 
(1)  Is loose or unconfined; 
(2)  Bites a person or attacks another animal; 
(3)  Is sold, given away, or dies; or 
(4)  Has been moved to a different address. 
(i)  The owner of any animal, which has been found by a court to be a dangerous dog, who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(j)  All fees collected pursuant to this section, less the costs incurred by the city in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by this section, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under Section 3.2-6557 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 4072-90; Ord. No. 4972-96; Ord. No. 6020-04, § 1; Ord. No. 7299-16) 
State Law reference— State law reference: Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 3.2-6540, et seq.  
Sec. 6-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-51, which pertained to seizure and impoundment of dangerous or vicious dogs, and derived from Ord. No. 4072-90; and Ord. No. 6020-04, § 1.  
Sec. 6-52. - Penalty. 
(a)  Whoever violates Division 3 of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any dangerous or vicious dog which attacks a human being or another domestic animal may be ordered destroyed when, in the court's judgment, such dangerous or vicious dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals. 
(c)  Any person found guilty of violating this division shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary expenses for identification or certification of the breed of the animal or boarding and veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of any dog for the protection of the public, and such other expenses as may be required for the destruction of any such dog. 
(Ord. No. 4072-90)  
DIVISION 4. - FREE-ROAMING CATS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, amended the title of div. 4 by changing it from feral cats to free-roaming cats. 
 
Sec. 6-53. - Unlawful care of free-roaming cats; exception. 
(a)  For purposes of this section the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  The acronym "ACO" shall mean the Newport News Animal Control Officer or designee. 
(2)  The term "colony manager" shall mean a resident of Newport News, Virginia who has been designated as a free-roaming cat colony manager by the ACO pursuant to the provisions of this division, and who accepts responsibility for expenses associated with providing care to free-roaming cats. 
(3)  The term "colony caregiver" shall mean a person who has been designated by the colony manager to assist with the care and feeding of free-roaming cats in a managed colony. 
(4)  The term "cat" shall mean a feline over the age of sixteen (16) weeks. 
(5)  The term "free-roaming cat" shall mean any cat that is not or has never been owned by a person, or was formerly owned and has been abandoned. 
(6)  The term "free-roaming cat colony" shall mean a group of free-roaming cats, whether managed or unmanaged, who generally live outdoors and have little or no human contact. 
(7)  The term "managed colony" shall mean a colony of free-roaming cats that is registered with the ACO and is maintained by the colony manager using trap, neuter, return methodology. 
(8)  The term "kitten" shall mean a feline sixteen (16) weeks of age or under. 
(9)  The term "trap/neuter/return (TNR)" shall mean a humane and non-lethal approach to free-roaming cat population control. It is a comprehensive management plan where healthy free-roaming cats are sterilized and vaccinated, then returned to their habitat and provided with long-term care. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to provide food, water, and care to free-roaming cats, unless such person has been designated as, and is currently appointed, a colony manager by the ACO. 
(c)  City residents desiring to provide food, water and care to free-roaming cats in Newport News shall annually apply to the ACO to be designated as a colony manager, and every person so designated shall comply with the provisions of this section throughout their term of appointment. There is no fee associated with applying for this designation. 
(d)  Every colony manager shall comply with the following conditions with respect to free-roaming cats or free-roaming cat colonies for which they are a designated colony manager: 
(1)  Provide documentation of: 
(i)  Permission by the owner(s), or their agent(s), of property on which free-roaming cats are located to enter upon their property to provide such care; and 
(ii)  A good faith estimate of the number of free-roaming cats and kittens residing in the colony at the time a colony manager's designation is applied for; and 
(iii)  Notification to adjacent property owners of the existence of the colony and colony manager's contact information. 
(2)  Colony managers shall abide by standard guidelines devised by the ACO regarding the provision of food, water, shelter and veterinary care for cats within the managed colony. 
(3)  Assume personal responsibility and make arrangements for feeding and providing emergency veterinarian treatment as needed to their free-roaming cat or free-roaming cat colony on a regular basis throughout the year, including weekends, holidays, and at such times as the colony manager is unable, for any reason, to provide such care. 
(4)  Provide regular and frequent trapping of not less than two (2) times per month, through the use of humane box traps of free-roaming cats and kittens over the age of eight (8) weeks who have not been spayed or neutered, vaccinated, and marked as provided herein. The trapped free-roaming cats shall be spayed or neutered, vaccinated for rabies, and marked by having their ears tipped or notched by a veterinarian professionally licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. It is also recommended, but not required, that all trapped free-roaming cats be vaccinated by the veterinarian for distemper. 
(5)  Make every attempt to remove kittens for domestication and placement with a person or foster who is willing to be the owner of same. 
(6)  Maintain, on an individual cat basis, documentation of all vaccinations, inoculations, medical procedures and sustenance provided to free-roaming cats under their care, and upon request, to provide such documentation to the ACO. 
(7)  Authorize veterinarians attending to free-roaming cats or kittens under their care to release copies of all medical records with regard to such free-roaming cats to the ACO. 
(8)  Maintain protection for the free-roaming cats and kittens sufficient to shield them from adverse weather conditions, and maintain the surrounding area free and clear of garbage, trash and debris. 
(9)  Refuse to accept the introduction of new cats to an existing registered free-roaming cat colony without permission of the ACO. 
(10)  Insure that a free-roaming cat colony for which a person has been designated a colony manager does not exceed twenty (20) cats. 
(e)  In the event a colony manager is found by the ACO to have violated any provision of this chapter, or failed to comply with any of its provisions, the ACO may require the colony manager to cease, desist and rectify their violation, or terminate their designation as a colony manager, depending on the severity of the violation. If abatement of the violation is appropriate, the colony manager shall be issued a notice of non-compliance specifying that the colony manager has five (5) working days within which to provide a written response to the ACO specifying the steps to be taken by the colony manager to come into compliance with the provisions of this chapter within a thirty-day period. The ACO may grant one (1) thirty-day extension if the colony manager demonstrates a good faith effort to comply, and the ACO feels that compliance may be achieved within the thirty-day extension period. The colony manager shall make an action report to the ACO at the end of each thirty-day period or when compliance is achieved, whichever occurs first. If the ACO determines that the violation is sufficiently serious to warrant termination of the colony manager designation, a notice of such termination shall be provided to that person. 
(f)  If compliance with the provisions of this chapter is not achieved as provided in subsection (d) of this section, or if termination as a colony manager is otherwise warranted, the ACO shall cause a notice of termination to be either personally delivered to the colony manager or mailed to the colony manager by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address provided by the colony manager on their current application for such designation. Compliance with this subsection by personal delivery shall be effective upon delivery; compliance with this section by mailing shall be effective on the day first delivered to the recipient's address. Termination of designation as a colony manager by the ACO may be appealed to the city manager's office by such person by providing notice of the appeal in writing stating the basis for the appeal within ten (10) calendar days of delivery of the notice of termination as required in this subsection. 
(g)  For purposes of this chapter, and except as provided in this section, a person who has been designated as a colony manager shall not be considered an owner or a custodian of the free-roaming cats for which they are providing care. 
(h)  The provisions of this section do not grant to any colony manager any authority to enter upon the property of others without the property owner's permission. 
(i)  In the event the ACO becomes aware, either through a complaint or personal observation, of a free-roaming cat or free-roaming cat colony, he/she shall make a reasonable attempt to determine if a suspected free-roaming cat or free-roaming cat colony has a colony manager who will comply with this section. If, after making such an attempt, no colony manager is identified or is willing to comply with the provisions of this section, the ACO shall take all necessary action to obtain permission from the property owner(s) to enter upon the property to capture and remove the free-roaming cats, and to dispose of the captured cats in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the disposal of impounded animals. 
(Ord. No. 6107-05, § 1)  
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL WELFARE ORDINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Injuring, molesting, etc., birds and animals in parks, § 29-39. 
State Law reference— Virginia Animal Welfare Act, Code of Virginia, § 31-796.68 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-54. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Newport News Animal Welfare Ordinance and may be so cited.  
Sec. 6-55. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
(a)  The city council declares that it is the policy and purpose of this article to ensure that animals are provided humane care and treatment by regulating the transportation, sale, purchase, housing, care, handling and treatment of animals. It is the purpose of this article to ensure that all animals, wherever found, and especially animals confined in pet shops, boarding kennels, animal shelters, auction markets, research facilities, transportation facilities and vehicles and in other similar places, are provided humane care and treatment. It is also the purpose of this article to protect the owners and purchasers of animals from misleading or fraudulent warranties regarding animals and from theft of their animals; to prevent the sale or use of stolen animals; and to ensure that only animals that appear to be free of infection, communicable disease and abnormalities are released for sale, trade or adoption, unless subsequent veterinary care is assured. 
(b)  The city council declares that it is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare by controlling animals as items of commerce to prevent disease, fraudulent practices and inhumane treatment and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-56, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 4158-91; and Ord. No. 7125-14, § 1.  
Sec. 6-57. - Exceptions from article. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to a place or establishment which is operated under the immediate supervision of a duly licensed veterinarian as a hospital or boarding kennel, where animals are harbored, boarded and cared for incident to the treatment, prevention or alleviation of disease processes during the routine practice of the profession of veterinary medicine or to animals boarded under the immediate supervision of a duly licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  The exception granted by this section shall not apply to sections 6-58, 6-59, 6-60 and 6-61.  
Sec. 6-58. - Cruelty to animals generally. 
(a)  Any person who: 
(1)  Overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain, not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation to, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates or kills, any animal, whether belonging to such person or another; 
(2)  Deprives any animal of necessary food, drink, shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; 
(3)  Sores any equine for any purpose or administers drugs or medications to alter or mask such spring for the purpose of sale, show, or exhibition of any kind, unless such administration of drugs or medications is within the context of a veterinary client-patient relationship and solely for therapeutic purposes; 
(4)  Willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; or 
(5)  Causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle conducted in a reasonable and customary manner. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit authorized wildlife management activities or hunting, fishing or trapping or to farming activities as regulated under titles of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, including Title 29.1. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to kill a domestic dog or cat for the purpose of obtaining the hide, fur or pelt of the dog or cat. A violation of this subsection is a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(e)  Any person convicted of violating this section may be prohibited by the court from possession or ownership of companion animals. 
(Ord. No. 60, §§ 8, 13; Code 1961, § 4-9; Ord. No. 7299-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6570.  
Sec. 6-59. - Maiming, killing or poisoning animal. 
Except as otherwise provided for by law, if any person maliciously shoots, stabs, wounds or otherwise causes bodily injury to, or administers poison to or exposes poison with intent that it be taken by, any animal of another, with intent to maim, disfigure, disable or kill the same, or if any person does any of the foregoing acts to any animal of his or her own, with intent to defraud any insurer thereof, such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 1; Code 1961, § 4-15.1; Ord. No. 7299-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-144, which makes similar acts relating to livestock a felony.  
Sec. 6-60. - Fighting of cocks, dogs, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Promote, prepare for, engage in, be employed in or attend an exhibition of the fighting of cocks, dogs or other animals for amusement, sport, money, prize or anything of value, or upon the result of which any money or other thing of value is bet or wagered, or to which an admission fee is charged, directly or indirectly; 
(2)  Authorize or allow any person to undertake any act described in this section on any premises under his charge or control; or 
(3)  Aid or abet any such acts. Except as provided in subsection (b), any person who violates any provision of this subsection is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  (1)  Any animal control officer, as defined in this chapter, shall confiscate any animal that he determines has been, is, or is intended to be used in animal fighting and any equipment used in training such animal or used in animal fighting. 
(2)  Upon confiscation of an animal, the animal control officer shall petition the appropriate court for a hearing for a determination of whether the animal has been, is, or is intended to be used in animal fighting. The hearing shall be not more than ten (10) business days from the date of the confiscation of the animal. If the court finds that the animal has not been used, is not used and is not intended to be used in animal fighting, it shall order the animal released to its owner. However, if the court finds probable cause to believe that the animal has been, is, or is intended to be used in animal fighting, the court shall order the animal forfeited to the locality unless the owner posts bond in surety with the locality in an amount sufficient to compensate the locality for its cost of caring for the animal for a period of nine (9) months. He shall post additional bond for each successive nine-month period until a final determination by the trial court on any criminal charges brought pursuant to subsections (a) or (b). 
(3)  Upon a final determination of guilt by the trial court on criminal charges brought pursuant to subsections (a) or (b), the court shall order that the animal be forfeited to the locality. Upon a final determination of not guilty by the trial court on the underlying criminal charges, a confiscated animal shall be returned to its owner and any bond shall be refunded to him. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating any provisions of subsection (a) or (b) shall be prohibited by the court from possession or ownership of companion animals or cocks. 
(d)  In addition to fines and costs, the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this section to pay all reasonable costs incurred for housing, caring for, or euthanizing any confiscated animal. If the court finds that the actual costs are reasonable, it may order payment of actual costs. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties. This section shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Authorized wildlife management activities or hunting, fishing, or trapping authorized under any title of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or regulations promulgated thereto; or 
(2)  Farming activities authorized under Title 3.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or regulations promulgated thereto. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 15; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-18; Ord. No. 7299-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6571.  
Sec. 6-61. - Leaving maimed, diseased, etc., animal in street or other public place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having in custody any maimed, diseased, disabled or infirm animal to leave it to lie or be in a street, road or public place. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 12; Ord. No. 1381, § 1; Code 1961, § 4-13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-323.  
Sec. 6-62. - Duty of owners to provide feed, water, shelter, etc. 
(a)  Each owner shall have the duty to provide, for each of such owner's companion animals and pursuant to regulations adopted by the state board of agriculture and commerce: 
(1)  Adequate feed; 
(2)  Adequate water; 
(3)  Adequate shelter that is properly cleaned; 
(4)  Adequate space in the primary enclosure for the particular type of animal, depending upon its age, size and weight; 
(5)  Adequate exercise; 
(6)  Adequate care, treatment, and transportation; and 
(7)  Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering or disease transmission. 
The provisions of this section shall also apply to every animal shelter, or other releasing agency, and every foster care provider, dealer, pet shop, exhibitor, kennel, groomer, and boarding establishment. This section shall not require that animals used as food for other animals be euthanized. 
(b)  Violation of this section is a Class 4 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of subdivision (a)(1), (2), (3) or (7) is a Class 2 misdemeanor and second or subsequent violation of subsection (a)(4), (5) or (6) is a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-63. - Care required of dealers and pet shops. 
It shall be unlawful for any dealer or owner or operator of a pet shop to fail to adequately house, feed, water, exercise and care for animals in his or her possession or custody. Animals not so provided for shall be subject to seizure and impoundment and, upon conviction of such dealer, owner or operator of violating this section, such animals may be sold or euthanized. Any funds that result from such sale shall be used first to pay the costs of the city for the impoundment and disposition of the animals and any funds remaining shall be paid to the owner, if known. In the event that the owner is not found, the remaining funds shall be paid into the city treasury.  
Sec. 6-64. - Care of animals being transported. 
(a)  No owner, railroad or other common carrier, when transporting any animal, shall allow that animal to be confined in any type of conveyance for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, without being exercised, properly rested, fed and watered as necessary for that particular type and species of animal; provided, however, that a reasonable extension of this time shall be permitted when an accident, storm or other act of God causes a delay. Adequate space in the primary enclosure within any type of conveyance shall be provided each animal, depending upon the particular type and species of animal. 
(b)  No person shall carry or cause to be carried, in or upon any vehicle, vessel or other conveyance, any animal in a cruel, brutal or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering. 
(c)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 60, §§ 8, 13; Code 1961, § 4-9; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-65, which pertained the importing or exporting puppy, for purpose of sale, without dam, and derived from the original codification.  
Sec. 6-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-66, which pertained to the sale of baby fowl in certain quantities prohibited, and derived from the original codification.  
Sec. 6-67. - Misrepresentation of animal's condition. 
No person shall misrepresent the physical condition of any animal at the animal's sale, trade, delivery or other method of transfer. For the purpose of this section, misrepresentation shall include selling, trading, delivering or otherwise transferring an animal to another person with the knowledge that the animal has an infection, communicable disease, parasitic infestation, abnormality or other physical defect that is not made known to the person receiving the animal. Violation of this section is a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-68. - Abandonment of animal. 
No person shall abandon any animal. Violation of this section is a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-69. - Procedure when animals left unclaimed with veterinarian or boarding kennel. 
Any animal not claimed by its owner from a licensed veterinarian or boarding kennel within fourteen (14) business days after a letter of notice has been sent to the owner, if found, by the veterinarian or boarding kennel, may be sold by the veterinarian or boarding kennel. The animal may be sold at public or private sale for fair compensation to a person capable of providing care consistent with this article. Any expense incurred by the veterinarian or boarding kennel becomes a lien on the animal and the proceeds of the sale shall first be used to discharge this lien. Any balance of the proceeds shall be paid over to the owner; provided, however, that if the owner cannot be found within the next ensuing thirty (30) days, the balance shall be paid to the city treasury. If no purchaser is found, the animal may be offered for adoption or euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-70. - Rights of veterinarian as to sick or injured animal when owner cannot be located. 
If a licensed veterinarian is called, or by his or her own action comes upon an animal that is sick or injured and the owner of such animal cannot be immediately located, then the licensed veterinarian, in his or her professional judgment, may treat, hospitalize or euthanize the animal, without the permission of the owner. In no event shall a licensed veterinarian who has properly exercised professional judgment regarding such animal be subject to liability for his or her actions.  
Sec. 6-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-71, which pertained to violations of article generally, and derived from the original codification.  
Sec. 6-72. - Investigation of complaint of violation of article; corrective action. 
(a)  Upon receiving a complaint of a suspected violation of this article, the animal control officer or any law enforcement official may, for the purpose of investigating the allegations of the complaint, enter upon the premises of a dealer or pet shop, and upon obtaining a warrant, upon any other premises where the animal or animals described in the complaint are housed or kept. The commonwealth's attorney and law enforcement officials shall provide such assistance as may be required in the conduct of such investigations. 
(b)  If the investigation provided for in this section discloses that a violation of this article has occurred, the investigator shall notify the owner or custodian of the complaint and of what action is necessary to comply with this article. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to sections 6-58, 6-59 and 6-60, and investigations and prosecutions for violations of those sections shall be handled as they are for violations of other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-73. - Seizure and impoundment of animals. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer may lawfully seize and impound any animal that has been abandoned, has been cruelly treated, or is suffering from an apparent violation of this chapter that has rendered the animal in such a condition as to constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or health. Before seizing or impounding any agricultural animal, such humane investigator, law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall contact the state veterinarian or a state veterinarian's representative, who shall recommend to such person the most appropriate action for the disposition of the agricultural animal. The law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall notify the owner of the agricultural animal and the local attorney of the recommendation. The law enforcement officer or animal control officer may impound the agricultural animal on the land where the agricultural animal is located if: 
(1)  The owner or tenant of the land where the agricultural animal is located gives written permission; 
(2)  A general district court so orders; or 
(3)  The owner or tenant of the land where the agricultural animal is located cannot be immediately located, and it is in the best interest of the agricultural animal to be impounded on the land where it is located until the written permission of the owner or tenant of the land can be obtained. 
If there is a direct and immediate threat to an agricultural animal, the law enforcement officer or animal control officer may seize the animal, in which case the humane investigator, law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall file within five (5) business days on a form approved by the state veterinarian a report on the condition of the animal at the time of the seizure, the disposition of the animal, any other information required by the state veterinarian. 
Upon seizing or impounding an animal, the humane investigator, law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall petition the general district court in the city or county where the animal is seized for a hearing. The hearing shall be not more than ten (10) business days from the date of the seizure of the animal. The hearing shall be to determine whether the animal has been abandoned, has been cruelly treated, or has not been provided adequate care. 
(b)  The law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall cause to be served upon the person with a right of property in the animal or the custodian of the animal notice of the hearing. If such person or the custodian is known and residing within the jurisdiction wherein the animal is seized, written notice shall be given at least five (5) days prior to the hearing of the time and place of the hearing. If such person or the custodian is known but residing out of the jurisdiction where such animal is seized, written notice by any method or service of process as is provided by the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be given. If such person or the custodian is not known, the humane investigator, the law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall cause to be published in a newspaper in general circulation in the jurisdiction wherein such animal is seized notice of the hearing at least one time prior to the hearing and shall further cause notice of the hearing to be posed at least five (5) days prior to the hearing at the place provided for public notices at the city hall or courthouse wherein such hearing shall be held. 
(c)  The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. Trial by jury shall be as provided in Article 4, (§ 19.2-260 et seq.) of Chapter 15 of Title 19.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. The Commonwealth shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(d)  The law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall provide for such animal until the court has concluded the hearing. The owner of any animal held pursuant to this subsection for more than thirty (30) days shall post a bond in surety for the amount of the cost of boarding the animal for nine (9) months. The bond shall be forfeited if the owner is found to be not guilty of the violation. 
If the court determines that the animal has been neither abandoned, cruelly treated, nor deprived of adequate care, the animal shall be returned to the owner. If the court determines that the animal has been: 
(1)  Abandoned or cruelly treated; 
(2)  Deprived of adequate care, as that term is defined in this chapter; or 
(3)  Raised as a dog that has been, is or is intended to be used in dogfighting in violation of section 6-60, then the court shall order that the animal be: 
a.  Sold; 
b.  Humanely destroyed, or disposed of by sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the Commonwealth, agency of another state, or a licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located with the Commonwealth; 
c.  Delivered to any local humane society or shelter, or to any person who is a resident of the city where the animal is seized or an adjacent county or city in the Commonwealth and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal; or 
d.  Delivered to the person with a right of property in the animal as provided in subsection (e). 
(e)  In no case shall the owner be allowed to purchase, adopt, or otherwise obtain the animal if the court determines that the animal has been abandoned, cruelly treated, or deprived of adequate care. The court shall direct that the animal be delivered to the person with a right of property in the animal, upon his request, if the court finds that the abandonment, cruel treatment or deprivation of adequate care is not attributable to the action or inactions of such person. 
(f)  The court shall order the owner of any animal determined to have been abandoned, cruelly treated or deprived of adequate care to pay all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for such animal from the time the animal is seized until such time that the animal is disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this section, to the provider of such care. 
(g)  The court may prohibit the possession or ownership of other companion animals by the owner of any companion animal found to have been abandoned, cruelly treated or deprived of adequate care In making a determination to prohibit the possession or ownership of companion animals, the court may take into consideration the owner's past record of convictions under this chapter and other laws prohibiting cruelty to animals or pertaining to the care and treatment of animals and the owner's mental and physical condition. 
(h)  If the court finds that an agricultural animal has been abandoned or cruelly treated, the court may prohibit the possession or ownership of any other agricultural animal by the owner of the agricultural animal if the owner has exhibited a pattern of abandoning or cruelly treating agricultural animals as evidenced by previous convictions. In making a determination to prohibit the possession or ownership of agricultural animals, the court may take into consideration the owner's mental and physical condition. 
(i)  Any person who is prohibited from owning or possessing animals pursuant to subsection (g) or (h) may petition the court to repeal the prohibition after two (2) years have elapsed from the date of entry of the court's order. The court may, in its discretion, repeal the prohibition if the person can prove to the satisfaction of the court that the cause for the prohibition has ceased to exist. 
(j)  When a sale occurs, the proceeds shall first be applied to the costs of the sale then next to the unreimbursed expenses for the care and provision of the animal, and the remaining proceeds, if any, shall be paid over to the owner of the animal. 
(k)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the humane destruction of a critically injured or ill animal for humane purposes by the impounding humane investigator, law enforcement officer, animal control officer or licensed veterinarian. 
(l)  In all cases the owner may, upon proof of ownership, redeem the animal within five (5) days after such seizure upon payment of the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first twenty-four (24) hours or portion thereof and the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each succeeding day or fraction thereof; provided, however, that the minimum payment shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). For each subsequent impoundment, within a twelve-month period, the owner may redeem the animal within five (5) days of seizure upon payment of the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first twenty-four (24) hours or portion thereof and the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each succeeding day or fraction thereof; provided, however, that the minimum payment in such cases shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 7299-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 3.2-3569.  
Sec. 6-74. - Impoundment records. 
The animal control officer or the custodian of the public animal shelter, upon taking custody of any animal in the course of his or her official duties, shall immediately make a record thereof. The record shall include a description of the animal, including color, breed, sex, approximate weight, reason for seizure, location of seizure, the owner's name and address, if known, and all license or other identification numbers, if any. Complete information relating to the disposition of the animal shall be added to the record, immediately after disposition of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-75. - Sale or gift of animals released from public animal shelter generally. 
No animal impounded at the city's public animal shelter shall be sold or given away other than by sale or gift directly to federal agencies, state-supported institutions, agencies of the Commonwealth of Virginia, agencies of other states, or by delivery to dealers licensed by federal, state or local authorities, or by delivery to a local humane society shelter or to any person who will pay the required fee, if any, on such animal. Any proceeds deriving from the gift, sale or delivery of such animals shall be paid directly to the city treasurer and no part of such proceeds shall accrue to any individual. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-76. - Animal control officer not to sell or give animals to dealers, pet shops, etc. 
The animal control officer and such officer's representatives shall not give or sell, or negotiate for the gift or sale, to a pet shop, dealer or research facility, of any animal which may come into his or her custody in the course of carrying out his or her official assignments. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-77. - Animal control officer not to be licensed as dealer. 
The animal control officer shall not be granted a dealer's license and each application for such license shall include a statement made under oath that neither the applicant nor any member or employee of the firm, partnership or corporation making application is the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-78. - Unattended tethering of dogs prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to tether any unattended dog. For the purposes of this section, a dog is attended only if the owner or custodian is both outdoors and within sight of the dog. 
(b)  When a dog is tethered, it must have adequate space as defined in section 6-1.1. 
(c)  Any owner, whose dog has a valid license pursuant to section 6-33 as of February 1, 2015, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section as it relates to each dog owned and licensed prior to February 1, 2015. The exemption provided by this subsection shall be forever forfeit for any dog whose license is not renewed by February 1 of any subsequent year. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7125-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7299-16; Ord. No. 7565-19, § 1; Ord. No. 7632-20, § 1)  
Sec. 6-79. - Use of animals as prizes or inducements. 
No person shall give away any vertebrate animals as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, a game or other competition or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement, whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-80. - Animals riding in open vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to place or keep an animal in any portion of such vehicle that is open in such a manner as to permit such animal to jump out of or escape the vehicle or to be thrown from the vehicle by acceleration or stopping of the vehicle or by an accident involving the vehicle. The prohibited portions of a motor vehicle shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The open bed of a truck or upon a motorcycle; or 
(2)  The rear storage portion of a vehicle with the tailgate, trunk or hatchback portion open or down. 
For the purpose of this section, the operator of a motor vehicle shall be deemed to have control of any animal found therein. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle in which an animal is secured in a cage or carrier of adequate design and shape to protect the animal and prevent its escape; 
(2)  Any animal which is properly secured, restrained or tethered; 
(3)  Law enforcement animals; or 
(4)  Animal control vehicles. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Secs. 6-81—6-87. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Rabies, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-48.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-88. - Vaccination or inoculation of cats, dogs and ferrets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, hold or harbor any cat or dog over the age of four (4) months within the city unless such cat or dog shall have been vaccinated with a vaccine licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) as recommended in the Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines, prepared by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians. It shall be unlawful for any person or dealer to sell, own, keep, hold, or harbor any ferret, three (3) months of age or older, within the city unless such ferret has been vaccinated with a vaccine licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). If, however, the requirement of vaccination or inoculation threatens the physical well-being of such cat, dog or ferret, the owner of such cat, dog or ferret shall have a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian certifying the same; and the owner shall keep such cat or dog [or ferret] in quarantine until same is inoculated or vaccinated. 
(b)  Any person transporting a cat, dog or ferret into the city from some other jurisdiction shall conform with the provisions of this section within thirty (30) days subsequent to bringing such cat, dog or ferret into the city. 
(c)  At the time of inoculation or vaccination under this section, a suitable and distinctive collar tag and certificate of rabies vaccination or inoculation, certifying that the cat, dog or ferret in question has been inoculated or vaccinated as provided in this section, shall be issued to the owner of the cat, dog or ferret in question. The collar tag shall be affixed to the cat's, dog's or ferret's collar and shall be worn at all times when the cat, dog or ferret is not on the owner's property or in the immediate control of a responsible person. 
(d)  A certificate of rabies vaccination or inoculation issued under this section shall show the date of injection; sex and breed of cat, dog or ferret; weight of the cat, dog or ferret; color and marks of the cat, dog or ferret; rabies tag number; the owner of the cat, dog or ferret; amount and kind of vaccine injection; and the method of injection. Such certificate shall certify that the cat, dog or ferret has been properly vaccinated with animal rabies vaccine licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as recommended in the Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines, prepared by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians. 
(e)  Each day such animal is allowed to go unvaccinated shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 8; Code 1961, §§ 4-31, 4-32, 4-35; Ord. No. 3245-84; Ord. No. 3936-89; Ord. No. 4131-90; Ord. No. 4146-91; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-89. - Report of existence of rabid animals. 
Every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies shall report immediately to the city health department the existence of such animal, the place where seen, the owner's name, if known, and the symptoms suggesting rabies. 
(Ord. No. 3245-84)  
Sec. 6-90. - Emergency ordinance requiring confinement or restraint of cats or dogs when rabid animal at large. 
When there is sufficient reason to believe that a rabid animal is at large, the city council shall have the power to pass an emergency ordinance, which shall become effective immediately upon passage, requiring owners of all cats or dogs in the city to keep the same confined on their premises, unless leashed under restraint of the owner in such a manner that persons or animals will not be subject to the danger of being bitten thereby. Any such emergency ordinance enacted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be operative for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, unless renewed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 3245-84)  
Sec. 6-91. - Confinement or destruction of cats or dogs showing signs of or suspected of having rabies. 
Cats or dogs showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies shall be confined under competent observation for such a time as may be necessary to determine a diagnosis. If confinement is impossible or impracticable, such cat or dog shall be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 3245-84)  
Sec. 6-92. - Confinement or destruction of cat or dog bitten by rabid animal. 
Any cat or dog bitten by an animal believed to be afflicted with rabies shall be destroyed immediately or confined in a public animal shelter, kennel or enclosure approved by the health department for a period not to exceed six (6) months, at the expense of the owner of such cat or dog. If the bitten cat or dog has been vaccinated against rabies within one (1) year, the cat or dog shall be revaccinated and confined to the premises of its owner for thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 3245-84; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-93. - Confinement or destruction of animal which has bitten person. 
At the discretion of the director of health, any animal which has bitten a person shall be confined under competent observation for ten (10) days, unless the animal develops active symptoms of rabies or expires before that time; provided, that a seriously injured or sick animal may be humanely euthanized and its head sent to the health department for evaluation. 
(Ord. No. 3245-84)  
Sec. 6-94. - Concealing or harboring animal to prevent its destruction or confinement under article. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or harbor any cat or dog or other animal to keep the same from being destroyed or confined in accord with this article. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3245-84; Ord. No. 7299-16)  
Sec. 6-95. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7299-16, adopted Aug. 9, 2016, deleted § 6-95, which pertained to the treatment of persons bitten by rabid animals, and derived from Ord. No. 3245-84.  
Chapter 7 - ARMORY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local armories, Code of Virginia, § 44-129 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Penalty for violations of chapter. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be punishable as such, unless otherwise specifically provided.  
Sec. 7-2. - Permitted uses generally. 
The armory building, with the exception of the auditorium or drill floor (including seats, the lavatories incident thereto, and the ladies' reception room) and the kitchen, shall be used exclusively to house the personnel, equipment and ordinance of the local national guard units, and to provide a suitable place in which the personnel of such units may drill and receive military instruction and training. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 1, § 1; Code 1961, § 5-1)  
Sec. 7-3. - Use of kitchen. 
The use of the kitchen or the auditorium of the armory, and the equipment therein, other than by the organizations named in section 7-16(b), shall be permitted only with the consent of the local national guard units. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 9; Code 1961, § 5-9)  
Secs. 7-4—7-13. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - USE OF AUDITORIUM 
 
Sec. 7-14. - Generally; compliance with article. 
The auditorium of the armory and the equipment incident thereto may be used for other than military purposes, provided such use is for community purposes and the rules and regulations of this article are fully complied with. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 2; Code 1961, § 5-2)  
Sec. 7-15. - Application of article to use by national guard units. 
The use of the auditorium of the armory and its equipment by the local national guard units shall be subject to the provisions of this article, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 10; Code 1961, § 5-10)  
Sec. 7-16. - Rental charges. 
(a)  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day, or fractional part thereof, shall be charged and paid in advance for the use of the auditorium of the armory pursuant to a permit applied for under this article, if an admission fee is charged or if admittance is by card or invitation. This rental charge shall not be refunded for any cause. When no charge is made and the auditorium is open to the public, a permit may be issued for the use of the auditorium without charge, provided the other provisions of this article are complied with. 
(b)  No charge for the use of the auditorium of the armory shall be required of or paid by the local national guard units when the use thereof is confined strictly to military purposes, nor shall any charge be required of organizations for the use of the auditorium for athletic events, banquets or special events, provided no admission charge is made. No charge shall be made for the use of the auditorium by national or state organizations for convention purposes or for social events in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 8; Code 1961, § 5-8)  
Sec. 7-17. - Permit generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the auditorium of the armory, without first obtaining a permit so to do from the director of recreation and parks. Application for such permit shall be made to the director of recreation and parks on forms prescribed by the city council. All rental charges shall be paid in advance, before the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 3; Code 1961, § 5-3)  
Sec. 7-18. - Permit to be issued only to city residents and not to be issued to certain persons and under certain circumstances. 
(a)  Permits for the use of the auditorium of the armory shall be granted only to citizens residing in this city, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Permits for the use of the auditorium of the armory shall not be granted to any person who, for security reasons, is not approved by the commanding officer of the national guard unit or units using the armory, or to any person reported by the attorney general of the United States as having significance in connection with the national security. 
(c)  Permits for the use of the auditorium of the armory shall not be granted to any person when there is danger of any breach of the peace, tumult, riot or resistance of law, or danger to person or property, nor shall such permits be granted when the use of the auditorium would interfere in any manner with the national guard training or the security of the equipment stored in the armory. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 4; Ord. No. 1004, § 1; Code 1961, § 5-4)  
Sec. 7-19. - Use limited to purpose stated on permit application. 
The auditorium of the armory shall not be used for any meeting or other activity or purpose other than that stated on the application for the permit required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 4; Ord. No. 1004, § 1; Code 1961, § 5-4)  
Sec. 7-20. - Use on Sunday. 
Use of the auditorium of the armory and equipment on Sundays shall be limited to religious or educational purposes, either or both. No admission fee may be charged for any affair held in the armory auditorium on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 5; Code 1961, § 5-5)  
Sec. 7-21. - Sale of goods, food and drinks. 
The sale of goods, food and drinks is prohibited in connection with the use of the auditorium of the armory pursuant to a permit issued under this article, except from the canteen operated by the organizations named in section 7-16(b). 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 7; Code 1961, § 5-7)  
Sec. 7-22. - Responsibility for damage. 
Persons to whom the use of the auditorium of the armory is granted pursuant to a permit issued under this article shall be responsible for any damage to building, furniture or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 45, art. 2, § 6; Code 1961, § 5-6)  
Chapter 8 - AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 26; pawnbrokers; junk and secondhand dealers; buyers of old gold and silver, Ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate the operation and maintenance of automobile graveyards, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-903. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term "automobile graveyard" shall mean any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five (5) motor vehicles of any kind, that are incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found. The movement or rearrangement of vehicles within an existing lot or facility does not render this definition inapplicable. The provisions established by this chapter shall begin with the first day that the vehicle is placed on the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 1; Code 1961, § 6-1; Ord. No. 6136-05, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar definition with respect to automobile graveyards adjacent to highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348.  
Sec. 8-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be punishable as such, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 16; Code 1961, § 6-16)  
Sec. 8-3. - Record of purchases. 
Every person operating an automobile graveyard who purchases any vehicle or vehicle parts or accessories shall record, in a book at such person's place of business for such purpose, the following information concerning each such purchase: 
(1)  The date and time of such purchase; 
(2)  The name, address, race, age and height of the seller and of the person actually delivering the vehicle or parts or accessories; 
(3)  The amount of the purchase price; 
(4)  The make, state license number, motor number, body number, style and seating capacity of the vehicle purchased; 
(5)  The make and identifying number of radiators, speedometers and magnetoes purchased; 
(6)  Such other information as may be necessary to prove ownership or identity of the vehicle or parts or accessories purchased. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 4; Code 1961, § 6-4)  
Sec. 8-4. - Inquiry as to right of seller to make sale. 
Before the operator of any automobile graveyard purchases any vehicle or vehicle parts or accessories, diligent inquiry shall be made as to the legal right of the seller to make such sale. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 4; Code 1961, § 6-4)  
Sec. 8-5. - Inspections. 
All automobile graveyards, together with the records required by section 8-3, shall at all times be open for inspection to all officers of the city having police powers. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 5; Code 1961, § 6-5)  
Sec. 8-6. - Fence required; fence specifications and location. 
Automobile graveyards shall be entirely enclosed by a fence eight (8) feet in height and constructed of planks, boards, corrugated iron or masonry, brick, cinder block or concrete, so as to exclude such graveyards from public view. Every such fence shall be located at least twenty (20) feet from the street or road and in no event project beyond the building line of other buildings on the same street or road. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 5; Code 1961, § 6-5) 
Cross reference— Fences generally, § 13-237 et seq.  
Sec. 8-7. - Maintenance of fence. 
The fence required by section 8-6 shall, at all times, be kept neatly painted and in good repair, to the satisfaction of the codes compliance administrator. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 7; Code 1961, § 6-7)  
Sec. 8-8. - Use of fence for advertising purposes. 
The fence enclosing an automobile graveyard shall not be used for billposting or other advertising purposes, except that a space not larger than six (6) feet by twelve (12) feet may be used for the advertisement of the business of the owner of such graveyard. Where such graveyard fronts on more than one (1) street or road, the use of space for advertisement herein permitted shall extend to each street or road on which the graveyard abuts. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 8; Code 1961, § 6-8) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3.  
Sec. 8-9. - Contents of yard not to extend above height of fence. 
The contents of an automobile graveyard shall not be placed or deposited to a height greater than the height of the fence required by section 8-6. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 9; Code 1961, § 6-9)  
Sec. 8-10. - Premises to be kept free of rubbish and waste matter. 
An automobile graveyard shall, as far as practicable, be kept clear and clean of all rubbish or waste matter. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 11; Code 1961, § 6-11) 
Cross reference— Garbage, litter and other solid waste, Ch. 19.  
Sec. 8-11. - Abutting sidewalks to be kept clean. 
All sidewalks abutting upon automobile graveyards shall be kept clear and clean of all, trash or other waste matter. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 14; Code 1961, § 6-14)  
Sec. 8-12. - Abutting streets to be kept clear. 
All streets abutting automobile graveyards shall be kept clear and clean of all vehicles incapable of being operated under their own power. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 15; Code 1961, § 6-15)  
Sec. 8-13. - Fire extinguishers and other safety devices. 
Safety devices, such as fire extinguishers or other like apparatus, may be required in, or for use in, automobile graveyards wherever, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, such devices are necessary in the interest of public safety. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 12; Code 1961, § 6-12) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 8-14. - Open fires. 
No open fires for the burning of rubbish, trash, vehicles or any part thereof or other waste matter shall be permitted in any automobile graveyard. An accidental or casual fire occasioned by the use of an acetylene torch shall not be regarded as an open fire under this section, where it is shown that the person operating or maintaining the graveyard has, by the use of fire extinguishers or other safety devices, made reasonable effort to prevent the same. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 10; Code 1961, § 6-10) 
Cross reference— Open burning of leaves, § 16-32 et seq.  
Sec. 8-15. - Gasoline to be drained from vehicles. 
All tanks and engines of vehicles in automobile graveyards shall be kept thoroughly drained of gasoline. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 13; Code 1961, § 6-13)  
Chapter 9 - BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY PARLORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— License tax for barbershops and beauty parlors, § 23-46. 
State Law reference— Barbers and cosmetologists, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-700 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attendant. Any barber, hairdresser, manicurist or other person working in a barbershop or beauty parlor, who comes in direct contact with the customers or patrons of such establishment. 
Barbering. Any one (1) or any combination of the following acts, when done on the human body for pay or reward and not for the treatment of disease: Shaving, shaping and trimming the beard; cutting, singeing, shampooing or dyeing the hair or applying lotions thereto; or applications, treatment or massages of the face, neck or scalp with oils, creams, lotions, cosmetics, antiseptics, powders, clays or other preparations in connection with shaving, cutting, or trimming the hair or a beard. The term "barbering" shall not apply to such acts when performed by any person in such person's home if such service is not offered to the public. 
Barbershop. Any establishment or place of business within which the practice of barbering is engaged in or carried on by one (1) or more barbers. 
Beauty parlor. Any place or establishment within which the practice of hairdressing is engaged in or carried on by one (1) or more hairdressers. 
Hairdressing. Any one (1) or any combination of the following acts, when done on the human body for pay or reward and not for the treatment of disease: The use of cosmetics or the administration of cosmetic treatments; cutting, curling or dressing hair; or applications, treatment or massages of the face, neck or scalp with oils, creams, lotions, cosmetics, antiseptics, powders, clays or other preparations in connection with cutting, curling, or dressing hair. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-700.  
Sec. 9-2. - Violation of chapter. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 20; Code 1961, § 7-20)  
Sec. 9-3. - General maintenance requirements. 
Floors in barbershops and beauty parlors shall be swept or mopped every day and all furniture, walls, woodwork and windows therein shall be kept clean at all times. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 16; Code 1961, § 7-16)  
Sec. 9-4. - Toilet and washing facilities generally. 
Each barbershop and beauty parlor shall be provided with a toilet and wash basin properly trapped and connected to an approved sewer system. Adequate soap, toilet tissue and clean towels shall be provide. All basins, sinks, bathtubs and toilets shall be kept clean at all times. Wash basins, sinks and bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each separate use. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 17; Code 1961, § 7-17)  
Sec. 9-5. - Running water required. 
Running hot and cold water shall be provided in all barbershops and beauty parlors. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 4; Code 1961, § 7-4) 
Cross reference— Water supply, Ch. 42.  
Sec. 9-6. - Use for sleeping purposes. 
No room in a barbershop or beauty parlor in which barbering, hairdressing or manicuring is done shall be used for sleeping purposes, and no furniture for sleeping purposes shall be kept in such room. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 1; Code 1961, § 7-1)  
Sec. 9-7. - Neatness and cleanliness of attendants. 
All attendants in barbershops and beauty parlors shall be neat and clean at all times. All such attendants shall wash their hands thoroughly after attending any person. 
(Ord. No. 83, §§ 5, 9; Code 1961, §§ 7-5, 7-9)  
Sec. 9-8. - Attendants to be free from contagious diseases. 
No person suffering from tuberculosis or venereal disease or from any other infectious or contagious disease shall serve as an attendant in any barbershop or beauty parlor. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 3; Code 1961, § 7-3)  
Sec. 9-9. - Attendants not to treat skin diseases or remove growths. 
No attendant in a barbershop or beauty parlor shall undertake to treat any disease of the skin or to remove any growths, such as warts or tumors, of any description. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 19; Code 1961, § 7-9)  
Sec. 9-10. - Serving persons with communicable disease. 
No person with any communicable disease of the skin or the face shall be shaved in a barbershop. No person with any communicable disease of the skin or hands shall be treated or served by a hairdresser or manicurist in a beauty parlor or barbershop. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 2; Code 1961, § 7-2)  
Sec. 9-11. - Use of powder puffs and sponges. 
The use of powder puffs and sponges is prohibited in barbershops and beauty parlors. 
(Ord. No. 83, §§ 6, 7; Code 1961, §§ 7-6, 7-7)  
Sec. 9-12. - Use of alum and other astringents. 
No alum or other astringent shall be used in stick form in barbershops or beauty parlors. If used therein to stop the flow of blood, it shall be applied in liquid or powdered form. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 8; Code 1961, § 7-8)  
Sec. 9-13. - Head rest of chairs to be covered. 
The head rest of any chair used in a barbershop or beauty parlor shall be covered with a towel or clean sheet of paper, not previously used for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 11; Code 1961, § 7-11)  
Sec. 9-14. - Use of towels or paper neck bands. 
In barbershops and beauty parlors, towels or neck bands shall be applied to the neck of each customer in such a manner as to prevent the hair-cutting cloth from coming into contact with the skin of the customer. Such towels or paper neck bands shall not be used on more than one (1) customer. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 12; Code 1961, § 7-12)  
Sec. 9-15. - Laundering of towels. 
All towels used in a barbershop or beauty parlor shall be laundered after each separate use. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 10; Code 1961, § 7-10)  
Sec. 9-16. - Washing of mugs and brushes. 
Mugs and shaving brushes used in barbershops must be thoroughly washed with hot water after each separate use. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 13; Code 1961, § 7-13)  
Sec. 9-17. - Sterilization and storage of combs, brushes, etc. 
Combs, brushes, razors, scissors, clippers and other instruments and utensils used in a barbershop or beauty parlor shall be thoroughly sterilized after each separate use. When not in use, such instruments and utensils shall be kept in dusttight containers. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 14; Code 1961, § 7-14)  
Sec. 9-18. - Storage of creams, lotions, etc. 
All creams, lotions and other cosmetics and hair pins used for customers in a barbershop or beauty parlor shall be kept in clean and closed containers. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 15; Code 1961, § 7-15)  
Sec. 9-19. - Maintenance of permanent wave equipment. 
All metallic curlers, clips, fiber shields and felt protectors and all permanent wave equipment used in a beauty parlor shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 18; Code 1961, § 7-18)  
Sec. 9-20. - Destruction, after use, of individual permanent wave equipment. 
In beauty parlors, after each separate use all individual permanent wave sachets, flannels or pads and contaminated lotions shall be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 83, § 18; Code 1961, § 7-18)  
Chapter 10 - BICYCLES, MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS OR SCOOTERS, OR ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED BICYCLES AND MOPEDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1, adopted Nov. 26, 2019, repealed ch. 10 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 10, as set out herein. The former chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2311, §§ 8-1, 8-3—8-5, 8-13, 8-15, 8-32; Ord. No. 2745-81; Ord. No. 3515-86; Ord. No. 4041-90; Ord. No. 4957-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5103-98; Ord. No. 5322-99; Ord. No. 5415-00; Ord. No. 5971-03; Ord. No. 6108-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6558-09; Ord. No. 6926-12, § 1; and Ord. No. 6983-13, § 1. 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Bicycles, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-903 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "bicycle," "electric personal assistive mobility device," "electric power-assisted bicycle," "moped," "motorized skateboard or scooter," "owner," "roadway," "toy vehicle," and "vehicle" are defined as set forth in Section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-3. - Altering, removing, etc., frame number. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of the frame or motor or other manufacturer's serial number of any bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-4. - Dealers' reports of purchase or sale of secondhand bicycles, motorized skateboards or scooters, or electric power-assisted bicycles and mopeds. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or trading in used or secondhand bicycles or mopeds or motorized skateboards or scooters or electric power-assisted bicycles shall make a weekly report to the chief of police of all used or secondhand bicycles or mopeds or motorized skateboards or scooters or electric power-assisted bicycles bought, exchanged or traded in by each such person during the preceding week, on forms provided by the police department. 
(b)  Each report required by this section shall specify a full and complete description of such used or secondhand bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle, and in addition thereto, whenever available, the serial number, factory number, frame number, color, type, frame size, wheel size, name of brake and other marks of identification, the date of purchase or trade, together with the name, address, age, height and weight of the person selling or trading in such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-5. - Dealers not to purchase secondhand bicycles or mopeds from minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of buying new or secondhand bicycles or mopeds or motorized skateboards or scooters or electric power-assisted bicycles to purchase such secondhand vehicles from persons under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Secs. 10-6—10-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EQUIPMENT AND OPERATING RULES 
 
Sec. 10-11. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply whenever a bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle is operated on any of the roadways or sidewalks in the city or upon any path or trail therein set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or mopeds, subject to those exceptions stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-12. - Applicability of traffic regulations to riders. 
Every person riding a bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle upon a roadway within the corporate limits of the city shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties and responsibilities applicable to the driver of motor vehicles under the laws of the state and the traffic ordinances of the city, except as to those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-13. - Motorized skateboards or scooters prohibited on certain streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized skateboard or scooter upon any street with a speed limit in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-14. - Warning devices. 
Every bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle equipped with handlebars shall also be equipped with a horn or bell in good working order, capable of emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, for a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet. It shall be unlawful for any person to equip a bicycle or a moped or a motorized skateboard or scooter or an electric power-assisted bicycle with a siren or whistle or to use any bell or horn otherwise than as a reasonable warning to others. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-15. - Maximum height of handlebars. 
No person shall operate a bicycle or motorized skateboard or scooter within the corporate limits of the city equipped with handlebars so raised that the operator must elevate his or her hands above the shoulder level in order to grasp the normal steering grip area. It shall be unlawful to operate a moped or electric power-assisted bicycle with handlebars or other type of steering mechanisms that are more than fifteen (15) inches above the level of the vehicle's seat. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-16. - Operation without consent of owner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle without the consent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-17. - Operation while under influence of liquor or drugs or while physically or mentally unfit. 
No person shall operate a bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or beverages or drugs or while physically or mentally unfit to operate such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-18. - Hands on handlebars and feet on pedals; acrobatic riding. 
With the exception of making a turn signal, no rider of a bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or feet from the pedals or from the flat platform, or practice any acrobatic tricks or fancy riding on any roadway in the city. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-19. - Required use of paths. 
Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-20. - Riding on sidewalks or pedestrian paths in parks. 
(a)  No person over the age of fourteen (14) years shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in the city unless such sidewalk is at least eight (8) feet in width and designated for use as a bicycle route, path or way. No person shall ride or operate a motorized skateboard or scooter, or an electric power-assisted bicycle or a moped on a sidewalk in the city. 
(b)  Whenever any person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalk, or ride on a roadway a bicycle, moped, motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle, whether paved or unpaved, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian, and shall ride in single file. 
(c)  No bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle shall be operated upon any pedestrian path in public parks, except that Newport News Police Officers and Park Rangers, and any other person specifically exempted in writing by the Director of the Newport News Department of Parks and Recreation, shall be exempt from the prohibition contained in this subsection. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-21. - Racing; endurance contests. 
(a)  Subject to the exception contained in subsection (b), no person shall operate a bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle in any race or speed or endurance contest with any other vehicle or bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle. 
(b)  The director of engineering, or his designee, may authorize the issuance of a permit for bicycle races conducted or sponsored by athletic, civic, or charitable organizations, upon such conditions as set forth in subsection (c). Any person, group, or organization desiring to conduct a race shall make written application to the director of engineering, or his designee. If the application is denied, the applicant shall be apprised in writing of the reason therefor. 
(c)  Permit conditions. The director of engineering, or his designee, may condition the issuance of a permit by imposing such requirements or conditions as are necessary to protect the safety and rights of persons and property and for the control of traffic. In order to accommodate the rights of abutting land owners and tenants, and the needs of the public to use the streets and sidewalks, and to protect the safety of the race participants, the conditions may include but are not limited to reasonable adjustments in the date, time, route and location of the race, designation of assembly and dispersal locations; accommodations for pedestrian and vehicular traffic using the streets and sidewalks; limitations on the length and duration of the race; and the use of monitors sufficient to control the orderly conduct of the race in conformity with the permit. 
(d)  Insurance. The applicant shall provide evidence of general liability insurance for a race in amounts of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for combined single limit insurance. Such insurance policy shall include an endorsement naming the City of Newport News as an "additional insured." 
(e)  Criteria for denial of permit. The director of engineering, or his designee, may deny an application, applying the following criteria and finding that: 
(1)  Due to the time, duration, route, condition of route, and size of the race, the proposed race presents an unreasonable safety or health risk to participants, spectators, or the public; 
(2)  The diversion of public safety resources to support the race are not reasonably available; 
(3)  The conduct of the race will unduly interfere with the proper fire and police protection of, and ambulance service to, all or part of the city; 
(4)  The race will cause irreconcilable interference with a competing event, or other activities; 
(5)  Other race permit requirements have not been met; 
(6)  The application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; or 
(7)  There is insufficient time for the city to process the application and make the necessary arrangements prior to the race. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to violate any requirement or condition of the permit. 
(g)  The permit shall be revocable at any time by the director of engineering, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-22. - Parking; attaching bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle to fire hydrant. 
(a)  A person shall park a bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach, tie, chain or secure a bicycle or moped or motorized skateboard or scooter or electric power-assisted bicycle to a fire hydrant in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-23. - Helmets required. 
(a)  Every person fourteen (14) years of age or younger shall wear a protective helmet that at least meets the consumer product safety commission standard whenever riding or being carried on a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, or electric power-assisted bicycle on any roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path. Violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). However such fine shall be suspended (i) for first-time violators and (ii) for any violator who, subsequent to the violation but prior to imposition of the fine, purchases a helmet of the type required by this section. 
(b)  Pursuant to Section 46.2-906.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, violation of this section shall not constitute negligence or assumption of risk, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence, or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation of any bicycle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule or procedure pertaining to any civil action. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-24. - Certain safety equipment required for moped operators and passengers; identification required. 
(a)  Every person operating a moped on a roadway shall wear a face shield, safety glasses, or goggles of a type approved by the Superintendent of the Department of State Police of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or shall have his moped equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating such moped. 
(b)  All operators and passengers of mopeds shall wear protective helmets of a type approved by the Superintendent of the Department of State Police of the Commonwealth at all times while operating or riding such moped. 
(c)  Pursuant to Section 46.2-915.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a moped or motor vehicle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any such civil action. 
(d)  Every person operating a moped on a roadway shall carry a government-issued form of photo identification that includes his name, address, and date of birth. 
(e)  Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Secs. 10-25—10-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SHARED MOBILITY DEVICES 
 
Sec. 10-30. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person who files an application in accordance with this chapter. 
Application means an initial application, any renewal application, any reinstatement application filed in accordance with this chapter. 
Licensee means any person who holds a license issued in accordance with this chapter. 
Shared mobility device means a motorized skateboard or scooter, bicycle, or electric power-assisted bicycle which is offered by the owner thereof for hire to the public. 
Shared-use path means a bikeway that is physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and is located either within the highway right-of-way or within a separate right-of-way. Shared-use paths may also be used by pedestrians, skaters, users of wheel chairs or wheel chair conveyances, joggers, and other nonmotorized users and electric personal delivery devices. 
Trip means each period of exclusive use of a shared mobility device by an individual. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-31. - Administration of license program for shared mobility devices. 
The city manager, or designee shall administer the license process for which this chapter provides. The city manager, or designee shall issue, enforce, and, from time to time, modify rules, regulations, or guidelines consistent with this chapter and other applicable law to carry out the requirements of this chapter. Such rules, regulations, and guidelines, and any and all modifications thereto, must be approved as to form by the city attorney or the designee thereof prior to issuance. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-32. - License requirement. 
No person shall operate or park a shared mobility device within the city unless such person has obtained or such shared mobility device is covered by a license in accordance with this article. Any shared mobility device operated or parked without a license issued in accordance with this article may be removed by the city and stored at the expense of the owner. Before obtaining possession of their shared mobility device(s), the owner shall pay to the city all costs incidental to its removal or storage. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-33. - Application; issuance and denial of licenses. 
(a)  Any person may file an application on forms provided by the city manager to obtain a license or, as applicable, a renewal license, or a reinstated license for the operation or parking of one (1) or more shared mobility devices within the city. The city manager, or designee shall review all applications according to the provisions of this division and the rules, regulations, and guidelines issued in accordance with section 10-31. 
(b)  Licenses issued in accordance with this chapter shall be subject to the following general terms and conditions: 
(1)  The applicant shall demonstrate on such applicant's application that the applicant has met all the requirements. 
(2)  Each application to obtain, renew, or reinstate a license shall be accompanied by payment of an application fee of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) and the annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per shared mobility device covered by the license. 
(3)  Each application to obtain, renew, or reinstate a license shall, in accordance with the rules, regulations, and guidelines issued in accordance with section 10-31, be accompanied by a certificate of insurance demonstrating evidence of commercial general liability insurance coverage of at least three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each occurrence and at least five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) in the aggregate, listing the city as an additional insured, and indicated that the city will receive at least ten (10) days notice of cancellation or material modification of the policy. 
(4)  Each license issued by the city manager, or designee shall state the following: 
a.  The name of the licensee and the name, address, and phone number of the authorized representative of the licensee, if applicable. 
b.  The dates and time period during which the license shall be effective. 
c.  Specifications concerning the parking of the shared mobility device on city sidewalks, including, but not limited to, a requirement that the shared mobility device shall be parked in an upright position on city sidewalks so as not to create a hazard for or interfere with public use and travel. 
d.  A prohibition against the parking of the shared mobility device on shared-use paths, and in parks and athletic fields owned by the city. 
e.  A prohibition against the parking or leaning of the shared mobility device or located on city-owned amenities or structures. 
f.  A requirement that the licensee ensure that each user of shared mobility devices covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter have a valid driver's license to the extent that a driver's license is required by law for operation of a shared mobility device. 
g.  Any other information, as permitted by law, that the city manager deems necessary for the administration of the license. 
(5)  Licenses may be issued and renewed annually for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of any such issuance, subject to the requirements of this chapter and the rules, regulations, and guidelines issued in accordance with section 10-31. The city manager shall not issue any more than one (1) license to the same person during any part of a twelve-month period covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter. 
(6)  The licensee shall pay to the city a fee of .05 cents per trip. 
(7)  Licenses shall incorporate by reference the provisions of this chapter and the rules, regulations, and guidelines issued in accordance with section 10-31. 
(8)  The licensee is limited to two hundred (200) shared mobility devices employed in the city per licensee, except as the limit is increased pursuant to section 10-34. 
(9)  The licensee shall execute a release, waiver of liability, and indemnification agreement prior to the issuance of any license. This subdivision (9) shall not apply to governmental organizations. 
(10)  Upon revocation or expiration of a license, the licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that any and all shared mobility devices to which a license relates are removed permanently from every sidewalk within ten (10) days unless another license is obtained or the shared mobility devices are otherwise stored in the manner provided in the rules, regulations, and guidelines issued in accordance with section 10-31. 
(11)  The city manager may deny a license to any applicant upon determining that the applicant has not complied with a requirement of this chapter or the rules, regulations, and guidelines issued in accordance with section 10-31. 
(12)  The city manager may deny a license to any applicant upon determining that the applicant has not complied with any applicable federal, state, or local law or that applicant is delinquent on any tax, fee, fine, or other obligation to the city. 
(13)  A license shall only be issued to an applicant whose shared mobility devices to be covered by the license are equipped with a speed controller limiting the maximum motor-assisted speed of such devices to no more than fifteen (15) miles per hour and that are equipped with global positioning system (gps) technology, and geo-fencing capability. 
(14)  Licenses issued in accordance with this division shall not be transferred or assigned. 
(15)  Licenses issued in accordance with this chapter may be modified by the city manager or designee upon request of the licensee or as the city manager or designee determines may be necessary for the preservation of the safety, health, and welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-34. - Increasing the number of permitted shared mobility devices. 
(a)  Once per year at the time of seeking renewal of a license issued in accordance with this chapter and upon payment of the annual fee for each additional shared mobility device permitted by this section, any licensee may submit a written request to the city manager or designee to increase the maximum number of shared mobility devices covered by such licensee's license issued in accordance with this chapter. Upon receipt of such request and payment of the fee referenced above, the city manager or designee shall consider such request in accordance with the requirements of this section. Within thirty (30) days from the date of the receipt of such request, the city manager or designee shall increase the maximum number of shared mobility devices covered by such licensee's license by an amount equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the maximum number of shared mobility devices covered by such license on the date of issuance of such license if the licensee, along with such written request, provides the city manager or designee with such evidence as the city manager or designee may lawfully require demonstrating that the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The shared mobility devices covered by a license issued in accordance with this division have been operated on an average of three (3) or more trips per day, which trips may begin or end in the city, either or both, for each day of the previous annual period covered by the license. 
(2)  The licensee has complied with all of the requirements of (i) the license for which an increase in the maximum number of shared mobility devices has been requested, (ii) this chapter, and (iii) all applicable state, federal, and local laws. 
(b)  If a licensee is granted an increase of shared mobility devices allowed pursuant to this section, the increased limit shall continue to apply if the licensee renews their license. 
(c)  If a licensee is granted an increase of shared mobility devices allowed pursuant to this section, and the licensee's license is revoked, the limit for the licensee shall revert to two hundred (200) shared mobility devices. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-35. - Revocation of license; reinstatement; unlawful actions. 
(a)  The city manager or designee shall have the authority to revoke, which revocation shall not be appealable, a license issued in accordance with this chapter if the city manager or designee determines that any of the following have occurred: 
(1)  The licensee has not complied with the requirements of the licensee's license, this chapter or the rules, regulations, or guidelines issued in accordance with section 10-31, other federal, state, or local law, or that the licensee is delinquent on any tax, fee, fine, or other obligation to the city. 
(2)  The licensee has misrepresented or provided false information in an application. 
(3)  The licensee has parked, or suffered to be parked, a shared mobility device in such manner as to create a public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(4)  The licensee has any unsatisfied judgments arising out of the licensee's operations within the city. 
(5)  The licensee has transferred or assigned such licensee's license. 
(b)  An applicant whose license has been revoked pursuant to this section may submit a reinstatement application to reinstate such license. If such reinstatement application is submitted before the expiration of the license period covered by the license that was revoked, such application shall be accompanied by the reinstatement fee of six hundred and twenty-five dollars ($625.00) and the reinstated license shall cover only the period remaining on the revoked license. If such application submitted on the date of or after the expiration of the license period covered by the license that was revoked, such application shall be accompanied by the application fee and annual fee set forth in section 10-33. Any licensee who has a license revoked during any part of a period covered by a previously issued license that has been revoked shall not be eligible to file a reinstatement application for a reinstated license until after the expiration of the period covered by the license that was previously revoked. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee whose license has been revoked, or any employee or agent thereof, to park, or suffered to be parked, on any sidewalk a shared mobility device owned or controlled by that licensee or to commit, or suffer to be committed, any act that is in violation of this chapter or any applicable law or regulation. The city manager or designee shall provide the licensee with written notice of any costs incurred by the city for removing from sidewalks any shared mobility device owned by the licensee whose license has been revoked, which costs the licensee shall reimburse the city within thirty (30) days from the written notice. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-36. - Permission to operate and park granted. 
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall permit a person authorized by the licensee to operate on city roadways and park on city sidewalks, for the period specified in the license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules, regulations, and guidelines issued pursuant to section 10-31. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-37. - Safety requirements. 
In order to ensure that licenses issued in accordance with this chapter for the parking of shared mobility devices on the city's sidewalks and operation within the city do not create hazards to the safety, health, and welfare of the city, the city hereby requires that all licensees follow the following safety requirements: 
(1)  Licensees shall perform regular maintenance on the shared mobility devices covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter to ensure that each such device is in safe working conditions. 
(2)  Licensees shall ensure that all shared mobility devices covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter are equipped with brakes, reflectors, a bell, and front and rear lighting. 
(3)  Licensees shall ensure that all shared mobility devices covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter are only operated from 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(4)  Licensees shall ensure that all shared mobility devices covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter are parked in an upright position on city sidewalks so as not to create a hazard for or interfere with public use and travel. 
(5)  Licensees shall ensure that all shared mobility devices covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter are parked in such a manner that does not block or otherwise interfere with access to city sidewalk access ramps. 
(6)  Licensees shall ensure that all shared mobility devices covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter are not parked on shared-use paths, and in parks and athletic fields owned by the city. 
(7)  Licensees shall ensure that all shared mobility devices covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter are not parked or leaned against city-owned amenities and structures. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-38. - City's authority to remove and/or store shared mobility devices and charge costs. 
The city may remove, take possession of, and store any shared mobility device covered by a license issued in accordance with this chapter that is operated or parked in a way that violates the provisions of this chapter. The city shall charge the owner of such shared mobility device with the costs incidental to the removal and storage of the shared mobility device. The owner must pay to the city all associated costs before taking possession of the shared mobility device. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-39. - Number of riders on shared mobility device limited. 
No more than one (1) person shall operate or ride on a shared mobility device per trip. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Sec. 10-40. - Reporting requirements. 
Upon the request of the city manager, or designee each licensee shall provide to the city manager or designee at such intervals, no more frequently than once a month, from the date of issuance of the license as may be determined by the city manager, or designee reports demonstrating the licensee's compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the rules, regulations, and guidelines issued in accordance with section 10-31, and any other applicable federal, state, or local laws. Each licensee shall also provide to the city manager, or designee as may be requested by the city manager, or designee reports containing trip origination and destination information and such other information as may be necessary for the city manager, or designee to determine the allocation of city resources to carry out the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7596-19, § 1)  
Secs. 10-41—10-45. - Reserved.  
Chapter 11 - WATERCRAFT, DOCKS, PIERS AND WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4422-93, adopted Jan. 26, 1993, amended Ch. 11, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 11 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Authority of city with respect to landings, wharves, docks, etc., § 2.03. 
Cross reference— Depositing litter in lakes or other bodies of water, § 19-22; parks, squares and recreational facilities, Ch. 29; recreational use of Diascund Creek and Little Creek reservoirs, § 29-54 et seq. 
State Law reference— Waters of the state, ports and harbors, Code of Virginia, title 62.1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning attributed thereto: 
Craft when used throughout this chapter, shall be synonymous with the term "watercraft." 
Emergency situation shall mean any situation which creates a reasonable expectation of danger to life, limb or property. 
Moor when used throughout this chapter, shall be synonymous with the term "anchor" and include watercraft that are at anchor or tied or secured to a pier, dock, bulkhead or other fixed facility. 
Motorized watercraft shall mean any watercraft propelled either entirely or in part by an internal combustion engine or other machinery, whether or not the engine or machinery is used as the principle source of propulsion. 
No wake means operation of a motorboat at the slowest possible speed required to maintain steerage and headway. 
Personal watercraft shall mean a type of motorized watercraft and refers to a vessel less than sixteen (16) feet in length which uses an inboard motor powering a jet pump as its primary motive power, and which is designed to be operated by a person sitting, standing or kneeling on, rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel. "Personal watercraft" includes watercraft commonly referred to under the trademark "jet-skis." 
Rafting shall mean the practice of mooring one (1) or more watercraft abreast to a watercraft already at anchor, tied or secured to a pier, dock, bulkhead or other fixed facility. 
Skiing or water skiing shall mean to ride upon or operate, for recreational purposes, any water skis or other rigid or inflatable devices designed or intended to be pulled or towed behind another vessel. 
Watercraft shall mean every type of conveyance used or capable of being used as a means of transportation for either persons or property on water. The term "watercraft" shall include the terms "craft" and "vessel." 
Vessel when used throughout this chapter, shall be synonymous with the term "watercraft." 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 5152-98, § 1)  
Sec. 11-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Except where otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-3. - Signs and markers to enforce chapter. 
The city manager, or his designee, is authorized to have appropriate signs and markers erected in accordance with and as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Such signs and markers shall comply with state and federal laws and with the rules and regulations of appropriate state and federal agencies. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-4. - Distance between motorized watercraft and swimmers or waders in tidal waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized watercraft, other than law enforcement officers and other emergency response personnel in the performance of their duties, on the tidal waters of the city within fifty (50) feet of any shore, dock, pier, boat ramp or other launching facility; or any person bathing, swimming or wading, except while leaving from or returning to a dock, pier, boat ramp or other launching facility. It shall be unlawful for any person, while wading, swimming or bathing, unless a member of the boat's company, to approach within fifty (50) feet of any motorized watercraft on the tidal waters of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-5. - Distance between skiers and swimmers or waders in tidal waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to water ski on the tidal waters of the city within fifty (50) feet of any person bathing, swimming or wading. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-6. - Operation of watercraft prohibited in designated swimming areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than law enforcement officers or other emergency response personnel in the performance of their duties, to operate any type of watercraft within any area designated and marked by the city as a "public swimming area." This section shall not be applicable to inflatable floats and rafts which are designed for use by no more than two (2) people at a time. 
(b)  The following area is designated for use as a public swimming area only: 
In the waters of the James River bounded on the south by the James River Fishing Pier and its adjacent parking lot, on the north by the Huntington Park Boat Ramp, and on the west by a line of pilings and other markers generally placed parallel to and approximately four hundred fifty (450) feet from the shoreline at mean low water. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 5118-98)  
Sec. 11-7. - Personal watercraft and skiing prohibited in certain waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a personal watercraft or water ski, or for any operator of any boat to permit any person to water ski: 
(1)  In the waters of the James River in the area from the James River Bridge fishing pier to the deep water channel leading from the Huntington Park Boat Ramp, such area to extend no further west than five hundred (500) yards from the Huntington Park Beach. 
(2)  In the waters of the James River in the area beginning at a point one hundred (100) yards downstream from the Hilton Pier and extending to a point one hundred (100) yards upstream from the Hilton Pier, such area to extend no further west than fifty (50) yards beyond the western end of the Hilton Pier. 
(3)  In the waters of the Warwick River in the area beginning at a point one hundred (100) yards downstream from the Denbigh Park Fishing Pier and extending to a point one hundred (100) yards upstream from the Denbigh Park Fishing Pier, such area to extend no further west than fifty (50) yards beyond the western end of the pier. 
(4)  In the waters of Newport News Creek (Newport News Seafood Industrial Park). 
(5)  In the waters within the I-664 wavescreen or in the entrance to the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park. Such waters collectively referred to as the waters of the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park. 
(6)  In the waters of Peterson's Yacht Basin north of the boat ramp. 
(b)  The prohibitions within this section shall not apply to personal watercraft being operated by law enforcement or other emergency response personnel in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 5029-97)  
Sec. 11-8. - Swimming prohibited in certain waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe or swim: 
(1)  In any of the waters referred to in subparagraphs (3), (4), (5) or (6) of section 11-7; 
(2)  In the waters of the Roy Peterson Yacht Basin or in the entrance thereto between the Sixteenth Street Bridge and Hampton Roads. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-9. - Safe operation of watercraft generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any watercraft to operate such watercraft in such a manner as to endanger life, limb or property. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-10. - Passing watercraft under way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any watercraft to pass other watercraft under way so closely or at such a rate of speed as to endanger the control of either vessel by its operator, or so as to entail or likely to entail danger or injury to a person or property from its wake. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to watercraft utilizing designated channels as provided by state and federal rules and regulations, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-11. - Operation of watercraft so as to endanger moored watercraft, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any watercraft to operate the same at such speed or in such proximity to moored watercraft as to endanger the security of their mooring, or so as to entail danger of injury to person or property, or unreasonable inconvenience to personal comfort, aboard such moored watercraft. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-12. - Watercraft lights and sound equipment. 
All watercraft operated on or moored in waters under the jurisdiction of the city shall be equipped with lights and sound equipment meeting the current requirements of the rules and regulations of the United States Coast Guard Navigation Rules, International-Inland and such lights and sound equipment shall be operated in accord with such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-13. - Approach and exit lanes to docking facilities and launching ramps for watercraft. 
(a)  The director of the department of parks, recreation and tourism shall designate, where deemed necessary, approach and exit lanes to docking facilities and launching ramps, which shall be clearly and properly marked, and within which only motorized watercraft may be operated. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person when approaching or leaving such dock or launching ramp to operate a motorboat outside designated lanes or at a speed in excess of five (5) miles per hour. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe, swim or wade within such designated lanes. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-14. - Limitation on speed of watercraft in certain waters; "no wake" designation of certain waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any watercraft in excess of five (5) miles per hour, or to generate a wake that, by virtue of wave height, speed or frequency, adversely impacts and disturbs other watercraft, marine structures or equipment, wildlife or the adjacent shoreline: 
(1)  In the waters of Deep Creek Harbor or in the entrance to such harbor; 
(2)  In the waters of Lucas Creek; 
(3)  In the waters of the Leeward Marina, Huntington Park Boat Ramp, and the City maintained channel leading into the facilities; 
(4)  In the waters of Fishers Creek; 
(5)  In any of the waters referred to in section 11-7; 
(6)  In or on any other waters designated by the commonwealth or the city, and identified by a sign indicating the speed limit or a "no wake" zone. 
(b)  The prohibitions within this section shall not apply to watercraft operated by law enforcement or other emergency response personnel in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 5029-97; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-15. - Watercraft not to be moored on portion of Salters Creek. 
No person operating watercraft on the waters of Salters Creek shall use either side of that part of such creek, between its mouth and the Sixteenth Street Bridge, as a mooring place, in any manner, by placing on the banks a stake, pole or anchor, or any other mooring device on the property of the city, or in the creek itself within such area. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-16. - Storing, painting and repairing watercraft upon the public beaches and shorelines of the city; exception. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, store or draw upon the public beaches and shorelines of the city any watercraft for any reason other than a bona fide emergency. 
(b)  Personal watercraft and small unmotorized water such as canoes and kayaks may be pulled up, for no more than three (3) consecutive hours, upon the public beaches and shorelines of the city in the areas designated for such watercraft. The designated area shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any area where a person is permitted to bathe, swim and wade. This subsection shall not be construed to allow the long-term storage, painting or repairing of such watercraft upon the public beaches and shorelines of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14; Ord. No. 7307-16)  
Sec. 11-17. - Use of public pier or dock by motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park a motor vehicle on any public pier or dock except those designated for such and only during the actual loading or unloading of cargo. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-18. - Diving or jumping off piers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any city pier, dock or bulkhead for the purpose of diving or jumping into the water surrounding such facility, where signs are placed on such facility, in conspicuous places, warning all persons that use of the facility for diving or jumping into the water is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-19. - Deposit of injurious material in or on harbors or yacht basin. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause or permit to be deposited, in any waters of the Deep Creek Harbor, the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park harbor or the Roy Peterson Yacht Basin, or along the shores thereof, or any of the streams or ditches emptying therein, or any of the land adjacent or contiguous thereto, any refuse, offal, debris, waste matter or other substance or material, whether earth, oil, liquid, animal, fish or vegetable matter, or other matter that may injuriously affect the sanitary, clean and safe condition of the water in either such harbor or the yacht basin, or diminish the depth thereof. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-20. - Floating loose timber or logs in harbors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to float loose timber or logs in the waters of the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park Harbor or Deep Creek Harbor. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-21. - Use of public pier for commercial purposes prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public pier, bulkhead, the I-664 wavescreen or public dock for any commercial purpose except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  There is hereby excepted from the prohibition set forth above, all commercial activity authorized by any lease or other agreement from the city for the use of the property concerned, the sale of gasoline by the city, and all commercial activity carried on as part of a recreational or cultural event sponsored or approved by the city. 
(c)  Commercial activities and purposes shall mean the sale, lease, exchange or barter of goods or services. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-22. - Fishing and crabbing prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fish or crab in any of the waters referred to in Article II, Article III and Article IV of this chapter where such prohibition is so posted. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-23. - Violation of No Wake Zone. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any watercraft so as to create a wake in those areas of the waters that have been posted as "NO WAKE" areas or zones. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 4775-95)  
Sec. 11-24. - Sinking of watercraft in harbor; marking and removal of sunken watercraft. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sink or abandon, or permit or cause to be sunk or abandoned, any vessel, barge, scow or other craft in any waters within or adjoining the city, or to float loose timbers, logs or debris therein. 
(b)  Whenever a vessel or other watercraft is sunk in such waters, accidentally or otherwise, it shall be the duty of both the owner and the operator of such sunken watercraft to immediately mark such sunken watercraft with a buoy and, at night, with approved lights, and to maintain such marks until the sunken watercraft is removed. It shall be the duty of both the owner and the operator of such sunken watercraft to commence the immediate removal of the same and to diligently prosecute such removal. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for either the owner or operator of a sunken watercraft to fail or refuse to immediately mark, and upon notification to remove or re-float the sunken craft, within ten (10) calendar days of notification. 
(d)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 5038-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-25. - Unlawful to maintain a domicile in a moored or anchored watercraft; exception. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to maintain a domicile in or on watercraft moored or anchored in the tidal waters within the City of Newport News. 
(b)  Watercraft moored or anchored within Leeward Marina may be used as a domicile so long as there exists a valid lease with the city to do so. 
(c)  Watercraft moored or anchored within privately owned marinas are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-26. - Unlawful to store private property on public property. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter with reference to the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park, it shall be unlawful for any person to store private property on city owned or operated docks, mooring areas, marinas and lands adjacent thereto unless such property is stored in an area designated by the city for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-27. - Watercraft required to be sound, seaworthy and operational. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to moor watercraft or raft to another watercraft moored to city owned piers, bulkheads, docks or other property unless said watercraft is sound, seaworthy and fully operational, unless such mooring or rafting is specifically allowed by ordinance or resolution. 
(b)  All watercraft moored or rafted to another watercraft moored to city owned piers, bulkheads, docks, or other property must possess and display a valid state, federal or foreign boat registration. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-28. - Removal, disposal or repair of abandoned vessels; docks, wharves, piers, pilings, bulkheads or other structures or vessels, which are hazardous or obstructions. 
(a)  Whenever the director of the department of parks, recreation and tourism, or the Harbor Master, or their designees or successors, shall be of the opinion that any vessel has been abandoned, or that any dock, wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel might endanger the public health or safety of persons, or might constitute a hazard or obstruction to the lawful use of the waters within or adjoining the city, he shall cause a written notice to be mailed by certified mail or delivered to the owner of such dock, wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel, directing the owner to remove, repair, dispose of or secure such property within the time specified in such notice. Any such owner who shall fail to remove, repair, dispose of or secure such property within the time specified in such notice shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day's default in the removal, repair, disposal or securing shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, a judge hearing the case may order the owner to remove, repair, dispose of or secure the dock, wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel. 
(b)  If the owner fails to remove, repair, dispose of or secure such dock, wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel within the time specified in the notice given pursuant to this section, the director of the department of parks, recreation and tourism or the Harbor Master, or their designees or successors, may remove, repair, dispose of or secure such property at the expense of the owner, and the expense shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property or the owner of the property to which any dock, wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure, hereinafter referred to as "hazard" is attached. Such expense shall be a lien upon such property that was removed, repaired, disposed of or secured, and upon any parcel of land of which the hazard is a part or to which the hazard is affixed or from which it was removed, and upon the owner's other real property in the city, until paid. Such expense shall be reported by the director of the department of parks, recreation and tourism or the Harbor Master, or their designees or successors, to the city treasurer, who shall collect the same in the manner in which city taxes levied upon real estate are authorized to be collected. Such lien shall be recorded in the judgment lien docket book in the circuit court of the city, and may also be reduced to a personal judgment against the owner and collected as otherwise provided by law. 
(c)  If the identity or whereabouts of the lawful owner is unknown or not able to be ascertained after a reasonable search and the above referenced notice has been made to the last known address of any known lawful owner, the director of department of parks, recreation and tourism or the Harbor Master, or their designees or successors, may cause repairs to be made to such wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel, or cause same to be removed and disposed of after giving notice of such repair or removal in a newspaper of general circulation in Newport News, Virginia. In the event the director of the department of parks, recreation and tourism or the Harbor Master, or their designees or successors, causes the removal, repair or security of any such wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel after complying with the notice provisions of this section, such expense shall be a lien upon such property that was removed, repaired, disposed of or secured, and upon any parcel of land of which the hazard is a part or to which the hazard is affixed or from which it was removed, and upon the owner's other real property in the city, until paid. Such expense shall be reported by the director of the department of parks, recreation and tourism or the Harbor Master, or their designees or successors, to the city treasurer, who shall collect the same in the manner in which city taxes levied upon real estate are authorized to be collected. Such lien shall be recorded in the judgment lien docket book in the circuit court of the city, and may also be reduced to a personal judgment against the owner and collected as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 5038-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
ARTICLE II. - ROY PETERSON YACHT BASIN 
 
Sec. 11-29. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, the term "yacht basin" shall mean the Roy Peterson Yacht Basin. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-30. - Erection of buildings, sheds, wharves, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect in the waters of the yacht basin or along the shores thereof, or on any of the land adjacent thereto, any building, shed, boathouse, piling, wharf or pier. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-31. - Mooring or anchoring of watercraft. 
No watercraft shall be moored or anchored inside the yacht basin except at such places as may be designated by the director of the department of parks, recreation and tourism. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-32. - Drawing up watercraft on shore. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to draw up on the shore surrounding the yacht basin any watercraft except at such points as may be designated by the director of the department of parks, recreation and tourism. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Secs. 11-33—11-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NEWPORT NEWS SEAFOOD INDUSTRIAL PARK 
 
Sec. 11-50. - Definition. 
For the purpose of this article, the term "Newport News Seafood Industrial Park Harbor" shall mean the waters of Newport News Creek, the waters within the I-664 wavescreen and the entrance to such harbor. The term "Newport News Seafood Industrial Park" shall mean all land bounded on the north by twelfth street, on the west by Terminal Avenue, the east by Jefferson Avenue to the southern boundary of King/Lincoln Park thence all land to Hampton Roads including the I-664 wavescreen. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-51. - Lease or permit for use or occupancy. 
(a)  With the exception of such city property abutting the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park which has been reserved for public use as a part of the federal project for improvement of the harbor and so identified by appropriate signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any part of the city property lying within the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park, without first having obtained a lease or permit for such use or occupation. No lease or permit shall be granted for any term for the use of a site for residential purposes only. 
(b)  All leases and permits for the use or occupancy of land in the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park shall be in writing, submitted to and approved by the city council, and executed by the parties thereto and preserved in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-52. - Permits to erect buildings or structures. 
(a)  By virtue of the adoption of a federal project for improvement of the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park harbor and the modification of harbor lines by the United States Corps of Engineers at and in proximity thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect any type of structure in the waters of the harbor or within the bulkhead line thereof without first securing a permit as prescribed by the building code of the city and obtaining a permit from the Army Corps of Engineers. It shall be unlawful to erect any type of structure on city property abutting the harbor without first securing a permit as prescribed by the building code of the city. 
(b)  All buildings, projections or structures erected without the permits required by this section or in violation of the terms of such permits shall be removed or rebuilt, at the owner's expense, to comply with this section and such permits. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-53. - Dockage fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to moor any watercraft to city moorings in the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park harbor without first being assigned a mooring by the Harbor Master. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to fail to remove any watercraft from the city moorings in the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park harbor within five (5) calendar days after being notified in writing to do so by the city manager or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to moor any watercraft within the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park harbor to a berth assigned to another watercraft or to a berth other than the one to which the craft is assigned. 
(d)  Dockage fees assessed against watercraft for berthing at a city controlled pier, wavescreen, bulkhead structure or bank within the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park shall first be submitted to and approved by the city council and shall be enforced by the city manager or his assigned representative. 
(e)  Monthly dockage fees shall be payable in advance by the fifth day of each month and monthly payments not received by the fifth day of each month shall accrue a late payment fee as approved by the city council. 
(f)  Failure to pay dockage fees as provided in this section shall constitute cause for the removal of any vessel from the city moorings in the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park Harbor. 
(g)  The departure of any vessel from the seafood industrial park prior to paying all dockage fees or making arrangements to do so shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-53.1. - Wharfage fees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to move or transfer, goods, chattels, seafood or similar items from watercraft moored at the city controlled bulkhead or pier in the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park Harbor without first having paid a wharfage fee to the harbor master. 
(b)  Wharfage fees, in the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per consecutive thirty (30) day period or seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per consecutive seven (7) day period shall be assessed for transferring or moving goods, chattels, seafood or similar items across a city controlled pier, wavescreen, bulkhead structure or bank within the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park. 
(c)  Wharfage fees shall be paid to the Harbor Master in advance. 
(Ord. No. 5091-98, § 1; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-54. - Mooring, anchoring, tying up, etc., watercraft generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to moor, anchor, tie-up, lay-off or stop any watercraft in the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the passage, approach, berthing or anchoring of other vessels or crafts, except at such points as shall be designated, located and directed by the city manager or his duly authorized agent. No watercraft shall utilize in any way bulkhead or pier space inside the Seafood Industrial Park harbor, except only that portion which is leased from the city and with respect only to the watercraft of such lessees, without first obtaining the permission of the city manager, or his duly authorized agent. Dockage charges shall be paid to the city according to rates approved by the Newport News City Council. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-55. - Mooring or anchoring of pleasure watercraft. 
No pleasure watercraft shall be moored or anchored inside the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park Harbor except at such points as shall be designated, located and directed by the city manager or his duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-56. - Use of land for drying nets, hauling boats, storing pound poles or storing crab pots. 
No person, other than Newport News Seafood Industrial Park harbor lessees and their invitees shall use the land, piers, wavescreen or bulkheads within the Newport News Seafood Industrial Park Harbor for drying nets, hauling watercraft, storing crab pots or storing pound poles unless such person shall first obtain permission of the Harbor Master. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Secs. 11-57—11-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEEP CREEK HARBOR 
 
Sec. 11-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7106-14, adopted September 23, 2014, repealed § 11-70 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained permit for erection of structures and derived from Ord. No. 4422-92.  
Sec. 11-71. - Mooring, anchoring, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to moor, raft, anchor, tie-up, lay off or stop any watercraft in Deep Creek Harbor in such manner as to prevent or obstruct the passage, approach, berthing or anchoring of other watercraft. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-72. - Certain vessels prohibited from docking or mooring at city facilities. 
It shall be unlawful for any vessel or craft, having an installed toilet with a discharge overboard or a sewage holding tank to dock or moor at any city-owned facility located in the Deep Creek Harbor. This section shall not apply to vessels tying up to such a facility in bona fide emergency situations. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92)  
Sec. 11-73. - Moored watercraft limited to fifty feet in length; unlawful. 
(a)  Mooring watercraft or rafting to another watercraft moored to the city owned bulkhead located at the end of Menchville Road, identified as parcel 199000104 with an address of 522 Menchville Road S, is limited to watercraft fifty (50) feet or less in length. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of such watercraft to moor or raft, or continue to moor or raft watercraft exceeding fifty (50) feet in length after having been notified of the mooring and rafting limitation. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-74. - Scows, barges, etc. prohibited at city owned facilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to moor or raft scows, barges or similar watercraft to the city owned bulkhead located at the end of Menchville Road, identified as parcel 199000104 with an address of 522 Menchville Road S, without permission from the director of the department of parks, recreation and tourism. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-75. - Rafting limited to three watercraft. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to raft more than three (3) watercraft to any other watercraft moored on the city owned bulkhead located at the end of Menchville Road, identified as parcel 199000104 with an address of 522 Menchville Road S. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4422-92; Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Sec. 11-76. - All watercraft moored or rafted to another watercraft moored at the city owned bulkhead to register with the department of parks, recreation and tourism. 
(a)  All watercraft moored or rafted to another watercraft moored at the city owned bulkhead located at the end of Menchville Road, identified as parcel 199000104 with an address of 522 Menchville Road S are required to register with the department of parks, recreation and tourism. In order to register, watercraft must be in full compliance with all state and city codes. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 7106-14)  
Chapter 12 - BONDSMEN[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Bail and recognizances, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-119 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Recognizance constitutes bond for purposes of chapter. 
For the purposes of this chapter a recognizance shall be construed to be a bond. 
(Ord. No. 49, §§ 10, 16; Code 1961, § 12-43)  
Sec. 12-2. - License required; license tax. 
No person shall, for compensation, enter into any bond for another in the city, whether as a principal or surety, unless such person shall have first obtained a license for that purpose. The tax for such license shall be as prescribed in section 23-48 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 49, §§ 1, 2; Code 1961, §§ 12-44, 12-45) 
State Law reference— Authority to require above license, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3724.  
Sec. 12-3. - Certificate from circuit court judge prerequisite to issuance of license. 
No license required by section 12-2 shall be issued unless and until the applicant shall have first obtained a certificate from the judge of the circuit court of the city approving the issuance of the license and certifying that the applicant is of good moral character, that the applicant's past conduct before the courts of the city has not been unsatisfactory and that the applicant is suitable to be licensed. Any person desiring such a certificate shall post a notice of intention to apply for same in front of courthouse. Such notice shall give the date on which the application will be made, which shall be not less than ten (10) days after the posting of the notice. The judge of the circuit court shall not issue such certificate, unless such notice requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 3; Code 1961, § 12-46) 
Cross reference— General provisions relative to certificates as prerequisite to issuance of license, § 23-17. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3724.  
Sec. 12-4. - Revocation of license. 
If any person licensed as provided in this chapter fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, the license issued to such person may be revoked by the judge of the circuit court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 9; Code 1961, § 12-47) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for revocation of bondsman's license, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3724.  
Sec. 12-5. - Not to designate agent to act as surety. 
No bondsman licensed by the city shall designate any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation as such bondsman's agent to act in behalf of such bondsman in furnishing surety for any person or persons. 
(Lic. Tax Ord. of 1977, § 42)  
Sec. 12-6. - Limitation on aggregate penalty of outstanding bonds. 
No bondsman licensed by the city shall enter into any bond, if the aggregate of the penalty of such bond and all other bonds, on which such bondsman has not been released from liability, is in excess of the true market value of such bondsman's real estate. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 4; Code 1961, § 12-48)  
Sec. 12-7. - List of outstanding bonds to be filed with clerk of circuit court. 
Each bondsman licensed by the city shall file with the clerk of the circuit court of the city, not later than the fifth day of each month, a list of all outstanding bonds on which the bondsman was obligated as of the last day of the preceding month, together with the amount of the penalty of each such bond. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 5; Code 1961, § 12-49)  
Sec. 12-8. - Information concerning real estate holdings to be filed with clerk of circuit court. 
Before entering into any bond, every bondsman licensed by the city shall file, with the clerk of the circuit court of the city, a list of such bondsman's several tracts, parcels or lots of land, briefly describing the location of, and improvements on, each separate tract, parcel or lot, and giving the fair market value of each separate tract, parcel or lot and the improvements thereon and the amount of all liens and encumbrances, if any, on each separate tract, parcel or lot. Whenever there is any change in the real estate or liens or encumbrances thereon, the value thereof, owned by such bondsman, decreasing the bondsman's equity therein, a new list shall be filed with the clerk, setting forth the information herein required to be given in the original list. A bondsman may, at any time, file a revised list under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 6; Code 1961, § 12-50)  
Sec. 12-9. - Determination of value of real estate holdings in case of disagreement. 
Should the city attorney, commonwealth's attorney or other judicial officer of the city disagree with a bondsman licensed by the city as to the fair market value of any tract, parcel or lot of land contained in the list filed by such bondsman as provided in section 12-8, the person so disagreeing shall notify such bondsman in writing and, if they cannot agree on the fair market value, then the city attorney, commonwealth's attorney or other judicial officer, as the case may be, and the bondsman shall each select a real estate dealer, and such real estate dealer shall review such real estate and fix the fair market value thereof. If these two (2) real estate dealers cannot agree, then they shall select a third real estate dealer familiar with the market value of real estate in the locality of such real estate and a majority of such dealers shall fix the true market value of such real estate. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 8; Code 1916, § 12-51)  
Sec. 12-10. - Power of attorney to be filed with clerk of circuit court by married bondsmen. 
Every bondsman licensed by the city, if married, shall file with the clerk of the circuit court for the city a power of attorney, duly executed and acknowledged by the spouse of such bondsman, authorizing such bondsman to obligate and encumber any and all property owned by such bondsman in the state individually, or as joint tenants or tenants in common with the right of survivorship as at common law, in the execution, performance and discharge of any and all obligations incurred. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 7; Code 1961, § 12-52)  
Sec. 12-11. - Maximum fees. 
(a)  The maximum fees that may be charged by a bondsman, where the original bond is for appearance of the principal before the circuit court of the city, or any judge of such court, or in any case where it is indicated to the circuit court that a petition will be presented to the district court or any judge thereof for an appeal or writ of error, shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a bond in the amount of $100.00 or less .....$12.50 
(2)  For each additional $100.00 or portion thereof, up to and including $500.00 .....10% 
(3)  For each additional $100.00 or portion thereof over $500.00 and not over $2,000.00 .....7% 
(4)  For each additional $100.00 or portion thereof over $2,000.00 .....6% 
(b)  When a defendant is held by the court to answer any indictment that may be found against the defendant by a grand jury, the bondsman shall have the right to collect from the defendant the same bond fees as prescribed in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The charges set out in this section shall be based on the aggregate amount of the bonds executed for any one (1) person at any one (1) time, where more than one (1) bond is so executed. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 11; Ord. No. 1361; Code 1961, §§ 12-53, 12-54)  
Sec. 12-12. - Refund of portion of fee when principal surrendered prior to time stipulated in bond. 
Whenever any bondsman licensed by the city surrenders such bondsman's principal under bail prior to the time stipulated in the bond, the bondsman shall refund to such principal a proportionate part of the amount collected from such principal proportioned according to the time such bond has been in effect and the time stipulated in the bond for the appearance of such principal. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 12; Code 1961, § 12-55)  
Sec. 12-13. - Entering into bond without complying with chapter. 
If any person enters into any bond for compensation, without first complying with the provisions of this chapter, such person shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 13; Code 1961, § 12-58)  
Sec. 12-14. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures. 
(a)  All fines imposed and collected for the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury at the time of the regular disbursements of other state and city fines by the court in which it is collected. 
(b)  An action to enforce the forfeiture of any bond for the appearance of defendants in the circuit court of the city shall be instituted and proceeded into judgment in such court, with the right of appeal, however, from any judgment rendered by such court. All collections made under this subsection shall be paid into the city treasury at the time of regular disbursements of state and city fines. 
(Ord. No. 49, § 15; Code 1961, § 12-57)  
Chapter 13 - BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5365-99, adopted Nov. 9, 1999, amended Ch. 13, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 13 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Erection of buildings, sheds, etc., in or near Roy Peterson Yacht Basin or municipal boat harbor, §§ 11-30, 11-52; erection of structures in Deep Creek Harbor, § 11-70; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16; construction requirements for food establishments, § 17-19 et seq.; mobile home parks, Ch. 25; permit for moving of houses, § 26-92 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 35; work on, over, under or affecting streets, § 38-34 et seq.; construction of sidewalks, § 38-97 et seq.; vaults under sidewalks, § 38-117 et seq.; installation or repair of underground utilities prior to street improvements, § 38-193 et seq.; street numbers for buildings, § 38-209 et seq.; swimming pools, Ch. 39; water supply, Ch. 42; zoning ordinance, Ch. 45; subdivision regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1117; Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Notice of order to abate violations of chapter and zoning ordinance. 
The director of codes compliance, any person authorized by the director of codes compliance and any person assigned to the department of codes compliance who has been appointed as a special conservator of the peace and has been given the duty to enforce the regulations set forth in this chapter and in the zoning ordinance set forth in the City Code shall have the authority to serve a written notice of violation and to order the abatement of such violation. Such written notices of violation and orders to abate violations of this chapter and the zoning ordinance shall be served by delivering a copy to the person by mail to the last known post office address, or by delivering it in person, or by delivering it to and leaving it in the possession of any person in charge of the premises, or by posting it in a conspicuous place at the entrance door or access way if such persons cannot be found on the premises. Such special conservators of the peace are each hereby granted the authority to issue a summons to the general district court to any person in the city who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such notice of violation or order to abate such violations. Such special conservators of the peace are further authorized to issue a civil summons or other civil process to any person in the city who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such notice of violation or order to abate such violations for those violations specifically identified as civil violations in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5948-03, § 1)  
Sec. 13-2. - General penalty for violations of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or any other person, firm or corporation, to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Unless otherwise provided, any such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any owner or any other person, firm or corporation convicted of such a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00); additionally, each day the violation continues, after conviction or the court ordered abatement period has expired, shall constitute a separate offense. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the City Code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six (6) months of the date of conviction. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five (5) years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter, after having been at least twice previously convicted, shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten (10) days and a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(b)  Any owner or any other person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of the building code relating to the removal of the covering of lead-base paint which poses a hazard to the health of pregnant women and children under the age of six (6) years who occupy the premises shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court convicts pursuant to this subsection and sets a time by which such hazard must be abated, each day the hazard remains unabated after the time set for the abatement has expired shall constitute a separate violation of the City Code. 
(c)  The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this chapter or any lawful order issued hereunder shall not preclude the city attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises. 
(d)  As an alternative to the criminal penalties provided in this chapter, and in addition to any other remedy allowed by law, the following violations of this chapter and the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended, or any successor thereto, are hereby declared to be civil violations and are subject to the schedule of civil penalties provided for in subsection (e) of this section: 
(1)  Violations of section 13-150 of this chapter. 
(2)  Violations of section 13-180 of this chapter. 
(3)  Violations of section PM-302.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(4)  Violations of section PM-305.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(e)  Any person who, having been served with a notice of violation to abate or remedy a violation of a kind provided in subparagraph (d) of this section, shall fail to comply with such order within ten (10) days after such service or shall continue the violation with respect to the violation named in such notice shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial summons or violation, and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each additional summons or violation. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. Specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, and a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). Utilization of the civil penalty provided by this subsection shall preclude criminal sanctions for the same offense. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5490-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5948-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5975-03, § 1)  
Sec. 13-3. - Disconnection of electric or gas supply in emergencies and in cases of defective wiring, piping or equipment. 
(a)  In case of fire, natural disaster or other emergency, the director of codes compliance or such director's authorized representative, or any officer of the police or fire department shall have the authority to order a public utility company to disconnect its electric or gas supply lines to any building or premises. 
(b)  If any existing electrical wiring or equipment in or upon any building or premises in the city is found hazardous, defective or unsafe by any electrical inspector, such inspector shall give a written notice to the property owner enumerating the deficiencies and stating the time allowed to correct same. If upon reinspection at the end of the stated time period, the electrical system deficiencies have not been corrected, the electrical inspector shall order the electrical service to be disconnected under the authority contained in this section. Such order shall not bar any prosecution for failing to comply with a lawful order to correct the electrical system. 
(c)  If any existing consumer's gas piping or gas burning equipment in or upon any building or premises in the city is found hazardous, defective or unsafe by any mechanical inspector, such inspector shall give a written notice to the property owner enumerating the deficiencies and stating the time allowed to correct same. If upon reinspection at the end of the stated time period, the gas system deficiencies have not been corrected, the mechanical inspector shall order the gas service to be disconnected under the authority contained in this section. Such order shall not bar any prosecution for failing to comply with a lawful order to correct the gas system. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the public utility company holding a franchise granted by the city to disconnect any building or premises from its electrical or gas supply lines upon an order issued under the provisions of this section. It shall be the further duty of such company to have a competent employee on duty at all times, who shall promptly proceed to disconnect electrical or gas services upon issuance of such an order. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-4. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions of this chapter: 
(a)  Board means the board of appeals as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Boarding up means covering entirely all window, door and similar openings with a minimum of three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch thick exterior plywood, fitted into said openings, and secured by nails, screws or other approved devices. All coverings shall be provided with a protective coat of paint or other approved weather resistant material which is consistent with the exterior color scheme of the building. 
(c)  Building code means the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended. 
(d)  City Code means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
(e)  Codes compliance administrator means the director of the department of codes compliance. 
(f)  Corner lot means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, the shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot. 
(g)  Decorative fence means a fence that is designed as an ornament, embellishment or decoration to the property although it may incidentally provide some measure of privacy or security, such as split rail and wrought iron fences. 
(h)  Director means the director of the department of codes compliance as well as city employees, agents and other assignees who assist the director to in performing the duties and authority assigned and delegated to the department of codes compliance. 
(i)  Fence means a physical structure commonly attached to the ground or a building which is made of wood, rock, metal, or other natural or synthetic material, and which is intended to delineate a boundary line, property line, access line or other desired demarcation, or to provide a decorative effect to the property. 
(j)  Front yard means open land area extending across the full width of a lot and lying between the front lot line and the principle structure(s). 
(k)  Inoperative motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition; or that does not display valid license plates; or which does not display an inspection decal which is valid or does display an inspection decal that has been expired for more than sixty (60) days. 
(l)  Inoperative trailer or semitrailer means any trailer or semitrailer which is not in operating condition; or that does not display valid license plates; or which does not display an inspection decal which is valid or does display an inspection decal that has been expired for more than sixty (60) days. 
(m)  Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any structure designed, used, or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place, office, or commercial space shall be considered a part of a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this title, any device herein defined as a bicycle or a moped shall be deemed not to be a motor vehicle. 
(n)  Owner means the holder of title in fee simple; and/or any person, group of persons, company, association or corporation in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. It shall also mean any person who alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any building or building unit with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; and 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any building or building unit as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owners, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in control of a building; or their duly authorized agents. 
Any such person, group of persons, company, association or corporation or entity shall have joint and several responsibility from compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(o)  Person means, without limitation, person, firm, partnership, corporation, company, limited liability company, partnership, or entity and any other term that denotes a human being or legal entity. 
(p)  Person responsible for real property means an owner, tenant, lessee, or any other person exercising dominion, management or control of real property in Newport News, Virginia. 
(q)  Rear yard means open land area extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the principal structure. 
(r)  Required yard means the open land area between the minimum setback lines required in a zoning district and the lot lines. 
(s)  Secure against unauthorized entry means secured in such a manner as to exclude unauthorized entry by humans, animals or birds. 
(t)  Security fence means a fence that is primarily designed and is intended to provide privacy or security regardless of its decorative effect. Such security fences normally cause a parcel of land to be so enclosed as to result in the prohibition of free ingress and egress, or the shielding of a parcel from view from outside the security fence, and include but are not limited to barbed wire fences, metal fences generally known as "chain link fences" and wooden fences generally known as "stockade fences." 
(u)  Semitrailer means every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests on or is carried by another vehicle. 
(v)  Side yard means open land area between the side lot line and the principal structure(s) and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(w)  Street shall be deemed to include private as well as public rights-of-way. 
(x)  Trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including mobile homes. 
(y)  Vacant or unoccupied building means any building or structure which is not occupied, used or inhabited on a regular and continuing basis by some person with a valid claim of right to possession or a fee simple title. The intrusion of trespassers or squatters into such buildings on any basis shall not render such building occupied or nonvacant within the meaning of this chapter. 
(z)  Vehicle means every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a highway, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. For the purposes of this chapter, bicycles, mopeds, motorized scooters and electric power-assisted bicycles shall not be considered vehicles. 
(aa)  Weeds means any grass or plants out of place, wild or uncontrolled growth or vegetation of every kind on any land, alley, sidewalk or street in the city, whether growing or severed from the land, of such height or of such profusion as to constitute or which is likely to constitute a harborage for rats, a place where mosquitoes or other harmful pests or insect infestations may breed or water may stagnate or which conceals or is likely to conceal deposits of garbage, trash or debris. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5876-02; Ord. No. 5975-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6039-04, § 1; Ord. No. 6849-12, § 1)  
Sec. 13-5. - Conformance with Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance. 
No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter in any case where the structure or activity to be permitted conflicts with the requirements of Chapter 37.1, Article V, Chesapeake Bay Preservation. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-6. - Construction near grave, etc. 
No structure shall be constructed which damages or destroys any grave or place of burial that contains or which may contain human remains. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-7. - Removal of defacements. 
The city manager or his/her designated representative is authorized to undertake or contract for the removal or repair of the defacement of any public building, wall, fence or other structure. Further the city manager or his/her designated representative may also undertake or contract for the removal or repair of the defacement of any private building, wall, fence or other structure where such defacement is visible from any public right-of-way. 
Prior to such removal or repair of any defacement from private property, the city manager or his/her designated representative shall send to the property owner, by regular mail sent to the last address listed for the owner in city property assessment records, a notice stating: the street address and legal description of the property; that the property has been defaced; that the owner must repair or remove the defacement within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice; and that if the defacement is not removed or repaired within the fifteen-day period, the city will begin removal procedures. In the case of unoccupied property, the notice shall also state that the cost of such corrective action shall be charged to the property owner. 
For purposes of this section, the term "defacement" means the unauthorized application by any means of any writing, painting, drawing, etching, scratching, or marking of an inscription, word, mark, figure, or design of any type. 
(Ord. No. 6765-11)  
Sec. 13-8. - Assessment of costs against property for removal or repair of defacements. 
(a)  If the city undertakes corrective action to remove or repair the defacement of unoccupied public or private property after complying with the notice provisions of section 13-7, the actual cost or expenses for such removal or repairs shall be chargeable to and paid by the property owner, and may be collected as a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates in the manner in which city taxes and levies are collected. 
(b)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as such liens. The city manager may waive and release such liens in order to facilitate the sale of the property. Such liens may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner and who has no business association with the owner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Ord. No. 6765-11)  
Secs. 13-9—13-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM STATEWIDE BUILDING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-21. - Purpose of article. 
The enactment of this article is deemed necessary in order to preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to assure the proper construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures and their service equipment within the city. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-22. - Conflict of article with existing ordinances. 
Ordinances or parts thereof in force at the time this article shall take effect, which are inconsistent with this article, are hereby repealed; provided, that the zoning ordinance of the City Code shall in no way be nullified by the provisions of this article, except as may be specifically required by the provisions of the building code as hereinafter adopted. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-23. - Adopted; general construction standards. 
(a)  The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and supplements thereto, including any future amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference; and the same are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length. The provisions of such code and supplements shall control all matters concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures, and all other functions which pertain to the installation of systems vital to all buildings and structures and their service equipment, as defined by such codes and supplements, and shall apply to existing and proposed buildings and structures in the city. Compliance with all provisions of the building code, including its maintenance provisions and this chapter is required and these codes shall be enforced by the director. 
(b)  All construction, alteration or repair of buildings or structures, or the installation of plumbing, piping, wiring, mechanical or electrical equipment in or upon such buildings, structures or premises, shall be reasonably safe to buildings and property and in conformity with the provisions of the City Code, and all orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof. Conformity of construction or installations of equipment with regulations set forth in the codes and supplements adopted by this section shall be prima facie evidence that construction or installations are reasonably safe to persons and property. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5975-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6395-07, § 1)  
Sec. 13-24. - Amendments. 
(a)  International Residential Code. The International Residential Code of the building code is amended by adding the following words and numbers to the listed column headings of Table R301.2(1): 
TABLE R301.2(1) 
GROUND 

SNOW 

LOAD 	WIND 

SPEED 

(mph) 	SEISMIC 

DESIGN 

CATEGORY 	SUBJECT TO 

DAMAGE FROM 

Weathering Frostline 

Termite Decay Depth 	Winter 

Design 

Temp. 	Ice Shield 

Underlayment 

Required 	Flood 

Hazards 
15 	100 3 sec. 

80 cont. 	A 0 - 17 	Moderate 12 in Mod to Heavy Slight to Mod. 	20 	No 	5/2/1977 
 
(b)  A public water supply system shall be deemed available to all premises located within the City of Newport News, except as provided in this section. 
Other approved potable water sources may be used when a detached single-family dwelling is to be located on an individual lot of record, provided that the minimum distance from the proposed dwelling to the nearest available public water supply system exceeds five hundred (500) linear feet. "Lot of record" shall mean a tract of land described by metes and bounds in a recorded deed or on a subdivision plat of record which possesses or is in the process of being assigned a number for tax assessment identification purposes. 
(c)  A public sewer system shall be deemed available as specified in Chapter 33 of City Code. 
(d)  Electrical utilities shall be installed only in accordance with the building code, Chapter 40.1 of the City Code and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5975-03, § 1)  
Sec. 13-25. - Availability of copies. 
Copies of the building code are available to members of the public in the office of the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development in accordance with Section 36-104 Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-26. - Fees, permit fees—Prescribed. 
(a)  Building permits: 
(1)  The minimum fee for any building permit shall be fifty-five dollars ($55.00). 
(2)  For the construction of any building or addition thereto where the floor area is increased and for the installation or erection of any industrialized building unit as defined in the building code, the fee shall be based on the floor area to be constructed, as computed from exterior building dimensions at each floor. In the case of buildings of use group R3, R4 or R5, any unenclosed carport, deck, porch or stoop, when built in conjunction with and at the same time as the dwelling, shall be excluded from the square footage computation. The cost of construction shall be determined by multiplying the total square footage by the appropriate cost per square foot found in Table 13-26 [at the end of this section]. The fee shall be computed as follows: 
a.  For use groups R3, R4 and R5, the fee shall be determined by multiplying the value of the construction as determined from Table 13-26, by a regional factor of eighty-eight hundredths (0.88), and the product thereof multiplied by a factor of forty-four hundredths (0.44) of one percent (.0044). 
b.  For all other use groups, the fee shall be determined by multiplying the value of the construction as determined from Table 13-26, by a regional factor of eighty-eight hundredths (0.88), and the product thereof multiplied by a factor of forty-eight hundredths (0.48) of one percent (.0048). 
(3)  For the alteration or repair of any building or structure, or for the construction or erection of piers, bulkheads, exterior walls or fences, towers, swimming pools or other structures or things, the fee shall be computed as follows: 
a.  For use groups R3, R4 and R5 the fee shall be determined by multiplying the value of the construction by a factor of forty-four hundredths (0.44) of one percent (.0044). 
b.  For all other use groups, the fee shall be determined by multiplying the value of the construction by a factor of forty-eight hundredths (0.48) of one percent (.0048). 
(4)  For the demolition or razing of any structure having a floor area greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet, the fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). A fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be charged for a permit to raze a building or structure with a floor area of two hundred fifty (250) square feet or less. 
(5)  For the erection, placement or removal of a building or structure, in part or in whole, from one (1) location to another, or into the city, or to a new location within the same lot or parcel of land, the fee shall be as determined by section 13-26(a)(2) for buildings, and by section 13-26(a)(3) for other structures. For buildings or structures being moved to sites outside the city, the fee shall be one hundred ten dollars ($110.00). 
(6)  For the erection or placement of tents, temporary office trailers, and temporary air-supported structures, the fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
(b)  Plumbing permits: 
(1)  The minimum permit fee for any plumbing permit shall be fifty-five dollars ($55.00). 
(2)  For the installation of each plumbing fixture, the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(3)  For the installation of the water distribution system in each unit of a multiple-occupancy building, or the installation of the water distribution system in other buildings, the fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(4)  For the connection of the waste drain from each unit of a multiple-occupancy building, or the connection of the building drain from other buildings to a public or private sanitary sewage collection system or sewage disposal system, the fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(5)  For each sewer (sanitary or storm), manhole (sanitary or storm), roof drain, area drain or other device, the fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(6)  For the installation of a gas line or medical gas line, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(7)  For an annual plumbing permit, the fee shall be forty-eight hundredths (0.48) of one percent (.0048) of the current value of all service, labor, materials and equipment. The minimum fee shall be fifty-five dollars ($55.00). 
(c)  Electrical permits: 
(1)  The minimum permit fee for any electrical permit shall be fifty-five dollars ($55.00). 
(2)  For the installation of each electrical system in new construction, the fee shall be determined from the rated size of service panel(s) in amperes as follows: 
	Single-Phase 	Three-Phase 
0—125 amps 	$55.00 	$85.00 
126—150 amps 	85.00 	110.00 
151—200 amps 	110.00 	165.00 
Over 200 amps 	165.00 	195.00 
 
Plus thirty dollars ($30.00) for each additional fifty (50) amperes or fraction thereof. 
(3)  For the installation of a temporary service or the reconnection of a mobile home, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(4)  For increasing the size of the electrical service to any building, structure or mobile home, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for service up to and including two hundred (200) amperes or fifty dollars ($50.00) plus fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each fifty (50) amperes or fraction thereof over two hundred (200) amperes. For relocation of any existing service without increasing the size, the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). No additional fee shall be charged for outlets when the service is increased in size. 
(5)  For repairs to an existing electrical system, and/or for the addition of receptacle, lighting or other outlets, the fee shall be forty-four hundredths (0.44) of one percent (.0044) of the current value of all service, labor, materials and equipment for buildings of use group R3, R4 or R5 and forty-eight hundredths (0.48) of one percent (.0048) of the current value of all service, labor, materials and equipment for buildings or structures of all other use groups. 
(d)  Mechanical permits: 
(1)  The minimum permit fee for any mechanical permit shall be fifty-five dollars ($55.00). 
(2)  For the installation, replacement, repair or alteration of mechanical systems or equipment, freestanding fireplaces and solid fuel stoves, storage tanks for flammable liquids or gases, fire suppression systems, elevators, dumbwaiters, moving stairways, moving walks, manlifts, and special hoisting or conveying equipment, the fee shall be forty-four hundredths (0.44) of one percent (.0044) of the current value of all service, labor, materials and equipment for buildings of use group R3, R4 or R5 and forty-eight hundredths (0.48) of one percent (.0048) of the current value of all service, labor, materials and equipment for buildings or structures of all other use groups. 
(3)  For the installation of one (1) kitchen hood vent and not more than three (3) bathroom vents in a dwelling of use group R3, R4 or R5 the fee shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
(4)  For the installation of a fire alarm system, music system or burglar alarm system, in other than dwellings of use group R3, R4 or R5 the fee shall be forty-eight hundredths (0.48) of one percent (.0048) of the current value of all service, labor, materials and equipment. 
(e)  Elevator operating permits. For periodic inspections made on all elevators, dumbwaiters, moving stairways, moving walks and manlifts in accordance with the building code, the fee shall be: 
(1)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the semi-annual routine inspection. 
(2)  Eighty-five dollars ($85.00) for the annual inspection and test. 
(3)  Forty-five dollars ($45.00) for the annual and semi-annual inspections for wheelchair lifts and inclined stairway chairlifts. 
(f)  Zoning confirmations. For the issuance of a confirmation of zoning appropriateness where a valid certificate of occupancy is on file, the fee shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(g)  Additional fees. Whenever work is begun prior to the issuance of a permit, the fee shall be doubled that which is otherwise imposed by this chapter. 
(h)  Utility reset inspection fee. The fee for a permit for reinspection of an electrical or gas piping system of a structure, to be made pursuant to the reconnection of the structure to the utility system, shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00). Such fee shall not be required to be paid when a permit has been issued for the installation of a new system or alteration of an existing system. Additional service charges may be assessed as provided for in this chapter. 
(i)  In accordance with section 110 of the building code, a fee in the amount of one and seventy-five hundredths (1.75) percent of the charge for a building permit shall be collected from the permittee upon issuance of fee permit and forwarded to the Department of Housing and Community Development to assist in funding the Virginia Building Code Academy. 
(j)  Plans review fee. For review of plans submitted to the department of codes compliance, the fee shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  For plans for improvements up to two thousand four hundred ninety-nine (2,499) square feet, the fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(2)  For plans for improvements from two thousand five hundred (2,500) to five thousand (5,000) square feet, the fee shall be fifty-five dollars ($55.00). 
(3)  For plans for improvements over five thousand (5,000) square feet, the fee shall be one hundred ten dollars ($110.00). 
(k)  Temporary certificate of occupancy fee. The fee for temporary certificates of occupancy shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
(l)  Reinspection fee. The fee for reinspection shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(m)  Amusement devices. 
(1)  An application fee in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each kiddie ride, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each circular ride or flat ride which can be inspected from less than twenty (20) feet above ground, and forty-five dollars ($45.00) for each other type of amusement device. 
(2)  An application fee in the amount of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for each kiddie ride, twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) for each circular ride or flat ride which can be inspected from less than twenty (20) feet above ground, and twenty-two dollars and fifty cents ($22.50) for each other type of amusement device. 
(n)  Fence permits. The fee for fence permits shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
(o)  Shed inspections. The fee for inspection of the construction of sheds not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet in foot print area shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
Table 13-26. Square Foot Construction Costs 
Type of Construction 
Use Group 	1A 	1B 	2A 	2B 	2C* 	4 	3A 	3B 	5A 	5B 
A-1 Assembly, theaters (with stage) 	$87.01 	$85.58 	$83.78 	$81.91 	$78.01 	$75.36 	$73.90 	$73.65 	$67.53 	$65.95 
A-1 Assembly 	77.95 	76.52 	73.71 	71.84 	67.94 	66.83 	63.83 	63.58 	58.38 	56.00 
A-2 Assembly 	69.39 	68.13 	66.30 	70.66 	63.77 	61.91 	57.03 	56.78 	49.78 	48.02 
A-3 Assembly 	68.88 	67.63 	65.79 	64.10 	63.27 	61.41 	56.53 	56.28 	49.28 	47.52 
A-4 Assembly 	83.07 	81.64 	78.83 	76.96 	73.06 	70.41 	68.95 	68.70 	60.66 	59.07 
A-5 Assembly 	68.88 	67.63 	65.79 	64.10 	63.27 	61.41 	56.53 	56.28 	49.28 	47.52 
B Business 	67.41 	65.81 	63.30 	61.50 	56.05 	58.35 	52.98 	52.24 	46.40 	44.94 
E Education 	68.74 	67.13 	64.52 	63.20 	57.38 	59.54 	54.26 	53.62 	47.69 	46.13 
F-1 Factory 	39.39 	38.03 	36.05 	34.22 	31.27 	28.50 	28.70 	28.60 	27.32 	26.27 
F-2 Factory 	39.39 	38.03 	36.05 	34.22 	31.27 	28.50 	28.70 	28.60 	27.32 	26.27 
H High hazard through H-5 High Hazard 	37.01 	35.65 	33.67 	31.84 	28.89 	26.12 	26.32 	26.22 	20.73 	N.P. 
I-1 Institutional 	59.29 	57.98 	55.78 	55.24 	50.78 	50.86 	47.14 	47.09 	42.88 	41.75 
I-2 Institutional 	91.07 	89.46 	86.96 	85.53 	79.71 	81.18 	75.91 	75.27 	69.34 	N.P. 
I-3 Institutional 	68.83 	68.22 	65.71 	64.33 	58.47 	61.98 	55.76 	55.12 	49.19 	N.P. 
I-4 Institutional 	59.29 	57.98 	55.78 	55.24 	50.78 	50.86 	47.14 	47.09 	42.88 	41.75 
M Mercantile 	54.47 	53.22 	51.36 	49.66 	48.83 	47.28 	42.4 	42.15 	35.15 	33.39 
R-1 Residential 	65.51 	64.20 	62.00 	61.46 	57.00 	57.97 	54.25 	54.20 	47.33 	46.20 
R-2 Residential 	56.99 	55.67 	53.48 	52.94 	48.47 	48.69 	44.94 	44.93 	38.06 	36.92 
R-3 through R-5 Residential 	48.72 	45.52 	45.95 	44.60 	43.36 	42.49 	41.58 	41.43 	37.67 	36.46 
S-1 Storage 	37.01 	35.65 	33.67 	31.84 	28.89 	26.12 	26.32 	26.22 	20.73 	19.68 
S-2 Storage 	37.01 	35.65 	33.67 	31.84 	28.89 	26.12 	26.32 	26.22 	20.73 	19.68 
U Utility/ 
Miscellaneous 	21.65 	21.65 	21.65 	21.65 	21.65 	21.65 	21.65 	21.65 	21.65 	21.65 
 
N.P. = Not Permitted 
* Note 2C can be omitted after one year (Oct. 1, 2004). 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5465-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5480-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5975-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6365-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6849-12, § 1)  
Sec. 13-27. - Same—Waiver of payment. 
(a)  Where the owner of any premises is the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Virginia, or this city, or the instrumentalities thereof, and the work performed in conjunction with the permit is performed by or for the owner, the payment of any permit fee established in Table 13-26 is hereby waived. 
(b)  The fees imposed in Table 13-26 may be waived if the city manager, or his designee, certifies that the criteria specified in the city's application for designation of a Newport News Enterprise Zone have been met. 
(c)  In the case of a revocation of a permit or abandonment or discontinuance of a building project, the city will provide a fee refund in proportion to that portion of the work that was not completed, when requested in writing by the permit holders. In order to receive a fee refund, the application must be received within sixty (60) days of the expiration or revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5768-02)  
Sec. 13-28. - Unsafe structures. 
(a)  Upon determination by the director that any building, wall or any other structure, or portion thereof, might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the city, such building, wall or structure shall be declared unsafe. 
(b)  Notice that a building, wall or structure has been declared unsafe shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last-known address of the owner and published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, once a week for two (2) successive weeks; provided, however, that the second publication shall not be sooner than one (1) calendar week after the first publication. Such notice shall state with reasonable particularity the defects or other conditions of the building, wall or structure which render it unsafe and shall specify the period of time within which repairs or corrections shall be made or the building, wall or structure, or a portion or portions thereof, demolished and removed. Such period of time shall not be less than is reasonably required by the exercise of due diligence for the required repairs or corrections to be made, or for the building, wall or structure, or portion or portions thereof, to be demolished and removed. 
(c)  In the event the owner of a building, wall or structure who has been served with the notice provided for in subsection (b) hereof shall fail to comply with the terms of such notice within the time specified therein, the director, through his or her own agents or employees, shall be authorized to order the building, wall or structure, or portion thereof, to be repaired, or to be demolished and the debris removed, at the cost of the owner. Such cost shall include an administrative fee in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00). For the purposes of this section, repair may include maintenance work to the exterior of a building to prevent deterioration of the building or adjacent buildings. No building, wall or structure, or portion thereof, shall be repaired or demolished by order of the director for at least thirty (30) days following the later of the return of the receipt or newspaper publication as provided for in subsection (b) hereof, except that the city may take action to prevent unauthorized access to the building within seven (7) days of such notice if the structure is deemed to pose a significant threat to public safety and such fact is stated in the notice. 
(d)  Any person who shall fail to comply with a notice provided for in subsection (b) hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the provisions of section 13-2 hereof. Any violation of the provisions of this section may also be enjoined by the circuit court at the suit of the city. 
(e)  All costs and expenses incurred by the city for repairing or demolishing a building, wall or structure pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of property and may be collected as real estate taxes and levies are collected. Any such charges which remain unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in §§ 58.1-3940 et seq., and 58.1-3965 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5975-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6709-10, § 1)  
Sec. 13-29. - Removal of unlawful or unsafe signs. 
Whenever the director shall cause the removal of an unlawful sign placed without proper permit, or shall cause the removal of a sign that has become unlawful or unsafe pursuant to the authority granted in the building code, such director shall determine the costs and expenses of such work. Such costs and expenses shall include an administrative charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and such costs and expenses shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of the property upon which the sign was located and shall be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. Every charge assessed under this section which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-30. - Insect and rodent infestation. 
All structures in the city shall be kept free by its owner and/or occupant from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation. 
(Ord. No. 5994-03)  
Secs. 13-31—13-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 13-40. - Inspections under building code generally. 
(a)  A building inspector shall, upon notification from the permit holder or such holder's agent, make the following inspections of buildings and such other inspections as may be necessary, and shall either approve that portion of the con-struction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or such holder's agent wherein the same fails to comply with the building regulations: 
(1)  Inspection of footing excavations and reinforcement material for concrete footings prior to the placement of concrete. 
(2)  Inspection of foundation systems during phases of construction necessary to assure compliance with the building code. 
(3)  Inspection of preparatory work prior to the placement of concrete. 
(4)  Inspection of structural members and fasteners (framing) prior to concealment. 
(5)  Inspection of electrical, mechanical and plumbing materials and systems prior to concealment. 
(6)  Inspection of energy conservation material (insulation) prior to concealment. 
(7)  Inspection of lath or wallboard prior to plastering or prior to taping and finishing wallboard joints and fasteners. 
(8)  Final inspection to be made and approved after the building, or portion thereof to be occupied under a temporary certificate of occupancy, is ready for occupancy. 
The building official may designate additional inspections and tests for the above enumerated items to be conducted during the construction or repair of a structure and so notify the permit holder. 
(b)  No work shall be done on any part of a building or structure beyond the point indicated above in each successive inspection, without first verifying that a building inspector has approved the work in place. 
(c)  No reinforcing steel, structural framework, plumbing, electrical wiring, gas piping, standpipe or sprinkler system piping, ductwork, or required insulation or fire-proofing material shall be covered or concealed in any manner whatsoever, without first verifying that such work or materials have been inspected and approved by an inspector employed by the city authorized to perform such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5975-03, § 1)  
Sec. 13-41. - Plumbing inspections. 
(a)  Inspections of plumbing work covered by the provisions of the building code shall be performed by a plumbing inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or such holder's agent. Such inspector shall either approve that portion of the plumbing work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or such holder's agent wherein such work fails to comply with the plumbing code or other building regulations. 
(b)  Completion of a final inspection of the plumbing system within a building shall not constitute final approval of such system where sanitary sewer or septic tank system connections have not been inspected and approved, or where the public sanitary sewer serving the premises has not been accepted for service by the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-42. - Electrical inspections. 
(a)  Inspections of electrical work covered by the building code and required under this section shall be performed by an electrical inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or such holder's agent. Such inspector shall either approve that portion of the electrical work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or holder's agent wherein such work fails to comply with the building regulations. 
(b)  As a minimum, the following inspections of electrical work shall be required. 
(1)  Rough inspection. To be made after wiring and electrical equipment has been installed but not yet covered or concealed. 
(2)  Service inspection. To be made after the electrical work is ready to be energized. The certificate of inspection provided for in section 13-43 shall be based on this inspection. 
(3)  Final inspection. To be made after all electrical work, including the installation of all electrical fixtures, has been completed. The certificate of inspection provided for in section 13-43 shall be based on this inspection. 
(c)  Additional inspections may be required by the electrical inspector where, in such inspector's judgment, such inspections are necessary because of the scope or complexity of the electrical work to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-43. - Certificate of electrical inspection. 
The certificate of inspection required by the building code shall be issued by an electrical inspector. Notice of the issuance of such certificate shall be furnished to the electric power company providing service to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-44. - Mechanical inspections. 
(a)  Mechanical inspections of mechanical work covered by the provisions of the building code shall be performed by a mechanical inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or such holder's agent. Such inspector shall either approve that portion of the mechanical work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or such holder's agent wherein such work fails to comply with the building regulations. 
(b)  Additional inspections may be required by a mechanical inspector where, in such inspector's judgment, such inspections are necessary because of the scope or complexity of the mechanical work to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-45. - Certificate of mechanical inspection for gas piping. 
A mechanical inspector or plumbing inspector shall issue a certificate of inspection after a final inspection has determined that all gas piping on any premises has been found to be in compliance with the building regulations. Notice of the issuance of such certificate shall be furnished to the gas company providing service to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5975-03, § 1)  
Sec. 13-46. - Inspection and approval of electrical and gas installations prerequisite to service. 
It shall be unlawful for any public utility company to furnish electricity or gas and to make or permit to be made any connections with its electric or gas supply lines to any building or structure, unless such electrical or gas piping installation has been inspected and a certificate of inspection has been issued, as provided for in this division. If such public utility company shall disconnect its electric or gas supply lines for the purpose of accommodating system related work or due to hazardous conditions, such company shall not reconnect its supply lines until such work or necessary corrective action has been inspected and approved. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 6849-12, § 1)  
Sec. 13-47. - Notification or request for inspection; inspector's access. 
It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit has been issued under the several provisions of the building code to arrange for each inspection as may be required in this division. Such person may designate an agent in his or her employ to notify an appropriate inspector that specific construction work is ready for inspection. Receipt of such notification or request for a specific type of inspection shall be taken to mean that such work to be inspected has been completed to the degree required for such inspection, and that reasonable access to the work has been provided to the inspector. Reasonable access for inspection of an attic space shall be taken to mean the placement of a ladder to access hatches, unless a permanent means for such access has been installed. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-48. - Service charge for additional inspections due to faulty work, premature inspection requests, etc. 
Whenever the senior building inspector, senior electrical inspector, senior plumbing inspector or senior mechanical inspector shall determine that inspections, in addition to those required in this division, are necessary, due to the failure of a contractor to properly correct faulty work, or where a contractor has requested an inspection before the work to be inspected has been completed to the degree required, or where the inspector cannot obtain reasonable access to the work to be inspected, the inspector shall assess a service charge of fifty dollars ($50.00). Such charge shall be chargeable to the holder of the permit covering such work and shall be paid to the city at the department of codes compliance prior to final approval of such work. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5975-03, § 1)  
Sec. 13-49. - Inspections in addition to those required by division. 
The director shall prescribe such inspections, in addition to those provided for in this division, as may be necessary to secure compliance with the building code, the Virginia Industrialized Building and Manufactured Home Safety Regulations or its successor, the zoning provisions of the City Code and such other regulations as shall properly fall within the enforcement responsibility of the department of codes compliance. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-50—13-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF APPEALS 
 
Sec. 13-60. - Established. 
There is hereby established a board of appeals, hereinafter referred to as the "board," as provided for in the building code adopted in Article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-61. - Compensation of members. 
Each appointed member of the board shall be compensated at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each attendance at an official meeting of the board. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-62. - Jurisdiction. 
The jurisdiction of the board, in acting on any appeal, shall include the entire scope of the codes and supplements thereto, as the same may be amended and as adopted in Article II of this chapter. The board shall also act on any appeal specifically provided for in such other building regulations as may be established in the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-63. - Duties. 
In addition to the duties of the board of appeals contained in the building code, the board shall perform such examination and qualification duties as are delegated to it by Division 6 of Article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-64. - Expert opinions on technical matters. 
On any appeal case forwarded to the board established by this article, the chairman shall have the authority to secure expert opinion from any recognized person, authority or agency on any technical matter relevant to the subject of the appeal. Nominal fees or stipends shall be authorized to be paid by the city for such purposes in an amount not to exceed a total of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in any particular appeal case. Any expert opinion secured by the board under this section shall be given during the conduct of the public hearing required by the building code and shall be made a part of the record of proceedings of the board. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-65. - Application for appeal; filing fee. 
Applications for appeal to the board shall be made at the office of the department of codes compliance and shall be accepted upon proper completion and payment of a filing fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-66—13-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REGISTRATION AND QUALIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS AND TRADESMEN[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54-1-1100 et seq.; tradesmen certification, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1128 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION OF STATE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 13-70. - Adopted; qualification standards. 
The current Virginia Tradesman Certification Standards, and supplements thereto, are hereby incorporated as fully as if set out in length. The provisions of such standards shall control all matters concerning the certification of tradesmen. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-71—13-74. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-75. - Required; information included. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor, builder or subcontractor who is not registered as a Class A or B Contractor with the Commonwealth of Virginia and who desires to make contracts for the erection, construction, alteration, addition or repair of buildings or structures or service equipment located therein, on any premises located in the city, to maintain a registration with the department of codes compliance. Such registration shall be maintained in a current status and shall be recorded on a form provided by the department of codes compliance. Information required to be recorded shall include: 
(1)  Name of the contractor, including proprietary or corporate identification, if any. 
(2)  Current business address and telephone number. 
(3)  Jurisdiction in the state in which a current business license has been issued. 
(4)  Registration number issued by the state registration board for contractors, if any. 
(5)  Type or class of contract services to be performed. 
(6)  Names of persons authorized to apply for and obtain permits for the contractor. 
(7)  Names of persons holding current certificates of qualification as a master electrician or as a master plumber and the jurisdiction in which such persons were examined for qualification. 
(8)  Name and address of bonding company, surety or public liability insurance company and agent, where applicable as a prerequisite to obtaining permits from the city. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-76. - Owner's agent or lessee applying for building permit; exception for architects and engineers. 
(a)  Any person who shall apply for a building permit as an agent of the owner in fee, or as the lessee of the building or structure concerned, shall first register with the department of codes compliance as provided in this division. 
(b)  An architect or engineer registered under the laws of the commonwealth regulating the practice of architecture or engineering, when employed in connection with the proposed work, shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-77. - Registrant's bond. 
(a)  Every contractor, builder or subcontractor registered under the provisions of this division shall give a bond of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in a form approved by the city attorney, payable to the city, with surety authorized to do business in the state. The conditions of every such bond shall be to indemnify and save harmless the city from all loss, damage, expense or cost by reason of any claim, suit or action made or instituted against the city, or against any agent or employee thereof, on account of any injury, loss or damage sustained in consequence of any defect in any work done pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by the principal obligor of such bond; or in consequence of any neglect on the part of the principal obligor to guard any such work sufficiently or properly; or in consequence of the use of any improper material or appliances; or in consequence of any act or neglect of the principal obligor or such obligor's agents or employees in or about any such work. A further condition of such bond shall be that the principal shall pay all fines and penalties properly imposed for violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  When any work done by a contractor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed defective, inadequate or not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter by the director or such director's authorized representative, and the contractor shall fail to put such work in proper condition to the satisfaction of the director or such director's authorized representative, within ten (10) days after receiving written notice to do so, the bond provided for in this section shall be forfeited. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the liability of the principal obligor in any such bond to the amount named as the penalty therein, either to any person injured or damaged, or to the city; nor shall anything herein contained be construed as a bar to prosecution for any violation of the building code or the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-78. - Fees. 
There are hereby established the following fees to be paid by each applicant for registration under this division: 
(1)  For initial registration, five dollars ($5.00). 
(2)  For reinstatement of an invalidated registration, five dollars ($5.00). 
There shall be no fee for the renewal of a registration at the time prescribed in section 13-79. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-79. - Annual renewal. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor who desires to remain registered under the provisions of this division to renew his or her registration each year during the month of January. Such renewal shall consist of amending, correcting or updating all information contained in the initial application for registration and certifying to the correctness of the same. The failure of any contractor to accomplish such renewal shall be sufficient reason for the director to deny the issuance of permits to such contractor until such renewal is accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-80. - Invalidation. 
The director shall have the power to declare invalid the registration of any contractor at any time that such director determines: 
(1)  That there exists a false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application upon which such registration was based; 
(2)  That a contractor has permitted his or her business license, state registration as a contractor, bond or public liability insurance to expire or otherwise become invalid; 
(3)  That a home improvement contractor has been found not qualified under the provisions of section 13-114; or 
(4)  That a contractor has failed to maintain a bond required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-81—13-84. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CERTIFICATE OF QUALIFICATION FOR ELECTRICIANS 
 
Sec. 13-85. - General requirement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform electrical work within the city, unless such person: 
(1)  Shall first have been granted a certificate of qualification; or 
(2)  Is a class A or B state registered electrical contractor; or 
(3)  Qualifies for an exemption under the provisions of the standards adopted by section 13-70 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-86. - Application. 
Every person desiring to obtain a certificate of qualification as an electrician shall make written application to the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation (DPOR), or its successor. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-87. - Effect. 
Any person who has been granted a certificate of qualification as an electrician shall have the right to perform electrical work within the city; provided, that such person shall comply with all regulations, limitations or conditions established in connection with the granting of such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-88. - Transfer; use by another. 
It shall be unlawful for any electrician to assign, loan or in any other way convey his certificate of qualification, the use thereof, or any rights thereunder, to anyone, by power of attorney or any other process, or become involved in any type agreement, assignment or use whereby the qualified electrician will not have supervision, direction and control of the work for which the permit was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-89. - To be carried by electrician and displayed upon request. 
It shall be the duty of each certified electrician to have his or her certificate in his or her possession whenever he or she shall perform any electrical work in the city and to permit an electrical inspector to examine such certificate upon request. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-90. - Report of loss and application for duplicate. 
It shall be the duty of each certified electrician to promptly report the loss of his or her certificate and to apply for a duplicate. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-91—13-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CERTIFICATE OF QUALIFICATION FOR PLUMBERS 
 
Sec. 13-95. - General requirement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform plumbing work within the city, unless such person: 
(1)  Shall first have been granted a certificate of qualification; or 
(2)  Is a Class A or B state registered plumbing contractor; or 
(3)  Qualifies for an exemption under the provisions of the standards adopted by section 13-70 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-96. - Application. 
Every person desiring to obtain a certificate of qualification as a plumber shall make written application to the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation, or its successor. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-97. - Effect. 
Any person who has been granted a certificate of qualification as a plumber shall have the right to perform plumbing within the city; provided, that such person shall comply with all regulations, limitations or conditions established in connection with the granting of such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-98. - Transfer; use by another. 
It shall be unlawful for any plumber to assign, loan or in any other way convey his certificate of qualification, the use thereof, or any rights thereunder, to anyone, by power of attorney or any other process, or become involved in any type agreement, assignment or use whereby the qualified plumber will not have supervision, direction and control of the work for which the permit was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-99. - To be carried by plumber and displayed upon request. 
It shall be the duty of each certified plumber to have his or her certificate in his or her possession whenever he or she shall perform any plumbing in the city and to permit a plumbing inspector to examine such certificate upon request. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-100. - Report of loss and application for duplicate. 
It shall be the duty of each certified plumber to promptly report the loss of his or her certificate and to apply for a duplicate. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-101—13-104. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - QUALIFICATION OF SEWER CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 13-105. - Qualification of contractors for installation of sewers and sewer systems on private property. 
(a)  Every contractor currently registered by the state registration board for contractors as a Class A or B public utilities contractor or as a specialty contractor in those fields normally including the installation of sewers and sewer systems shall be considered qualified to obtain permits and to install sewers and sewer systems on private property within the city. 
(b)  Every plumbing contractor currently registered in accordance with the provisions of Division 2 of this article shall be considered qualified to obtain permits and to install sewers and sewer systems on private property within the city. 
(c)  Any building contractor or any other contractor who specializes in the installation of building sewers or storm sewers shall be considered qualified to obtain permits and to install or repair such sewers that serve one- or two-family dwellings, where the size of such sewers is not greater than four (4) inches; provided, that such contractor shall cause any such sewer pipe to be laid by a certified journeyman plumber. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-106—13-109. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - REGISTRATION OF HOME IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 13-110. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the term "home improvement contractor" shall mean any person, firm, company or corporation who/which contracts for or otherwise provides labor and material, or labor only, for repairs, improvements and additions to residential buildings, or structures accessory thereto, where any payment of money or other thing of value is required. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-111. - Examination of applicant required; purpose of examination. 
(a)  The board is hereby authorized to examine applicants for registration as home improvement contractors within the city. Such examination shall be for the purpose of determining the qualifications of such applicants as to their ability and proficiency to conduct the business of home improvement contracting in conformance with the building code, the provisions of this chapter, and in accordance with normally accepted business and professional standards common to the building construction industry. 
(b)  Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed to require a contractor currently registered as a Class A or B contractor under Section 54.1-1102, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, also known as the Virginia Contractor Registration Law, to be examined by the board as a prerequisite to registration under the provisions of Division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-112. - Application for examination; filing fee. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation shall contract for or engage in the business of home improvement until they shall have been examined, approved and registered as a home improvement contractor as provided for in this division. All persons desiring to register as a home improvement contractor shall first make application to and be examined by the board as to their qualifications. All applicants shall furnish the board with evidence of their ability, quality of work and reputation for carrying out obligations; their financial responsibility; and their reputation for payment of labor and material bills. Such evidence in the form of letters of recommendation; affidavits, or other relevant documents shall accompany each application. 
(b)  Applications shall be made at the office of the department of codes compliance and shall be accepted upon payment of a filing fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-113. - Examination procedure. 
The board shall convene, upon call of the chairman, within fifteen (15) days after notification by the director that an application for examination has been filed pursuant to section 13-112; provided, that the board shall not be convened more often than once each month for the sole purpose of conducting examinations under this division. Every applicant shall appear before the board to make a presentation in support of the application for registration as a home improvement contractor. The board, having considered each application and the evidence furnished therewith, shall approve or disapprove each application and cause its findings and the reasons therefor to be sent to the applicant and to the director. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-114. - Cancellation of registration. 
Whenever the director shall receive a written sworn complaint concerning the qualifications of any home improvement contractor, such director shall promptly forward the same with a report of investigation attached thereto, to the board of appeals. The board, at its next meeting or within thirty (30) days after receipt of such complaint, whichever is earlier, shall, after a hearing, determine whether such contractor meets the qualifications established in this division. A determination that such contractor is found not qualified shall be reported to the director, who shall cancel the registration recorded under the provisions of Division 2 of this article. The board, in making such determination, shall hear any person who desires to speak for or in the behalf of either the complainant or the respondent. Written notice of the board's action and the record of its proceedings pertaining thereto shall be furnished to the respondent. The decision of the board shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-115—13-119. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - CERTIFICATE OF QUALIFICATION FOR MECHANICAL WORKERS 
 
Sec. 13-120. - General requirement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform building-related mechanical work within the city, unless such person: 
(1)  Shall first have been granted a certificate of qualification by the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation (DPOR) or its successor; or 
(2)  Is a Class A or B state registered mechanical contractor in good standing; or 
(3)  Qualifies for an exemption under the provisions of the standards adopted by section 13-70 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-121. - Effect. 
Any person who has been granted a certificate of qualification as a building-related mechanical worker shall have the right to perform mechanical work within the city; provided, that such person shall comply with all regulations, limitations or conditions established in connection with the granting of such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-122. - Transfer; use by another. 
It shall be unlawful for any building-related mechanical worker to assign, loan or in any other way convey his certificate of qualification, the use thereof, or any rights thereunder, to anyone, by power of attorney or any other process, or become involved in any agreement, assignment or use whereby the qualified mechanical worker will not have supervision, direction and control of the work for which a mechanical permit was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-123. - Certificate to be carried by mechanical worker and displayed upon request. 
It shall be the duty of each certified building-related mechanical worker to have his or her certificate in his or her possession whenever he or she shall perform any mechanical work in the city and to permit a mechanical inspector to examine such certificate upon request. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-124. - Report of loss and application for duplicate. 
It shall be the duty of each certified building-related mechanical worker to promptly report the loss of his or her certificate and to apply for a duplicate if such worker desires to further perform building-related mechanical work in the city. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-125—13-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
 
Sec. 13-130. - Adopted; standards. 
There is hereby adopted by reference in the city the Virginia Amusement Device Regulations and supplements and amendments thereto and the whole thereof; and the same are hereby incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length. The provisions of such regulations and supplements shall govern the construction, maintenance, operation and inspection of amusement devices, whether mobile or permanently fixed to a site, including kiddie rides as defined therein. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-131. - Permits; fees. 
(a)  Application for permits shall be made in writing on forms provided by the director. 
(b)  An application fee in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each kiddie ride, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each circular ride or flat ride which can be inspected from less than twenty (20) feet above ground, and forty-five dollars ($45.00) for each other type of amusement device, shall accompany permit applications for which the city will be required to conduct inspections of the device prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(c)  An application fee in the amount of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for each kiddie ride, twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) for each circular ride or flat ride which can be inspected from less than twenty (20) feet above ground, and twenty-two dollars and fifty cents ($22.50) for each other type of amusement device, shall accompany permit applications for which the inspection of the device prior to the issuance of a permit will be conducted by a qualified private inspector. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-132. - Inspections. 
All inspections shall be performed by a qualified person employed by the applicant or his agent; such applicant or agent shall be responsible for all costs attendant thereto. The applicant shall submit copies of all inspection reports to the director; such reports shall be certified by the person making such inspections. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-133—13-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FENCES 
 
Sec. 13-140. - Application of article; violation; penalty. 
This article shall apply to the location, construction, alteration or repair of fences, and related equipment or structures, such as gates, posts and braces. It shall be unlawful to erect a fence in violation of this article. A violation of this article shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-141. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Corner lot. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, the shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot. 
Decorative fence. A fence that is designed as an ornament, embellishment or decoration to the property although it may incidentally provide some measure of privacy or security, such as split rail and wrought iron fences. 
Fence. A physical structure commonly attached to the ground or a structure and which is made of wood, rock, metal, or other natural or synthetic material, and which is intended to delineate a boundary line, property line, access line or other desired demarcation, or to provide a decorative effect to the property. 
Front yard. Open land area extending across the full width of a lot and lying between the front lot line and the principal structure(s). 
Rear yard. Open land area extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the principal structure(s). 
Required yard. The open land area between the minimum setback lines required in a zoning district and the lot lines. 
Security fence. A fence that is primarily designed and is intended to provide privacy or security regardless of its decorative effect. Such security fences normally cause a parcel of land to be so enclosed as to result in the prohibition of free ingress and egress, or the shielding of a parcel from viewing from outside the security fence, and include but are not limited to barbed wire fences, metal fences generally known as "chain link fences" and wooden fences generally known as "stockade fences." 
Side yard. Open land area between the side lot line and the principal structure(s) and extended from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 6849-12, § 1)  
Sec. 13-142. - Locations prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to erect a fence within any recorded city easements where such fence will obstruct the flow of stormwater or obstruct necessary access required for maintenance of city facilities. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-143. - Materials; restriction on barbed wire and electrified fences. 
(a)  Fences may be constructed of any material permitted by the building code; provided, that barbed wire shall not be permitted in any fence located on the same premises as any dwelling located in any residential zoning district. 
(b)  Barbed or razor wire strands may be used to enclose permitted storage areas, other similar commercial uses or swimming pools where the strands are restricted to the uppermost portion of the fence and do not extend lower than a height of six (6) feet from the nearest ground level. 
(c)  No electrified fence shall be permitted except as stated herein: 
(1)  An electrified fence shall be permitted for the enclosure of livestock as may be permitted in agricultural district zoning regulations. 
(2)  An electrified fence shall be permitted for the enclosure of wild animals kept as permitted by section 6-8 of the City Code; provided, that such fence shall be installed in such a manner so as to protect the public from accidental contact; and further provided, that signs shall be posted to warn the public of the danger. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-144. - Height, etc., limitation—In residential districts. 
In residential districts established by or under the zoning ordinance, fences shall conform to the following: 
(1)  In side or rear yards, no fence shall exceed six (6) feet in height, except that in side or rear yards of apartment houses containing at least six (6) dwelling units, no fence shall exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(2)  In required front yards, no fence shall exceed four (4) feet in height. 
(3)  For corner lots to conform with zoning regulations, no front yard fence shall be maintained higher than three (3) feet above the adjoining street curb grade within a triangle comprised of two (2) twenty-foot legs measured from the intersecting street right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5747-02)  
Sec. 13-145. - Same—In nonresidential districts. 
In nonresidential districts established by or under the zoning ordinances, fences shall conform to the following: 
(1)  A fence not more than ten (10) feet in height shall be permitted in the rear yard of any interior or corner lot. 
(2)  No fence shall be permitted in the portion of the rear yard of a corner lot that is closer to the side property line abutting a right-of-way than the principal structure. 
(3)  A security fence not to exceed twenty (20) feet in height shall be permitted on any lot in a non-residential zoning district provided that said fence is located no closer than one hundred (100) feet from a public right- of-way and is attached or connected to the primary structure, except that such a fence may be located closer than one hundred (100) feet from a public right-of-way in the Hilton Village Historic District if approved by the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board. A fence that provides both decoration and security to property shall be considered a decorative fence for purposes of this section. 
(4)  A decorative fence not to exceed ten (10) feet in height, may be erected on any lot in a non-residential zoning district provided that said fence is set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any public right-of-way that abuts the property. Upon request of the property owner, the city manager or his designee may grant a reduction in the twenty (20) foot setback upon a finding that the strict application of the setback would constitute an undue hardship on the property owner due to the shallowness of the lot or the presence of existing structural features. In the event that a reduction in the setback is granted, the city manager or his designee may impose reasonable conditions to mitigate the impact of the reduction in setback. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-146. - Permits. 
Permits for fence construction are not required except in the following instances: construction of any fence in the front yard area of any lot, construction in the interior or corner side yard of any lot, construction along any property line abutting the city street right-of-way, or construction of any fence in a flood hazard district as such district is defined by section 45-3112. Applications for fence construction permits shall be obtained from the department of codes compliance on forms to be prescribed by the director of the department. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 7606-20)  
Sec. 13-147. - Fee. 
Completed applications for fence construction permits shall be accepted and reviewed upon payment of an application fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-148—13-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ACCUMULATION OF WEEDS 
 
Sec. 13-150. - When prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person responsible for real property within the city, including the area adjoining such property extending to the curb line or paved portion of the roadway, to permit the accumulation of any weeds. Weeds exceeding a height of ten (10) inches on such property within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any building shall be considered detrimental to the health, safety, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, morals or general welfare of the citizens of the city. Weeds exceeding a height of fifteen (15) inches, regardless of their location, shall be presumed to be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, morals or general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to farm land, unless such farm land is within one hundred (100) feet of a structure of another owner on an adjacent tract or parcel of land. 
(c)  Notices of violations of this section shall be mailed by the director to the owner of record of the property at the address maintained by the real estate assessor for the mailing of tax assessments. The notices shall advise the owner of the requirements of this section and that failure to keep the weeds within the height limits established herein shall result in the city having them cut, with the owner being responsible for the costs thereof as provided by sections 13-151 and 13-152. Such notice need only be provided to the owner once annually. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5675-01)  
Sec. 13-151. - Cutting of grass and weeds by the city—Generally. 
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any person responsible for real property to keep the grass and weeds cut as required by this code, the codes compliance administrator is authorized to have the cutting or removal performed by city forces or by contract; and the actual cost of such cutting, plus a charge for administrative costs of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be charged to such person to whom the notice was directed. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-152. - Cutting of grass and weeds by city—Collection of costs. 
Whenever the director or his agent has the work done pursuant to section 13-151, he shall determine the costs and expenses of such work. 
(1)  When the notice required by the building code was directed to a person other than the owners of the property, the director shall bill the person to whom the notice was directed for the actual cost of such work, plus the charge for administrative costs. If such bill is not paid within thirty (30) days, legal action may be instituted for its collection. 
(2)  The director shall certify to the city treasurer the amount of the actual cost of such work, plus the administrative costs; and the city treasurer shall include such total amount in the next regular tax bill for payment, and such amount shall be collected by the treasurer as other taxes and levies are collected. Every charge assessed under this section which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such real property. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-153. - Prohibiting dead trees or parts thereof on property in the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any responsible person to permit a dead tree which might endanger the health or safety of persons or property to remain on real property in the city. For the purpose of this ordinance, "responsible person" means an owner of real property or the agent therefor, or any other person responsible for the maintenance of the real property. For the purpose of this ordinance, "dead tree which might endanger the health or safety of persons or property" means any dead tree, any tree that is diseased; or has a dead, diseased, or broken limb or a dead, diseased or broken trunk, or any tree that is totally or partially uprooted, if the height of the tree or the length or the limb or trunk is such that, if it were to fall, the tree, limb or trunk could fall within the public right of way or strike a structure or improvement to real property. A determination of whether or not a tree or part thereof is dead or diseased, shall be made by a qualified arborist employed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6227-06, § 1)  
Secs. 13-154—13-159. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - VACANT BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 13-160. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Boarding up. Covering entirely all window, door and similar openings with a minimum of three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch thick exterior plywood, fitted into said openings, and secured by nails, screws or other approved devices. All coverings provided with a protective coat of paint or other approved weather-resistant material which is consistent with the exterior color scheme of the building. 
Director. The director of the department of codes compliance or such director's authorized representative. 
Owner. The holder of title in fee simple; and/or any person, group of persons, company, association or corporation in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. It shall also mean any person who alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any building or building unit with or without accompanying actual possession thereof. 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any building or building unit as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in control of a building; or their duly authorized agents. 
Any such person, group of persons, company, association or corporation shall have joint and several responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Secure against unauthorized entry. Secured in such a manner as to exclude unauthorized entry by humans, animals and birds. 
Vacant or unoccupied building. Any building or structure which is not occupied, used or inhabited on a regular and continuing basis by some person with a valid claim of right to possession or a fee simple title. The intrusion of trespassers or squatters into such buildings on any basis shall not render such building occupied or nonvacant within the meaning of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-161. - Closure required. 
The owner of any building shall, whenever the same is or becomes vacant or unoccupied, remove therefrom all paper, debris and other waste material accumulated therein, and shall securely close and lock and thereafter keep closed and locked all doors, windows and other openings into such building so long as it shall remain vacant or unoccupied. The owner shall also maintain the building and premises in a clean, sanitary and safe condition in compliance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-162. - Registration and permits required. 
Whenever any building in the city is or hereafter becomes vacant or unoccupied and the building or any of its doors, windows or other openings cannot be securely closed by the conventional means used in the design or the building, as required by section 13-271 herein, the owner of such building shall, within fifteen (15) days thereafter, secure said building against unauthorized entry by boarding up or by some other approved method; shall register such building with the director. 
The owner or owners of any building which has been vacant for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or more shall register such building with the director and obtain a permit therefore on an annual basis. A new registration shall be required whenever the information provided in the initial registration changes. The new registration shall be filed with the director within ten (10) days after such change. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5834-02, § 1)  
Sec. 13-163. - Registration and permit forms; letters of certification; nonassignable. 
Registration shall be made on forms supplied by the director for such purpose and shall include the names and addresses of all persons having any interest in the premises, the name and address of the person who shall be responsible for compliance with this article, the facts and conditions of such vacancy, the date the said building became vacant and the length of time the building is expected to remain vacant or unoccupied. 
Permits shall be on forms supplied by the director for such purpose and shall include the name of the person to whom issued, the full address of the building covered, a statement that the required fees have been paid, and the expiration date of the permit. No permit or registration shall be assignable. 
Letters of certification shall be on forms supplied by the director for such purpose and shall include a statement certifying that the building is secured against unauthorized entry and that the information provided on the initial registration forms remain unchanged. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-164. - Inspections. 
Upon registration of any such building or upon any such building coming to his attention, the director shall cause inspection to be made of the premises to determine the condition of such building and premises and to detect all fire, safety or health hazards. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-165. - Fees. 
An annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall apply to each building required to be registered by section 13-162. The initial fee shall be due at the time of the registration required under section 13-162. Upon registration, the building shall be inspected by the director to insure that it complies with this article and all applicable laws, including building and property maintenance codes. Failure to register shall be a fifty dollar ($50.00) civil penalty; however, failure to register in conservation and rehabilitation districts designated by the governing body, or in other areas designated as blighted pursuant to Section 36-49.1:1, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be punishable by a civil penalty not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Notice shall be mailed to the owner or owners, at the address to which property tax notices are sent, at least thirty (30) days prior to the assessment of the civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5834-02, § 1)  
Sec. 13-166. - City may secure buildings; charges collected as taxes and may become liens. 
After reasonable notice and reasonable time to secure a building has been given pursuant to this article, the city manager or his designee may cause such building to be secured by city employees or agents of the city. The cost or expenses of such action shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner(s) of the property and may be collected as taxes and levies are collected. A fee for adminis trative costs of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be charged to such person to whom the notice was directed. Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner(s) of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Secs. 13-167—13-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 13-170. - Premises; entitlement. 
(a)  On premises where no construction work is to be performed or work performed does not involve construction of structures or additions to existing structures, the director, upon proper application by the owner, shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy for the premises if such use and occupancy is not in violation of any provisions of the City Code. 
(b)  The owner or owner's agent desiring a certificate of use and occupancy shall file an application with the director on forms provided by the city and pay an application fee of fifty-five dollars ($55.00). It shall be the duty of the applicant to arrange an inspection of the premises by the building inspector and the fire prevention inspector. Reasonable access to the premises shall be provided. If reinspections are necessary in order to secure a certificate of occupancy, a thirty-five dollar ($35.00) fee shall be paid for such reinspections 
(c)  Whenever the applicant fails to provide reasonable access to the premises at the scheduled inspection time, an additional inspection fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) shall be paid to the city at the department of codes compliance prior to scheduling an additional inspection. 
(d)  When the application is for a home occupation as provided for in Chapter 45 of this Code, a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee shall be charged and an inspection of the premises shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 6366-07, § 1)  
Secs. 13-171—13-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - ACCUMULATIONS OF DEBRIS, LITTER OR RUBBISH 
 
Sec. 13-180. - Violation; removal of debris, litter and rubbish by the city. 
(a)  The accumulation of trash, garbage, refuse, debris, litter, rubbish or other substances which might endanger health or safety is deemed to be a nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of record of real property or the person or entity that leases or has possession thereof or who occupies same to permit trash, garbage, refuse, debris, litter, rubbish or other substances which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the city or provide a breeding place for mosquitoes, vermin or rodents to remain on said real property, which includes the sidewalks, curbs or rights-of-way to the edge of the pavement of any public street abutting such property, within the city. 
(c)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any owner of record of real property to whom a notice has been mailed to remove therefrom such trash, garbage, refuse, debris, litter, rubbish or other substances, the director is authorized to have the removal performed by city forces or by contract; and the actual cost of such removal, plus a charge for administrative costs of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), shall be charged to such person to whom the notice was directed. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5675-01; Ord. No. 5948-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6711-10, § 1)  
Sec. 13-181. - Removal of debris, litter and rubbish by the city—Collection of costs. 
Whenever the director has the work done pursuant to section 13-180, he shall determine the costs and expenses of such work and proceed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  The director shall bill the owner for the actual cost of such work, plus the charge for administrative costs. If such bill is not paid within thirty (30) days, a legal action may be instituted for its collection and such bill may be collected as taxes are collected. 
(2)  The director shall certify to the city treasurer the amount of the actual cost of such work, plus the administrative costs; and the city treasurer shall include such total amount in the next regular tax bill for payment, and such amount shall be collected by the treasurer as other taxes and levies are collected. Every charge assessed under this section which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such real property. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5675-01)  
Secs. 13-182—13-185. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAILERS AND SEMITRAILERS 
 
Sec. 13-186. - Inoperative vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person responsible for real property within the city to keep, or permit to be kept, except within a fully enclosed building or structure, any vehicle which is inoperative. 
(b)  The provisions of this section are subject to the following: 
(1)  The section shall not apply to a business licensed through the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles as a salvage dealer, demolisher, rebuilder, salvage pool or vehicle removal operator. 
(2)  The section shall not apply to a licensed towing service providing temporary storage of inoperative vehicles for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days when vehicles are being stored pending settlement of insurance claims. Vehicles stored by such towing services shall be shielded or screened from public view. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5876-02)  
Sec. 13-187. - Notice to remove inoperative vehicles. 
(a)  The director is hereby authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the record owner of the real property whereon the inoperative vehicle is located to remove any inoperative vehicles located on such property in violation of section 13-186. 
(b)  The notice provided for in this section shall be personally served on the property owner by the director, who shall note the time, place and manner of such service on a duplicate copy of the notice to be kept by the director; however, in lieu of such personal service, such notice may be mailed by first class mail, addressed to such record owner at his or her last-known address. 
(c)  The notice provided for in this section shall state the time within which the action or work ordered to be done is to be completed. Such time shall not be less than twenty-four (24) or more than seventy-two (72) hours, if personal service is had, and not less than seven (7) days from the date of mailing if the notice is properly mailed in accord with subsection (b) above. 
(d)  Any owner of real property provided notice pursuant to this section shall immediately proceed to remove any inoperative vehicles that are not kept within an enclosed building or structure, within the time stated in said notice. The failure or refusal of such person to do so shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor, and prosecution therefor shall not be barred by the city proceeding to have the work done in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5876-02)  
Sec. 13-188. - Removal of inoperative vehicles by the city—Generally. 
Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person responsible for real property upon whom notice has been served pursuant to section 13-187 to comply with such notice within the time indicated in the notice, the director is authorized to have the removal performed by city forces or by contract; and the actual cost of such removal, plus a charge for administrative costs of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), shall be charged to such person to whom the notice was directed. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99; Ord. No. 5876-02)  
Sec. 13-189. - Removal of inoperative vehicles by the city—Collection of costs. 
Whenever the director or his agent has the work done pursuant to section 13-188, he shall determine the costs and expenses of such work. 
(1)  When the notice required by section 13-187 was directed to a person other than the owner of the real property, the director shall bill the person to whom the notice was directed for the actual cost of such work, plus the charge for administrative costs. If such bill is not paid within thirty (30) days, a legal action may be instituted for its collection. 
(2)  When the notice required by section 13-187 was directed to the owner of the real property, the director shall certify to the city treasurer the amount of the actual cost of such work, plus the administrative costs; and the city treasurer shall include such total amount in the next regular tax bill for payment, and such amount shall be collected by the treasurer as other taxes and levies are collected. Every charge assessed under this section which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against the real property from which the vehicle was removed. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
Sec. 13-190. - Disposal of vehicle. 
Any vehicle removed by the city from any property may be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5365-99)  
ARTICLE XII. - IDENTIFICATION AND INSPECTION OF RENTAL DWELLING UNITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Conditions which immediately affect safe, decent and sanitary living conditions of persons occupying a residential rental dwelling unit include items that violate fire safety; lack of or poor condition of sanitary facilities; absence of adequate heating systems or equipment; items which affect the safe operation of electrical and mechanical systems; items which affect structural integrity of the building and/or the ability of the building envelope to keep out weather, or one (1) or more other conditions that if not corrected would be reasonably expected to become conditions that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions of the occupants. 
Disqualifying violation includes those conditions which affect safe, decent and sanitary living conditions of persons occupying a residential rental dwelling unit, or other conditions that violate the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, or multiple building code violations that indicate in their totality that the dwelling unit is not being properly maintained. 
Dwelling unit means a building or structure or part thereof that is used for a home or residence by one (1) or more persons who maintain a household. 
Multiple-family complex means any structure, consisting of ten (10) or more dwelling units under common ownership and occupied for valuable consideration. The term "multiple-family complex" shall not include mobile homes under common ownership in a mobile home park or subdivision; nor shall such term include single-family detached dwellings, duplex dwellings, or townhouse dwellings under common ownership. 
Owner means the person or entity shown on the current real estate assessment books or current real estate assessment records of the city or the fee simple titleholder of the property if ownership has changed since such tax assessment records were last updated. 
Residential rental dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that is leased or rented to one (1) or more tenants. However, a dwelling unit occupied in part by the owner thereof shall not be construed to be a residential rental dwelling unit unless a tenant occupies a part of the dwelling unit which has its own cooking and sleeping areas, and a bathroom, unless otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance by the local governing body. 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
DIVISION 2. - RENTAL INSPECTION DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 13-192. - Factors for establishing rental inspection districts. 
After holding a duly advertised public hearing as required by Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1.C.1., city council finds that within the inspection districts described in section 13-193 herein below: 
(1)  There is a need to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the occupants of dwelling units inside the designated rental inspection districts; 
(2)  The residential rental dwelling units within the designated rental inspection districts are either: 
(a)  Blighted or in the process of deteriorating, or 
(b)  The residential rental dwelling units are in the need of inspection by the code compliance administrator to prevent deterioration, taking into account the number, age and condition of residential dwelling rental units inside said rental inspection districts, and 
(3)  The inspection of residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection districts is necessary to maintain safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants and other residents living in the rental inspection districts. 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
Sec. 13-193. - Rental inspection districts established. 
Based upon the findings of city council as set forth in section 13-192 hereinabove, the following areas are included and hereby declared to be rental inspection districts (RID) which are subject to the requirements of this article. 
District 1: RID #1 
 
District 2: RID #2 
 
District 3: RID #3 
 
Maps showing the rental inspection districts described in this section are hereby adopted as a part of this article, and shall be available for public inspection in the codes compliance office. Said districts are hereinafter referred to collectively as "rental inspection districts" or "inspection districts". 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
Sec. 13-194. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to residential rental dwelling units located within the districts identified in section 13-193 of this article and shall further apply to certain structures located outside of such districts but meeting the requirements of section 1-6(c) herein below. 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
DIVISION 3. - INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 13-195. - Inspection and certificate required. 
(a)  The owner of each residential rental dwelling unit located in an inspection district shall obtain and permit an initial inspection and subsequent inspections of such residential rental dwelling unit as provided in this section and section 13-196. Inspections under this article shall be conducted by the department of codes compliance who is charged with the enforcement of this article. If the unit to be inspected is occupied at the time of a required inspection, it shall be the duty of the owner thereof to notify the occupants of such inspection and make the residential rental dwelling unit available for inspection. 
(b)  If inspection reveals that a residential rental dwelling unit has no disqualifying violations, the department of codes compliance shall issue a forty-eight-month certificate of compliance for such unit. However, if one (1) or more violations of the property maintenance provisions of the building code are found that do not constitute a disqualifying violation, the existence of such non-disqualifying violations shall be noted on the forty-eight-month certificate of compliance together with the date by which such non-disqualifying violations must be remedied, which date shall be determined by the department of codes compliance and which date shall be reasonable. The issuance of a certificate of compliance shall not be evidence of a lack of any and all building code violations, and shall not prevent the department of codes compliance from conducting follow-up inspections regarding building code violations in the residential rental unit, whether or not the violations affect the safe decent and sanity occupancy of said unit. If a follow-up inspection reveals that the owner has failed to remedy the noted violations by specified date, the department of codes compliance shall issue a notice of violation, revoke the forty-eight-month certificate of compliance and the unit shall thereafter be subject to annual inspections pursuant to section 13-196. 
(c)  If inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit reveals one (1) or more disqualifying violations, the department of codes compliance shall not issue a certificate of compliance until the disqualifying violations are satisfactorily remedied. However, the department of codes compliance may issue a temporary certificate of compliance if in the opinion of the department, such disqualifying violations do not constitute an immediate threat of injury to the occupants of such residential rental dwelling unit. If conditions warrant, however, the department of codes compliance may require that the residential rental dwelling unit be vacated or remain unoccupied until brought into compliance, pursuant to his authority under Code of Virginia, (1950), as amended, § 36-98, et seq., the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Upon compliance, the department of codes compliance shall, as provided in section 13-196 of this article, issue an annual certificate of compliance. 
(d)  No annual inspection pursuant to this article shall take place more than one time each year, calculated from the date of the first inspection, should additional inspections be necessary to achieve compliance. However, nothing in this article shall modify the authority of the department of codes compliance to conduct any other inspections, as allowed under the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and inspections for obtaining a certificate of compliance under this article do not supplant or preclude any other inspection authorized under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(e)  Unless a current certificate or temporary certificate of compliance is in force for a residential rental dwelling unit in accordance with the provisions of subsection 13-196(a)(1) of this article, and such certificate remains in effect, no owner of such unit shall permit any person to occupy such unit as a tenant or otherwise. 
(f)  A building or structure meeting the definition of a residential rental dwelling unit but located outside of an inspection district shall nevertheless be subject to the terms of this article on the following basis: City council makes a separate finding for said individual residential rental dwelling unit that: 
(1)  There is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of that individual residential rental dwelling unit; 
(2)  The individual residential rental dwelling unit is either: 
a.  Blighted, or 
b.  In the process of deteriorating; or 
(3)  There is evidence of violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for occupants of such individual residential rental dwelling unit. 
Upon said finding by the city council, said residential rental dwelling unit shall be subject to this article, notwithstanding its location outside the inspection districts. 
(g)  Should the owner fail to timely contact the code compliance office within the required time in order to schedule any inspection required under this article, or should such owner fail to allow such inspection to proceed on the date for which it was scheduled, the owner shall be in violation of this article and shall be subject to such penalties and enforcement remedies as provided in section 13-196 herein below. 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
Sec. 13-196. - Certificates of compliance; applications and exemptions. 
(a)  The following shall apply to all residential rental dwelling units located within inspection districts, which are not exempted under subsection 13-196(b). 
(1)  The initial inspection of each residential rental dwelling unit which is subject to inspection under this article, shall take place no later than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date that the owner thereof contacts the code compliance office to schedule such inspection. Each residential rental unit for which a certificate of compliance or forty-eight-month certificate of compliance as described in (a)(3) below has been issued shall be again inspected within thirty (30) days from the expiration of the certificate or expiration or earlier revocation of a forty-eight-month certificate of compliance. 
Prior to expiration of the certificate of compliance or forty-eight-month certificate of compliance, or upon earlier revocation of a forty-eight-month certificate of compliance, the owner of the residential rental dwelling unit covered thereby shall contact the code compliance office and arrange for an inspection of such unit. Except in the case of an inspection following revocation of a forty-eight-month certificate of compliance, should the date scheduled for inspection be after expiration of the current certificate and more than thirty (30) days from the day on which the owner contacted the code enforcement office to schedule inspection, a thirty-day temporary certificate of compliance shall be issued. Said inspection shall take place no later than thirty (30) days from the date of application for said inspection, and such temporary certificate shall expire on the date of the inspection. 
As to building code violations which do not immediately affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for persons living in such unit, and provided that all inspection fees shall have been remitted in advance to the issuance of such temporary certificate of compliance the department of codes compliance shall issue one (1) temporary certificate of compliance, valid for thirty (30) days and may permit such extensions thereof, as the department shall deem reasonably necessary to allow for remediation of the violations. However as to building code violations which are disqualifying violations and which violations which pose an immediate threat to the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for persons living in such unit, then the department of codes compliance shall not issue a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
Temporary certificates of compliance shall expire upon the earlier of their stated expiration date or the completion of an inspection which finds all violations satisfactorily remedied. 
(2)  Unless a residential rental unit in an inspection district is exempted from inspection under this article, or receives a forty-eight-month certificate of compliance as provided section (a) below, the term of a certificate of compliance issued for any residential rental dwelling unit in an inspection district, shall be for a term of twelve (12) months beginning with the first day of the month next following the month of issuance. 
(3)  A residential rental dwelling unit which upon inspection under this article reveals no disqualifying violations, or with only one (1) or more violations of such code that do not affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for persons living in such unit, shall not be subject to further annual inspection under this article for forty-eight (48) months from date of such annual inspection, except as provided in section 13-195, and a forty-eight-month certificate of compliance shall be issued for such unit. However, if a residential rental dwelling unit covered by a forty-eight-month certificate of compliance is found in violation of the Uniform Statewide Building Code during the term of such forty-eight-month certificate of compliance, the department of codes compliance may revoke such forty-eight-month certificate of compliance and such unit shall thereupon become subject to annual inspections and the issuance of annual certificates of compliance. If an annual certificate of compliance is issued after the inspection necessitated by the violation of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and revocation of the extended certificate of compliance, then said residential rental dwelling unit shall again be eligible for an extended certificate of compliance only after the annual certificate of compliance has expired and as of the first subsequent annual inspection when no disqualifying violations are found. 
(4)  Should a residential rental dwelling unit be sold, or the title thereto be otherwise transferred to another owner during term of a certificate of compliance or forty-eight-month certificate of compliance issued for such unit, the term of such certificate shall end as of the last day of the month next following the month of transfer of ownership and the new owner shall contact the department of codes compliance and arrange for inspection of the unit; provided, however, that if the last inspection of the unit pursuant to this article occurred during the calendar year of transfer of ownership, the existing certificate shall not expire until the end of such calendar year. 
(b)  The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this article for the time periods indicated: 
(1)  No inspection of a newly constructed residential rental dwelling unit located in an inspection district shall be required within forty-eight (48) months of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such newly constructed unit. Thereafter said unit shall in all respects become subject to the requirements of this article. 
(2)  All hotels, motels, inns, bed and breakfast establishments, and other similar facilities to the extent occupied by transients shall be exempt from compliance with this article. 
(3)  All residential rental dwelling units owned by or leased by an agency of the Commonwealth of Virginia or of the City of Newport News, shall be exempt from compliance with this article so long as said dwelling units are operated by such agency in carrying out its public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
Sec. 13-197. - Multifamily complexes. 
(a)  If a multifamily complex contains more than ten (10) residential rental dwelling units, in the initial and annual inspections, the department of codes compliance shall inspect no less than two (2) units and not more than ten (10) percent of the residential rental dwelling units. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the number of residential rental dwelling units inspected, the department of codes compliance shall charge the fee authorized by this article for inspection of no more than ten (10) dwelling units. 
(c)  If the department of codes compliance determines upon inspection of the dwelling units in accordance with (a) above that there are within one (1) or more of such units or the building housing same, violations of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such multifamily complex, the department may inspect as many dwelling units as it deems reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the building code in which case, the fee shall be based upon a charge per dwelling unit inspected, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
DIVISION 4. - CERTIFICATE ISSUANCE, INSPECTION FEES AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 13-198. - Issuance of certificate; fees. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 13-197 above, there shall be a fifty-dollar ($50.00) inspection fee for the inspection of each dwelling unit. If repairs or corrections are deemed necessary by the department of codes compliance, and a reinspection is required, no additional fee shall be charged for the reinspection. If, however, subsequent reinspections are required, there shall be charged an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per dwelling unit for each subsequent reinspection. No reinspection shall be performed, nor any certificate of compliance be issued, unless all fees have been paid. 
(b)  Requests for an inspection may be made by telephone; provided that the department of codes compliance shall, in all cases, receive notice from the owner and payment of the applicable inspection fees prior to conducting any inspection required under this article. 
(c)  The department of codes compliance shall issue a forty-eight-month certificate, as provided in section 13-196 hereinabove if, upon inspection, the department finds that the residential rental dwelling unit does not have any disqualifying violations. The forty-eight-month certificate of compliance may be issued immediately upon completion of an inspection in which no disqualifying violations are found. 
(d)  If the dwelling unit fails to comply with any one (1) or more provisions of Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and any amendments thereto, the department of codes compliance shall furnish the owner with a written list of specific violations. Failure to list any violation shall not be deemed a waiver of such violation. Upon the completion of all corrections and repairs, the owner shall arrange a reinspection of the residential rental dwelling unit. Reinspection shall be for the purpose of determining compliance by the owner with the written list of specific violations furnished to the owner by the codes compliance administrator. However, if upon reinspection, the department of codes compliance discovers other violations that were not listed on the written list of specific violations previously furnished to the owner, the department shall furnish the owner with a supplemental list of violations and shall provide the owner a reasonable opportunity to correct same. This provision, however, shall not preclude the department from revoking the forty-eight-month certificate of compliance if the subsequently discovered violations are disqualifying violations or if the non-disqualifying violations have not been corrected pursuant to sections 13-195 and 13-196. 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
Sec. 13-199. - Appeals; effects. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any determination or decision of the department of codes compliance made pursuant to this article shall have the right to appeal such determination or decision in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and amendments thereto. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, impair, alter or extend the rights and remedies of persons in their relationship of landlord and tenant as such rights and remedies exist under applicable law. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve or exempt any person from otherwise complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, standards and regulations pertaining to the condition of buildings and other structures. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the authority of the department of codes compliance to perform housing inspections in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
Sec. 13-200. - Violation; penalty; right of entry. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing to comply with the inspection requirements of this article or the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be subject to the penalties established section 13-2 of this Code. 
(b)  The remedies set forth in (a) of this section are not the exclusive remedies for noncompliance with the requirements of this article and the department of codes compliance shall take such further actions as allowed by applicable law in order to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article including, but not limited to, seeking injunctive relief under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432, and obtaining inspection warrants as provided in Code of Virginia, § 36-105.C.3. 
(Ord. No. 7320-16)  
Chapter 14 - EDUCATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Department of education, Ch. 11. 
Cross reference— Disrupting school sessions, § 28-11; use of school property for recreational purposes, § 29-8; membership of school employees in employees retirement fund, § 31-30. 
State Law reference— Education, Code of Virginia, title 22.1. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Criminal history investigation of applicants for employment in educational system. 
The personnel division of the Newport News school board may require a criminal history record information investigation on all applicants for employment with the Newport News educational system. Such division shall formulate and implement procedural rules and regulations to insure the proper requisition, transmission, storage and disposition of all criminal history records requested pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2380) 
Cross reference— Criminal history investigations of applicants for city employment, § 2-601.  
Sec. 14-2. - Compulsory school attendance. 
Article 1, Chapter 14, Title 22.1 (section 22.1-254 et seq.), of the Code of Virginia, relating to the compulsory attendance of children in schools, is hereby adopted by reference and placed in force and effect in the city to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 1; Code 1961, § 13A-1)  
Chapter 15 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1, amended Ch. 15, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 15 pertained to voting precincts. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Elections, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Elections, Code of Virginia, title 24.2; election of constitutional and local officers, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-217 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - VOTING PRECINCTS 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Generally. 
The voting precincts in the city shall be as set out in the following sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-2. - Map. 
The boundaries of the voting precincts of the city, set forth in this chapter, are shown on the map designated "Map of the City of Newport News, Virginia," on file in the office of the registrar of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-2.1. - Lee Hall Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Lee Hall Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Skiffs Creek and the west right-of-way line of the CSX main line; thence, in a southerly direction along the west right-of-way line of the CSX main line to the intersection of the centerline of Fort Eustis Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Fort Eustis Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of the Warwick River; thence, meandering in a southerly direction along the centerline of the Warwick River to its intersection with the low-water mark of the James River; thence in a northerly and easterly direction along the low-water mark of the James River to its intersection with the centerline of Skiffs Creek; thence, meandering in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Skiffs Creek to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of the CSX main line, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 5164-98)  
Sec. 15-3. - Reservoir Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Reservoir Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Fort Eustis Boulevard and the west right-of-way line of the CSX main line; thence, in a southerly direction along the west right-of-way line of the CSX main line to the intersection of the centerline of Woodhaven Road, if extended; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline, if extended, and the centerline of Woodhaven Road to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence, in a southerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Curtis Tignor Road; thence, in a westerly direction along the centerline of Curtis Tignor Road to its intersection with the centerline of Saddler Drive; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Saddler Drive, if extended, to the intersection with the centerline of Stoney Run; thence, meandering in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Stoney Run to the intersection of the centerline of the Warwick River; thence meandering in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of the Warwick River to its intersection with the centerline of Fort Eustis Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Fort Eustis Boulevard to its intersection with the west right-of-way line of the CSX main line, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5164-98)  
Sec. 15-4. - Epes Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Epes Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Stoney Run and the west right-of-way line of the CSX main line; thence, meandering in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Stoney Run to its intersection with the centerline of Saddler Drive, if extended; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline, if extended, and the centerline of Saddler Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Curtis Tignor Road; thence, in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Curtis Tignor Road to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence, in a northerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Woodhaven Road; thence, in an easterly direction along the centerline and centerline, if extended, of Woodhaven Road to the intersection with the west right-of-way line of the CSX main line; thence, in a southerly direction along the west right-of-way line of the CSX main line to its intersection with the centerline of Stoney Run, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-5. - Denbigh Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Denbigh Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Lucas Creek at its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek Road; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with the centerline of Old Lucas Creek Road; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Old Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Stony Drive; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Stony Drive extended to its intersection with Stoney Run; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Stoney Run to its intersection with the west right-of-way of the CSX main line; thence in a southerly direction along the west right-of-way of the CSX main line to its intersection with the centerline of Bland Boulevard; thence along the centerline of Bland Boulevard in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek; then meandering in a westerly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek to its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek Road, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-6. - Sanford Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Sanford Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of a creek approximately two thousand three hundred (2,300) feet south of the centerline of Colony Road, if extended, at its intersection with the low-water mark of the Warwick River; thence in a northerly direction along the low-water mark of the Warwick River to the centerline of Lucas Creek; thence meandering in an easterly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek to its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek Road; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with the centerline of the creek approximately two thousand three hundred (2,300) feet south of the centerline of Colony Road; thence meandering in a westerly direction along the centerline of said creek to the low-water mark of the Warwick River, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-7. - Jenkins Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Jenkins Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Warwick Boulevard at its intersection with the centerline of Menchville Road; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Menchville Road to its intersection with the centerline of Bernard Drive; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Bernard Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Princess Margaret Drive; thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Princess Margaret Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Nicewood Drive; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Nicewood Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Eastwood Drive; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Eastwood Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Colony Road; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Colony Road to its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek Road; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek; thence meandering in an easterly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek to its intersection with the centerline of Bland Boulevard; thence along the centerline of Bland Boulevard in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of the CSX main line; thence along the centerline of the CSX main line in a southerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Sluice Mill Pond; thence along the centerline of Sluice Mill Pond in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Menchville Road, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-8. - Charles Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Charles Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Warwick Boulevard at its intersection with Boxley Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Boxley Boulevard to the centerline of Menchville Road; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Menchville Road to the centerline of Youngs Road; thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Youngs Road to the centerline of Lucas Creek Road; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with the centerline of Colony Road; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Colony Road to its intersection with the centerline of Eastwood Drive; thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Eastwood Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Nicewood Drive; thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Nicewood Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Princess Margaret Drive; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Princess Margaret Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Bernard Drive; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Bernard Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Menchville Road; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Menchville Road to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Boxley Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 4933-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-9. - Riverview Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Riverview Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the low-water mark of the James River and the centerline of Deep Creek; thence in a northwesterly direction along the low-water mark of the James River to the centerline of a creek approximately two thousand three hundred (2,300) feet south of the centerline of Colony Road; thence meandering in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of said creek, if extended, to the centerline of Lucas Creek Road; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with the centerline of Youngs Road; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Youngs Road to its intersection with the centerline of Menchville Road; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Menchville Road to its intersection with the centerline of Boxley Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Boxley Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Deep Creek; thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Deep Creek to the low-water mark of the James River, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4933-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-10. - Richneck Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Richneck Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Richneck Road at its intersection with the centerline of Ridgewood Parkway; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Richneck Road to its intersection with the east city limit line at the CSX railroad - Amoco spur line; thence in a southeasterly direction along the east city limit line to its intersection with the centerline of Old Denbigh Boulevard; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Old Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Shields Road; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Shields Road to its intersection with the centerline of Galahad Drive; thence along the centerline of Galahad Drive in a southwesterly and then a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Ridgewood Parkway; thence along the centerline of Ridgewood Parkway in a northwesterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Richneck Road, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5164-98; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6381-07, § 1)  
Sec. 15-11. - Windsor Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Windsor Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Jefferson Avenue at its intersection with the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Richneck Road; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Richneck Road to its intersection with the centerline of Ridgewood Parkway; thence along the centerline of Ridgewood Parkway in a southeasterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Galahad Drive; thence along the centerline of Galahad Drive in a southerly and then a northeasterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Shields Road; thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Shields Road to its intersection with the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard; thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Jefferson Avenue, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 5164-98; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-12. - McIntosh Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The McIntosh Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard and the east right-of-way line of the CSX main line; thence, in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way line of the CSX main line to its intersection with the centerline of the CSX railroad - Amoco spur line; thence along the CSX railroad - Amoco spur line in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Richneck Road; thence, in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Richneck Road to its intersection with the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence, in a southerly direction along the centerline of Jefferson avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard; thence, in a westerly direction along the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with the east right-of-way of the CSX main line, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6381-07, § 1)  
Sec. 15-12.1. - Greenwood Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Greenwood Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of the CSX main line and the centerline of Skiffs Creek; thence meandering in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Skiffs Creek to its intersection with the northernmost city limit line; thence, in a southeasterly direction along the northernmost city line to its intersection with the east city limit line; thence, in a southeasterly direction along the east city limit line to its intersection with the centerline of Fort Eustis Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Fort Eustis Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Richneck Road; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Richneck Road to its intersection with the CSX railroad - Amoco spur line; thence along the CSX railroad - Amoco spur line in an westerly direction to its intersection with the CSX main line; thence along the CSX main line in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Skiffs Creek, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 5707-01, § 2; Ord. No. 6381-07, § 1)  
Sec. 15-13. - Saunders Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Saunders Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard and the centerline of Virginia Interstate 64; thence, in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Virginia Interstate 64 to its intersection with the centerline of the westerly branch of Brick Kiln Creek; thence, in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of the westerly branch of Brick Kiln Creek to the centerline of Big Bethel Reservoir and the south city limit line; thence, in a southwesterly direction along the south city limit line to the centerline of Saunders Road; thence, in a westerly direction along the centerline of Saunders Road to the south city limit line; thence, in a southwesterly direction along the south city limit line to the centerline of Virginia Interstate 64; thence, in a northerly direction along the centerline of Virginia Interstate 64 to the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-14. - Palmer Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Palmer Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Muller Lane extended to its intersection with the the centerline of the CSX main line; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of the CSX main line to its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek to its intersection with the centerline of I-64; thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of I-64 to its intersection with the centerline extended of the entrance ramp from Victory Boulevard onto westbound I-64; thence along the centerline of the said entrance ramp to its intersection with the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Victory Boulevard to its intersection with the east city limit line; thence in a southerly direction along said city limit line to its intersection with centerline of the westerly branch of Brick Kiln Creek; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of the westerly branch of Brick Kiln Creek to its intersection with the centerline of I-64; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of I-64 to its intersection with the centerline extended of the entrance ramp from Oyster Point Road onto eastbound I-64; thence along the centerline of the said entrance ramp in a northwesterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Oyster Point Road; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Oyster Point Road to its intersection with the centerline of Canon Boulevard; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Canon Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of CEBAF Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of CEBAF Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of SURA Road; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of SURA Road to its intersection with the centerline of Onnes Drive; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Onnes Drive and Muller Lane extended to its intersection with the centerline of the CSX main line, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5164-98; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-14.1. - Kiln Creek Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Kiln Creek Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Lucas Creek at its intersection with the centerline of I-64; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek to its intersection with the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Old Denbigh Boulevard; thence in a southeasterly direction along the centerline of Old Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with the east city limit line; thence in a southerly direction along said city limit line to its intersection with the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Victory Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of the entrance ramp for westbound I-64; thence along the centerline of the entrance ramp in a northwesterly direction extended to its intersection with the centerline of I-64; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Interstate 64 to its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 5164-98; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-15. - Yates Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Yates Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Maxwell Lane and the centerline of Deep Creek; thence meandering in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Deep Creek to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Scufflefield Road; thence in an easterly direction along the the centerline of Scufflefield Road to its intersection with the centerline of Nettles Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Nettles Drive to the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; and thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Maxwell Lane; thence along the centerline of Maxwell Lane to the centerline of Deep Creek, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-16. - Deep Creek Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Deep Creek Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Fishers Creek and the low-water mark of the James River; thence in a northerly direction along the low-water mark of the James River to the centerline of Deep Creek; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Deep Creek to the centerline of Maxwell Lane; thence easterly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard; thence westerly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Madison Lane; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Madison Lane to the centerline of Fishers Creek; thence meandering in a westerly direction along the centerline of Fishers Creek to the low-water mark of the James River, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-17. - Boulevard Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Boulevard Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard and the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Nettles Drive; thence northerly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Radcliff Lane; then following the centerline of Radcliff Lane to Pointer Circle; then following the centerline of Pointer Circle back to Radcliff Lane; then following the centerline of Radcliff Lane to the centerline of Oyster Point Road; then following the centerline of Oyster Point Road east to the centerline of the CSX main line; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of the CSX main line to its intersection with the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to the centerline of Warwick Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-18. - Hidenwood Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Hidenwood Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Fishers Creek and the low-water mark of the James River; thence meandering in an easterly direction along the centerline of Fishers Creek to the centerline of Madison Lane; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Madison Lane to the centerline of Hiden Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Hiden Boulevard to the centerline of Corbin Drive; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Corbin Drive to its intersection with Prince Drew Road and Moores Lane; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Moores Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Shoe Lane; thence along the centerline of Shoe Lane in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Roberts Road; thence along the centerline of Roberts Road in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Fairview Road; thence along the centerline of Fairview Road in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Country Club Road; thence along the centerline of Country Club Road in a northwesterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of an unnamed creek existing as and being contiguous with the eastern boundary of the James River Country Club; thence along the centerline of the unnamed creek in a westerly direction to its intersection with the James River; thence in a northerly direction along the low-water mark of the James River to the centerline of Fishers Creek, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-19. - Peninsula Fine Arts Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Peninsula Fine Arts Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Shoe Lane and the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Shoe Lane to the centerline of Moores Lane; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Moores Lane to its intersection with Prince Drew Road and Corbin Drive; thence continuing along the centerline of Corbin Drive to the centerline of Hiden Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Hiden Boulevard to the centerline of Madison Lane; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Madison Lane to the centerline of Deep Creek Road; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Deep Creek Road to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to the centerline of Shoe Lane, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 6037-04, § 1)  
Sec. 15-20. - Riverside Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Riverside Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the low-water mark of the James River and the mouth of an unnamed creek existing as and being contiguous with the eastern boundary of the James River Country Club; thence continuing in an easterly direction along said boundary to its intersection with the centerline of Country Club Road; thence along the centerline of Country Club Road in a southerly direction to its intersection Fairview Road; thence along the centerline of Fairview Road in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Roberts Road; thence along the centerline of Roberts Road in an southerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Shoe Lane; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Shoe Lane to the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a southwesterly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to the centerline of Museum Drive; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Museum Drive, if extended, to the low-water mark of the James River; thence in a northerly direction along the low-water mark of the James River to its intersection with the mouth of the aforesaid unnamed creek, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-21. - Watkins Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Watkins Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Jefferson Avenue at its intersection with the centerline of Forrest Drive; thence in an easterly and then southerly direction along the centerline of Forrest Drive to its intersection with J. Clyde Morris Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of I-64; thence along the centerline of I-64 in a southerly direction to its intersection with the eastern boundary line of the City of Newport News; thence southeastwardly along said boundary to its intersection with the centerline of Hampton Roads Center Parkway; thence along the centerline of Hampton Roads Center Parkway, in a northwesterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Harpersville Road; thence along the centerline of Harpersville Road in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of the CSX main line; thence along the centerline of the CSX main line in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard; thence along the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence in a northerly direction to the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 4933-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6811-11, § 1)  
Sec. 15-22. - South Morrison Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The South Morrison Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Jefferson Avenue and the centerline of Lyliston Lane; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Harpersville Road; thence along the centerline of Harpersville Road in an easterly direction to its intersection with the proposed East-West Expressway, now under construction; thence along the centerline of the proposed East-West Expressway, now under construction in a southwesterly direction to its intersection with the eastern boundary line of the City of Newport News; thence southwardly along said boundary to its intersection with the centerline of an extension of Lyliston Lane; thence westerly along said extension of Lyliston Lane and continuing along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Jefferson Avenue, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-23. - Deer Park Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Deer Park Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of the CSX main line and the centerline of Muller Lane extended; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of the CSX main line to its intersection with the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Forrest Drive; thence in an easterly and then southerly direction along the centerline of Forrest Drive to its intersection with the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of I-64; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of I-64 to its intersection with the centerline extended of the entrance ramp from Oyster Point Road onto eastbound I-64; thence along the centerline of the said entrance ramp in a northwesterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Oyster Point Road; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Oyster Point Road to its intersection with the centerline of Canon Boulevard; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Canon Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of CEBAF Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of CEBAF Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of SURA Road; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of SURA Road to its intersection with the centerline of Onnes Drive; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Onnes Drive and Muller Lane extended to its intersection with the centerline of the CSX main line, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6811-11, § 1)  
Sec. 15-24. - Warwick Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Warwick Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of the northernmost portion of James River Drive, if extended, and the low-water mark of the James River; thence in a northerly direction along the low-water mark of the James River to its intersection with the centerline of Museum Drive, if extended; thence in a northeasterly direction along the centerline of Museum Drive and J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to the western right-of-way of the CSX main line; thence in a southerly direction along the western right-of-way of the CSX main line to the centerline of the CSX railroad spur to Camp Morrison; thence along the CSX railroad spur to Camp Morrison in a southerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of the unpaved portion of Export Circle; thence along the centerline of the unpaved portion of Export Circle and then its paved portion in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard in a southerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of the northernmost portion of James River Drive; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of the northernmost portion of James River Drive, if extended, to the low-water mark of the James River, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-25. - Reserved.  
Sec. 15-26. - Hilton Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Hilton Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the low-water mark of the James River and the centerline of the northernmost portion of James River Drive, if extended; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of the northernmost portion of James River Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Export Circle; thence along the centerline of the paved portion of Export Circle and then the unpaved portion of Export Circle in an easterly direction to its intersection with the CSX railroad spur to Camp Morrison; thence along the CSX railroad spur to Camp Morrison in a northerly direction to its intersection with the western right-of-way line of the CSX main line; thence southerly along said right-of-way line to its intersection with the centerline of a certain creek, commonly known as Government Ditch; thence westerly along said centerline to the low-water mark of the James River; thence northerly along the low-water mark of the James River to its intersection with the centerline of the northernmost portion of James River Drive, if extended, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-27. - River Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The River Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the western right-of-way of the CSX main line and the centerline of a certain creek, commonly known as Government Ditch; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of the CSX main line to its intersection with the centerline of 50th Street; thence westerly along the centerline of 50th Street to its intersection with the centerline of Huntington Avenue; thence along the centerline of Huntington Avenue in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of River Road; thence along the centerline of River Road in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 70th Street; thence along the centerline of 70th Street in a westerly direction, if extended, to the low-water mark of the James River; thence meandering northwardly along the low-water mark of the James River to the intersection of the low-water mark of the James River and the centerline of a certain creek known as Government Ditch; thence northeasterly along said centerline to its intersection with the western right-of-way of the CSX main line, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-28. - Sedgefield Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Sedgefield Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Main Street and the eastern right-of-way of the CSX main line; thence in a northerly direction along the eastern right-of-way of the CSX main line to the centerline of Harpersville Road; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Harpersville Road to the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to the centerline of Lyliston Lane; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Lyliston Lane to the eastern boundary line of the City of Newport News; thence in a southerly direction along said boundary to the centerline of Main Street; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Main Street to the eastern right-of-way of the CSX main line, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-29. - Carver Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Carver Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Mercury Boulevard and the eastern right-of-way of the CSX main line; thence in a northerly direction along the eastern right-of-way of the CSX main line to the centerline of Main Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Main Street to its intersection with the eastern boundary line of the City of Newport News; thence in a southerly direction along said boundary to the centerline of Mercury Boulevard; thence westerly along said centerline to the eastern right-of-way of the CSX main line, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-30. - Newmarket Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Newmarket Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Marshall Avenue and the northern boundary of the City of Newport News; thence in an easterly direction along said northern boundary line to the intersection of the eastern boundary of the City of Newport News; thence in a southerly direction along the eastern boundary line to the centerline of 56th Street; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of 56th Street to the centerline of Chestnut Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Chestnut Avenue to the centerline of Briarfield Road; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Briarfield Road to the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Marshall Avenue to the northern boundary of the City of Newport News, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-31. - Briarfield Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Briarfield Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Mercury Boulevard and eastern right-of-way of the CSX main line; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Mercury Boulevard to the eastern boundary of the City of Newport News; thence along said boundary in a southerly and easterly direction to the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Marshall Avenue to the centerline of Briarfield Road; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Briarfield Road to the centerline of Chestnut Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Chestnut Avenue to the centerline of 48th Street; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of 48th Street to its intersection with the centerline of Madison Avenue; thence along the centerline of Madison Avenue in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 50th Street; thence along 50th Street in a westerly direction to the eastern right-of-way of the CSX main line; thence in a northerly direction along the eastern right-of-way of the CSX main line to the centerline of Mercury Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-32. - Newsome Park Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Newsome Park Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of 48th Street and the centerline of Madison Avenue; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 48th Street to the centerline of Chestnut Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Chestnut Avenue to the centerline of 56th Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 56th Street to the eastern boundary line of the City of Newport News; thence in a southerly direction along the said boundary to the centerline of 39th Street; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of 39th Street to the centerline of Chestnut Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Chestnut Avenue to the centerline of 44th Street; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of 44th Street to the centerline of Orcutt Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Orcutt Avenue to the centerline of 39th Street; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of 39th Street to the centerline of Madison Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Madison Avenue to the centerline of 48th Street, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-33. - Jefferson Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Jefferson Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of 50th Street, if extended, and the CSX main line; thence along the centerline of 50th Street in an easterly direction to the centerline of Madison Avenue; thence along the centerline of Madison Avenue in a southerly direction to the centerline of 39th Street; thence along the centerline of 39th Street in an easterly direction to the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence along the centerline of Marshall Avenue in a southerly direction to the centerline of 29th Street; thence along the centerline of 29th Street extended in a westerly direction to its intersection with the eastern right-of-way line of I-664; thence along the eastern right-of-way line of I-664 in a southerly direction its intersection with the centerline of 28th Street; thence along the centerline of 28th Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with the CSX main line; thence along the CSX main line in a northerly direction to the centerline of 50th Street, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-34. - Downtown Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Downtown Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the low-water mark of the James River and the north right-of-way of the CSX spur at 23rd Street; thence in a northerly direction along the low-water mark of the James River to the centerline of 70th Street, if extended; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 70th Street to the centerline of River Road; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of River Road to its intersection with the centerline of Huntington Avenue; thence along the centerline of Huntington Avenue in a southerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 50th Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 50th Street to its intersection with the western right-of-way of the CSX main line; thence in a southerly direction along the CSX main line to the north right-of-way of the CSX spur at 23rd Street; thence in an easterly direction along the CSX spur at 23rd Street to the low-water mark of the James River, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-35. - Huntington Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Huntington Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of 39th Street and the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 39th Street to the centerline of Orcutt Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Orcutt Avenue to the centerline of 44th Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 44th Street to the centerline of Roanoke Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Roanoke Avenue to the centerline of 30th Street; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of 30th Street to the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Marshall Avenue to the centerline of 39th Street, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-36. - Washington Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Washington Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of 44th Street and the centerline of Roanoke Avenue; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 44th Street to the centerline of Chestnut Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Chestnut Avenue to the centerline of 39th Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 39th Street to the eastern boundary of the City of Newport News; thence in a southerly direction along said boundary to the centerline of 30th Street; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of 30th Street to the centerline of Roanoke Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Roanoke Avenue to the centerline of 44th Street, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-37. - Chestnut Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Chestnut Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of 30th Street and the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence along the centerline of 30th Street in an easterly direction to the eastern boundary of the City of Newport News; thence in a southerly direction along said boundary to the centerline of 27th Street; thence along the centerline of 27th Street in a westerly direction to the centerline of Parish Avenue; thence along the centerline of Parish Avenue in a southerly direction to the centerline of 25th Street; thence along the centerline of 25th Street in a westerly direction to the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence along the centerline of Marshall Avenue in a northerly direction to the centerline of 30th Street; the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-38. - Marshall Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Marshall Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of 28th Street and the CSX main line; thence along the centerline of 28th Street in an easterly direction to the eastern right-of-way line of I-664; thence along the eastern right-of-way line of I-664 in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 29th Street if extended in a westerly direction; thence along the centerline of 29th Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence along the centerline of Marshall Avenue in a southerly direction to the centerline of 25th Street; thence along the centerline of 25th Street in an easterly direction to the centerline of Wickham Avenue; thence along the centerline of Wickham Avenue in a southerly direction to the centerline of 20th Street; thence along the centerline of 20th Street in a westerly direction to the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence along the centerline of Marshall Avenue in a southerly direction to the centerline of 16th Street; thence along the centerline of 16th Street in a westerly direction to the centerline of Ivy Avenue, thence along the centerline of Ivy Avenue in a northerly direction to the centerline of 18th Street; thence along the centerline of 18th Street in a westerly direction to the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue in a northerly direction to the centerline of 21st Street; thence along the centerline of 21st Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Terminal Avenue; thence along the centerline of Terminal Avenue in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 25th Street; thence along the centerline of 25th Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of the CSX main line; thence in a northerly direction along the CSX main line to the centerline of 28th Street, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-39. - Reserved.  
Sec. 15-40. - Dunbar Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Dunbar Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the low-water mark of the James River and the centerline of the CSX spur at 23rd Street; thence along the centerline of the CSX spur in an easterly direction to the centerline of the CSX main line; thence along the centerline of the CSX main line in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 25th Street; thence along the centerline of 25th Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Terminal Avenue; thence along the centerline of Terminal Avenue in a southerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 21st Street; thence along the centerline of 21st Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to the centerline of 18th Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 18th Street to the centerline of Ivy Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Ivy Avenue to the centerline of 12th Street; thence along the centerline of 12th Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Lassiter Drive; thence along the centerline of Lassiter Drive in a southerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 9th Street; thence along the centerline of 9th Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Ivy Avenue; thence along the centerline of Ivy Avenue in a southerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 6th Street; thence along the centerline of 6th Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Aqua Vista Drive; thence along the centerline of Aqua Vista Drive to its intersection with the centerline of 6th Street; thence along the centerline of 6th Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue extended in a southerly direction to the low-water mark of Hampton Roads; thence in a southerly direction along the low-water mark of Hampton Roads to the low-water mark of the James River; thence in a northwesterly direction along the low-water mark of the James River to the centerline of the CSX spur at 23rd Street, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-41. - Reed Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Reed Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of 25th Street and the centerline of Roanoke Avenue; thence along the centerline of Roanoke Avenue in a southerly direction to the centerline of 16th Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 16th Street to the centerline of Salters Creek; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Salters Creek to the low-water mark of Hampton Roads; thence meandering in a westerly direction along the low-water mark of Hampton Roads to the centerline of Jefferson Avenue extended; thence along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 6th Street; thence along the centerline of 6th Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Aqua Vista Drive; thence along the centerline of Aqua Vista Drive to its intersection with the centerline of 6th Street; thence along the centerline of 6th Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Ivy Avenue; thence along the centerline of Ivy Avenue in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 9th Street; thence along the centerline of 9th Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Lassiter Drive; thence along the centerline of Lassiter Drive in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 12th Street; thence along the centerline of 12th Street in a westerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Ivy Avenue; thence along the centerline of Ivy Avenue in a northerly direction to its intersection with the centerline of 16th Street; thence along the centerline of 16th Street in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Marshall Avenue; thence along the centerline of Marshall Avenue in a northerly direction to the centerline of 20th Street; thence along the centerline of 20th Street in an easterly direction to the centerline of Wickham Avenue; thence along the centerline of Wickham Avenue in a northerly direction to the centerline of 25th Street; thence along the centerline of 25th Street in an easterly direction to the centerline of Roanoke Avenue, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-42. - Magruder Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Magruder Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Roanoke Avenue and the centerline of 25th Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 25th Street to the centerline of Parish Avenue; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Parish Avenue to the centerline of 27th Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 27th Street to the boundary of the City of Newport News; thence in a southeasterly direction along the city boundary line to the centerline of Salters Creek; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Salters Creek to the centerline of 16th Street; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of 16th Street to the centerline of Roanoke Avenue; thence along the centerline of Roanoke Avenue in a northerly direction to the centerline of 25th Street, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-43. - Wilson Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Wilson Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the low-water mark of Hampton Roads and the centerline of Salters Creek; thence meandering in a northerly direction along the centerline of Salters Creek to the intersection of the boundary of the City of Newport News and the east branch of Salters Creek; thence meandering in a northerly direction along the centerline of the east branch of Salters Creek to the intersection of the eastern boundary of the City of Newport News; thence in a southerly direction along the eastern boundary to the centerline of 27th Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of 27th Street to the centerline of Pear Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Pear Avenue to the low-water mark of Hampton Roads; thence in a westerly direction along the low-water mark of Hampton Roads to the centerline of Salters Creek, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-44. - Nelson Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Nelson Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Lucas Creek and the centerline of the Warwick River; thence meandering in a northerly direction along the centerline of the Warwick River to the centerline of Stoney Run; thence meandering in an easterly direction along the centerline of Stoney Run to the centerline of Stony Drive extended; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Stony Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard; thence in an easterly direction along the aforesaid centerline to a point where it is intersected by the centerline of Old Lucas Creek Road; thence along the centerline of Old Lucas Creek Road in an easterly direction to its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek Road; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek Road to the centerline of Lucas Creek; thence meandering along the aforesaid centerline in a westerly direction to the centerline of the Warwick River, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-45. - Bland Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Bland Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the east right-of-way of the CSX main line at its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek; thence in a northerly direction along the east right-of-way of the CSX main line to its intersection with the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence in a southerly direction along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Lucas Creek; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of Lucas Creek to its intersection with the east right-of-way of the CSX main line, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-46. - Oyster Point Voting Precinct boundaries. 
The Oyster Point Voting Precinct shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of Sluice Mill Pond at its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a northwesterly direction along the centerline of Sluice Mill Pond to its intersection with the west right-of-way of the CSX main line; thence in a southerly direction along the west right-of-way of the CSX main line to its intersection with the centerline of Oyster Point Road; then following the centerline of Oyster Point Road west to Radcliff Lane; then following the centerline of Radcliff Lane to Pointer Circle; then following the centerline of Pointer Circle back to Radcliff Lane; then following the centerline of Radcliff Lane to Nettles Drive; then following the centerline of Nettles Drive south to Scufflefield Road; then following the centerline of Scufflefield Road west to its intersection with the centerline of Warwick Boulevard; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Sluice Mill Pond, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-47. - Voting places in respective voting precincts. 
Voting Precinct 	Voting Place 
(1) Bland 	G.J. McIntosh Elementary School 
Richneck Road 
(2) Boulevard 	Knights of Columbus Building 
12742 Nettles Drive 
(3) Briarfield 	An Achievable Dream Middle and High School 
5720 Marshall Avenue 
(4) Carver 	Carver Elementary School 
6160 Jefferson Avenue 
(5) Charles 	B.C. Charles Elementary School 
701 Menchville Road 
(6) Chestnut 	Dochiki Club 
2705 Chestnut Avenue 
(7) Deep Creek 	Moose Lodge 
1711 Warwick Moose Lane 
(8) Deer Park 	Deer Park Elementary School 
11541 Jefferson Avenue 
(9) Denbigh 	Courthouse Way Community Center 
14302 Old Courthouse Way 
(10) Downtown 	City Council Chambers Lobby 
2400 Washington Avenue 
(11) Dunbar 	An Achievable Dream Academy 
726 16th Street 
(12) Epes 	Horace H. Epes Elementary School 
855 Lucas Creek Road 
(13) Greenwood 	Greenwood Elementary School 
13460 Woodside Lane 
(14) Hidenwood 	Hidenwood Elementary School 
501 Blount Point Road 
(15) Hilton 	Main Street Library 
110 Main Street 
(16) Huntington 	Dorie Miller Community Center 
2814 Wickham Avenue 
(17) Jefferson 	Marshall Courts Recreation Center 
3301 Marshall Avenue 
(18) Jenkins 	Jenkins Elementary School 
80 Menchville Road 
(19) Kiln Creek 	Kiln Creek Elementary School 
1501 Kiln Creek Parkway 
(20) Lee Hall 	Lee Hall Elementary School 
17346 Warwick Boulevard 
(21) Magruder 	Discovery STEM Academy 
1712 Chestnut Avenue 
(22) Marshall 	John Marshall Elementary School 
743 24th Street 
(23) McIntosh 	George J. McIntosh Elementary School 
185 Richneck Road 
(24) Nelson 	R. O. Nelson Elementary School 
826 Moyer Road 
(25) Newmarket 	American Legion Post 25 
7609 Marshall Avenue 
(26) Newsome Park 	Newsome Park Elementary School 
4200 Marshall Avenue 
(27) Oyster Point 	Yates Elementary School 
75 Maxwell Lane 
(28) Palmer 	Lutrelle F. Palmer Elementary School 
100 Palmer Lane 
(29) Reed 	Downing-Gross Cultural Center 
2410 Wickham Avenue 
(30) Reservoir 	Denbigh Early Childhood Center 
15638 Warwick Boulevard 
(31) Richneck 	Richneck Elementary School 
Tyner Drive 
(32) River 	Virginia War Museum 
9285 Warwick Boulevard 
(33) Riverside 	Riverside Elementary School 
1100 Country Club Road 
(34) Riverview 	Riverview Gymnastics Center 
125 City Farm Road 
(35) Sanford 	Sanford Elementary School 
480 Colony Road 
(36) Saunders 	Saunders Elementary School 
853 Harpersville Road 
(37) Sedgefield 	Sedgefield Elementary School 
804 Main Street 
(38) South Morrison 	South Morrison Adult Learning School 
746 Adams Drive 
(39) Warwick 	Warwick Recreation Center 
51 Copeland Lane 
(40) Washington 	Booker T. Washington Middle School 
3700 Chestnut Avenue 
(41) Watkins 	Watkins Early Childhood Center 
21 Burns Drive 
(42) Wellesley 	The Hidenwood 
50 Wellesley Drive 
(43) Wilson 	Ivy Baptist Church 
50 Maple Avenue 
(44) Windsor 	Stevens Memorial Baptist Church 
224 Richneck Road 
(45) Yates 	Yates Elementary School 
75 Maxwell Lane 
 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5707-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5811-02; Ord. No. 5961-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6037-04, § 1; Ord. No. 6156-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6279-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6354-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6455-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6620-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6714-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6850-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7187-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7251-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7293-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7401-17, § 1; Ord. No. 7442-18, § 1; Ord. No. 7492-18, § 1; Ord. No. 7568-19, § 1) 
_____ 
Sec. 15-48. - Central absentee voter election precinct. 
There is hereby established a Central Absentee Voter Election Precinct for the City of Newport News for the purpose of counting and recording absentee ballots in all elections. 
The polling place shall be located at the City Hall in the Office of the Voter Registrar on the 6 th Floor, 2400 Washington Avenue, Newport News, Virginia, or at such other location within City Hall as the Voter Registrar may designate and shall make the public aware. 
(Ord. No. 7080-14, § 1)  
Sec. 15-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTION DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 15-50. - Election districts, generally. 
For the purpose of electing members of the city council and the school board of the City of Newport News, the city shall be divided into election districts as set forth in the following sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-51. - Election District One. 
Election District One, also known as North Voting District, and sometime referred to as Ward One, shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of the mouth of the Warwick River; then following the centerline of the Warwick River to its intersection with Stoney Run Creek; then following the centerline of Stoney Run Creek to the point where Stoney Drive extended would cross Stoney Run; then following the centerline of Stoney Drive extended and Stoney Drive south to its intersection with Denbigh Boulevard; then following the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard to Old Lucas Creek Road; then following the centerline of Old Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with Lucas Creek Road; then following the centerline of Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with Colony Road; then following the centerline of Colony Road to its intersection with Eastwood Drive; then following the centerline of Eastwood Drive to its intersection with Nicewood Drive; then following the centerline of Nicewood Drive to its intersection with Princess Margaret Drive; then following the centerline of Princess Margaret Drive to its intersection with Bernard Drive; then following the centerline of Bernard Drive to its intersection with Menchville Road; then following the centerline of Menchville Road to its intersection with Warwick Boulevard; then following the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with Scufflefield Road; then following the centerline of Scufflefield Road to its intersection with Nettles Drive; then following the centerline of Nettles Drive north to its intersection with Radcliff Lane; then following the centerline of Radcliff Lane to Pointer Circle; then following the centerline of Pointer Circle back to Radcliff Lane; then following the centerline of Radcliff Lane to Oyster Point Road; then following the centerline of Oyster Point Road east to the CSX main line; then following the centerline of the CSX main line north to its intersection with Denbigh Boulevard; then following the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with Old Denbigh Boulevard; then following the centerline of Old Denbigh Boulevard to the corporate boundary between the City of Newport News and York County; then following the corporate boundary between the City of Newport News and York County to its intersection with Skiffs Creek; then following the centerline of Skiffs Creek to its entrance at the James River; then following the James River shoreline to a point at the centerline of the mouth of the Warwick River. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5654-01, § 1)  
Sec. 15-52. - Election District Two. 
Election District Two, also known as Central Voting District, and sometime referred to as Ward Two, shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the James River shoreline at its intersection with the Government Ditch; then following the centerline of the Government Ditch to its intersection with the CSX main line; then following the CSX main line to its intersection with J. Clyde Morris Boulevard; then following the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to its intersection with Jefferson Avenue; then following the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to its intersection with Forrest Drive; then following the centerline of Forrest Drive to its intersection with J. Clyde Morris Boulevard; then following the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to its intersection with I-64; then following the centerline of I-64 north to the westerly branch of Brick Kiln Creek; then following the centerline of the westerly branch of Brick Kiln Creek east to its intersection with the corporate boundary between the City of Newport News and York County; then following the corporate boundary between the City of Newport News and York County to its intersection with Old Denbigh Boulevard; then following the centerline of Old Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with Denbigh Boulevard; then following the center line of Denbigh Boulevard west to its intersection with the CSX main line; then following the centerline of the CSX main line to its intersection with Oyster Point Road; then following the centerline of Oyster Point Road west to Radcliff Lane; then following the centerline of Radcliff Lane to Pointer Circle; then following the centerline of Pointer Circle back to Radcliff Lane; then following the centerline of Radcliff Lane to Nettles Drive; then following the centerline of Nettles Drive south to Scufflefield Road; then following the centerline of Scufflefield Road west to its intersection with Warwick Boulevard; then following the centerline of Warwick Boulevard to its intersection with Menchville Road; then following the centerline of Menchville Road to its intersection with Bernard Drive; then following the centerline of Bernard Drive to its intersection with Princess Margaret Drive; then following the centerline of Princess Margaret Drive to its intersection with Nicewood Drive; then following the centerline of Nicewood Drive to its intersection with Eastwood Drive; then following the centerline of Eastwood Drive to its intersection with Colony Road; then following the centerline of Colony Road to its intersection with Lucas Creek Road; then following the centerline of Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with Old Lucas Creek Road; then following the centerline of Old Lucas Creek Road to its intersection with Denbigh Boulevard; then following the centerline of Denbigh Boulevard to its intersection with Stoney Drive; then following Stoney Drive and Stoney Drive extended to the point where it crosses ; Stoney Run Creek; then following the centerline of Stoney Run Creek to its intersection with the Warwick River; then following the centerline of the Warwick River to its entrance at the James River; then following the James River shoreline to the point where it is intersected by the Government Ditch. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5654-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6811-11, § 1)  
Sec. 15-53. - Election District Three. 
Election District Three, also known as South Voting District, and sometime referred to as Ward Three, shall be composed of the territory situate, lying and being within the following described boundaries: 
Beginning at the centerline of the mouth of the Small Boat Harbor; then following the Hampton Roads shoreline to its intersection with the corporate boundary between the City of Newport News and the City of Hampton; then following the corporate boundary between the City of Newport News and the City of Hampton to its intersection with York County; then following the corporate boundary between the City of Newport News and York County to the westerly branch of Brick Kiln Creek; then following the centerline of the westerly branch of Brick Kiln Creek to where it is crossed by I-64; then following the centerline of I-64 south to its intersection with J. Clyde Morris Boulevard; then following the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to its intersection with Forrest Drive; then following the centerline of Forrest Drive to its intersection with Jefferson Avenue; then following the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to its intersection with J. Clyde Morris Boulevard; then following the centerline of J. Clyde Morris Boulevard to its intersection with the CSX main line; then following the centerline of the CSX main line to its intersection with the Government Ditch; then following the centerline of the Government Ditch to its intersection with the James River shoreline; then following the James River shoreline to the centerline of the Small Boat Harbor. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5654-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6811-11, § 1)  
Sec. 15-54. - Precincts for each election district. 
The precincts for each election district shall be as set forth below: 
a.  Election District One shall consist of the following voting precincts: 
Denbigh 
Epes 
Jenkins 
Greenwood 
Lee Hall 
McIntosh 
Oyster Point 
Reservoir 
Richneck 
Windsor 
b.  Election District Two shall consist of the following voting precincts: 
Bland 
Boulevard 
Charles 
Deep Creek 
Deer Park 
Hidenwood 
Hilton 
Kiln Creek 
Nelson 
Palmer 
Peninsula Fine Arts 
Riverside 
Riverview 
Sanford 
Warwick 
Yates 
c.  Election District Three shall consist of the following voting precincts: 
Briarfield 
Carver 
Chestnut 
Downtown 
Dunbar 
Huntington 
Jefferson 
Magruder 
Marshall 
Newmarket 
Newsome Park 
Reed 
River 
Saunders 
Sedgefield 
South Morrison 
Washington 
Watkins 
Wilson 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 4933-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5654-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5708-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6037-04, § 1)  
Secs. 15-55—15-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 15-60. - City council. 
The mayor and members of the city council shall be elected as provided in the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5654-01, § 1)  
Secs. 15-61—15-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SCHOOL BOARD 
 
Sec. 15-70. - School board; generally. 
The school board shall consist of seven (7) members. One (1) member shall be elected at large by all the voters of the City of Newport News and shall represent all areas of the city. The remaining six (6) members shall be elected by Election Districts. Two (2) members shall be elected by the voters of each respective election district that they represent as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-71. - Election and terms of members of the school board. 
There shall be a general election of the school board on the first Tuesday in May, 1994, or as soon thereafter as may be permitted or provided by law, at which time there shall be elected four (4) members. Those four (4) members shall be elected by the qualified voters of the various election districts as follows: one (1) each from Election District One, Election District Two and Election District Three, and one (1) from the city at large. Only those qualified voters residing in each election district shall be eligible to vote for the school board member representing that specific election district, and each qualified voter of the city shall be eligible to vote for the candidate for the at-large position. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes, in each individual election district, or in the city for the at-large position, as the case may be, shall be declared elected and shall serve four (4) years. 
The four (4) members so elected shall take office on July 1, 1994, or as soon thereafter as is permitted. The remaining three (3) members of the school board who have been previously and legally appointed to the board by the city council shall continue to serve as members of the school board until June 30, 1996, or until such time as their successors have been duly elected. 
There shall be a general election for the school board on the first Tuesday in May, 1996, at which time there shall be elected three (3) members. These three (3) members shall be elected by the qualified voters of the various election districts as follows: one (1) each from Election District One, Election District Two and Election District Three. Only those qualified voters residing in each election district shall be eligible to vote for candidates for the school board representing that specific election district. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes in each individual election district shall be declared elected and shall serve four (4) years. The three (3) members so elected shall take office on July 1, 1996. Thereafter there shall be a general election held on the first Tuesday of May prior to the expiration of each member's four-year term, and in the same manner as provided above, with candidates receiving the highest number of votes in each respective election district, or at large, as the case may be, being declared elected and with terms of school board members elected at such elections beginning July 1, following their election and continuing four (4) years. 
The school board shall be a continuing body and no measure pending before it shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the expiration of the term of office or the removal of the members of the body or any of them. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-72. - Nomination of candidates for members of the school board. 
Candidates for members of the school board shall be qualified voters of the city and residents of the election district for which they seek office. Candidates shall file their notice of candidacy and be nominated only by petition in the manner prescribed by law for non-party candidates and not by caucus, primary, convention or other party affiliated proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-73. - Party designation and ballots in school board elections. 
The ballot used in the election of members of the school board shall be without any distinguishing party name, mark, or symbol. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1)  
Sec. 15-74. - Selection of chairperson. 
The chairperson of the elected school board shall be selected by the members of the school board from the members of the school board. 
(Ord. No. 4875-96, § 1) 

Chapter 15.1 - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Human rights, Ch. 21.1. 
State Law reference— Virginia Fair Housing Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15.1-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Fair Housing Ordinance" of the City of Newport News. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-2. - Declaration of policy. 
It is the policy of the City of Newport News to provide for fair housing throughout the city, to all its citizens, regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, or sex, age or parenthood; and to that end to prohibit discriminatory practices with respect to residential housing by any person or group of persons, in order that the peace, health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of all the inhabitants of the city may be protected and insured. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-3. - Effect, severability. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal any other ordinance of the City of Newport News relating to discrimination because of race, color, religion, national origin, or sex, age or parenthood; but all such ordinances and portions thereof in conflict herewith are repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are severable; and if any part or provision hereof shall be held void, the decision of the court so holding shall not affect or impair any of the remaining parts or provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-4. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to (1) any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any twenty-four-month period; provided further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one (1) time; provided further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this chapter only if such house is sold or rented (a) without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee, independent contractor or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person and (b) without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this chapter; but nothing in this proviso shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or (2) rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one (1) of such living quarters as his residence. 
(2)  Family includes a single individual, whether male or female. 
(3)  Person includes one (1) or more individuals, whether male or female, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
(4)  To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let or otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(5)  Restrictive covenants shall mean any specification limiting the transfer, rental or lease of any dwelling because of race, color, religion, national origin or sex. 
(6)  Discriminatory housing practices means an act that is unlawful under this chapter. 
(7)  Age and parenthood discrimination shall not apply to all-adult or all-elderly complexes. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-5. - Discriminatory practices unlawful. 
It is unlawful to commit or to attempt to commit, directly or indirectly, a discriminatory practice as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-6. - Unlawful discriminatory housing practices—Unlawful practices by persons selling, leasing, etc., dwellings. 
It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice, because of race, color, religion, national origin or sex, for any person having the right to sell, rent, lease, control, construct or manage any dwelling constructed or to be constructed, or any agent, independent contractor or employee of such person: 
(1)  To refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of a dwelling; 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith; 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(4)  To represent to any person, for reasons of discrimination, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  To deny any person access or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate broker's organization or other services, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation; 
(6)  To include in any transfer, sale, rental or lease of housing any restrictive covenant that discriminates, or for any person to honor or exercise, or attempt to honor or exercise, any discriminatory covenant pertaining to housing. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-7. - Same—Attempting to induce or discourage transfer of property; soliciting listing of dwellings for sale or lease. 
It shall further be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice: 
(1)  For any person, firm, corporation or association, acting for monetary gain, knowingly to induce or attempt to induce another person to transfer an interest in real property, or to discourage another person from purchasing real property, by representations regarding the existing or potential proximity of real property owned, used or occupied by persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, or sex, age or parenthood; 
(2)  For any person, firm, corporation or association to solicit or attempt to solicit the listing of dwellings for sale or lease, by door-to-door solicitation, in person or by telephone, or by mass distribution of circulars, for the purpose of changing the racial composition of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-8. - Same—Unlawful practices by lending institutions; deposit of city funds in such institutions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any bank, savings and loan institution, credit union, insurance company or other person regularly engaged in the business of making mortgages or other loans for the purchase, construction, improvement, or repair or maintenance of dwellings to deny such a loan to a person applying therefor, or discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the down payment, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such a loan, because of the race, color, religious creed, national origin or sex of such person, or of any member, stockholder, director, officer or employee of such person, or of the prospective occupants, lessees or tenants, of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which the application for a loan is made. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the city treasurer or any city governmental official whose responsibility it is to account for, to invest or to manage public funds to deposit or cause to be deposited any public funds in any lending institution provided for herein which is found to be committing discriminatory practices, where such findings were upheld by the court. Upon a court's judicial enforcement of any order to restrain a practice of such lending institution or for said institution to cease or desist in a discriminatory practice, if the treasurer has funds deposited in any lending institution which is practicing discrimination, as set forth herein, he shall take immediate steps to have the funds withdrawn and redeposited in another lending institution. If for reasons of sound economic management this action will result in a financial loss to the city, the action may be deferred for a period not longer than one (1) year. If the lending institution in question has corrected its discriminatory practices, any prohibition set forth in this section shall not be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-9. - Certain restrictive covenants void; instruments containing such covenants. 
(a)  Any restrictive covenant purporting to restrict occupancy or ownership of property on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, or sex, age or parenthood, whether heretofore or hereafter included in an instrument affecting the title to real or leasehold property, is declared to be null, void and of no effect, and contrary to the public policy. 
(b)  Any person who is asked to accept a document affecting title to real or leasehold property may decline to accept the same if it includes such a covenant until the covenant has been removed from the document. Refusal to accept delivery of an instrument for this reason shall not be deemed a breach of a contract to purchase, lease, mortgage or otherwise deal with such property. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-10. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preferences to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, or sex, age or parenthood. Nor shall anything in this chapter apply to a private membership club which is a bona fide club and which is exempt from taxation under 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. Nor shall anything in this chapter be construed to prohibit any private, state-owned or state-supported educational institution, hospital, nursing home, religious or correctional institution, from requiring that persons of both sexes not occupy any single-family residence, or room or unit in dwellings, or other buildings or restrooms in said room or unit in dwellings or other buildings, which it owns or operates. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-11. - Interference with enjoyment of rights under this chapter. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his or her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by section 15.1-6, 15.1-7, 15.1-8 or 15.1-9. This section may be enforced by appropriate civil action. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-12. - Conspiracy to violate this chapter unlawful. 
It is an unlawful practice for a person, or for two (2) or more persons, to conspire: 
(1)  To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this article, or because he has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing under this chapter; or 
(2)  To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce a person to engage in any of the acts or practices declared unlawful by this chapter; or 
(3)  To obstruct or prevent a person from complying with the provisions of this chapter or any order issued thereunder; or 
(4)  To resist, prevent, impede or interfere with the committee or any of its members or representatives in the lawful performance of duty under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-13. - Acting for another person no defense. 
It shall be no defense to a violation of this chapter by a person who commits a violation, that the violation was requested, sought or otherwise procured by another person. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84)  
Sec. 15.1-14. - Administering agency. 
The city shall contract with the office of human affairs (OHA) to receive, examine and inquire into alleged violations of this chapter and to conduct such investigation as is necessary, and to take action as prescribed in section 15.1-15. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84; Ord. No. 3224-84; Ord. No. 3858-89)  
Sec. 15.1-15. - Provisions for administering the Newport News Fair Housing Policy. 
(a)  Should inquiries and examination by OHA reveal no basis for complaint, the complainant and the alleged violator shall be so informed. 
(b)  If, at any time after a complaint has been filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Newport News OHA has reasonable cause to believe that appropriate civil action to preserve the status quo or to prevent irreparable harm is advisable, the OHA shall so notify the alleged violator, who will be given the opportunity to respond and/or resolve the alleged violation. 
(c)  Should the response not be sufficient to preserve the status quo or prevent irreparable harm, OHA shall refer the complaint to the Newport News Human Rights Commission. 
(d)  If the Newport News Human Rights Commission determines that there is reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred and has not been resolved, it shall so notify the complainant. The OHA shall then offer its assistance to the complainant to file a complaint with the Virginia Real Estate Commission. 
(e)  Should a Newport News Human Rights Commission finding of no basis for complaint be unacceptable to the complainant, the OHA shall then advise the complainant of the appeal filing procedure. The complainant shall also be advised that OHA files will be available to the agency with which an appeal may lie and the alleged violator. 
(Ord. No. 3168-84; Ord. No. 3858-89)  
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection regulations for automobile graveyards, §§ 8-13—8-15; attaching bicycles to fire hydrants, § 10-35; building regulations, Ch. 13; fire prevention in mobile home parks generally, § 25-42; storage of fuel in mobile home parks, § 25-43; calling firefighting apparatus without cause or malicious activation of fire alarm in public building, § 28-7; making fires in parks or squares or on beaches, § 29-37; discharge of flammables or explosives into sewerage system, § 33-50(b); smoking, Ch. 33.1; sidewalk vaults not to interfere with fire hydrants, § 38-126; smoking on buses, § 41-18; application for connection of fire sprinklers to city's water system, § 42-2; water charges for fire hydrants and fire sprinklers, §§ 42-32, 42-33; protective devices for fire service systems connected to waterworks, § 42-57; installation of fire hydrants in subdivisions, App. B, § 9-06. 
State Law reference— Fire protection, Code of Virginia, title 27; Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code Act, Code of Virginia, § 27-94 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Fire department generally. 
(a)  There is hereby established a fire department, which shall consist of the fire chief, to be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by orders of the fire chief consistent therewith. 
(b)  The fire chief shall be the head of the fire department and shall, under the supervision of the city manager, have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. The city manager shall, through the fire chief, promulgate all orders, rules and regulations for the government of the fire department. 
(c)  In case of the disability of the fire chief to perform his duties, by reason of sickness, absence from the city or other cause, the city manager shall designate one (1) of the officers of the fire department to act as fire chief. 
(d)  The officers and members of the fire department shall be responsible to protect life and property from fire or other emergencies and it shall be their duty to use their best endeavors to prevent fire by enforcement of the fire prevention code and other city ordinances pertaining to open burning, fireworks, obstructing fire hydrants and fire lanes and similar ordinances. 
(e)  No member of the fire department shall receive any fee or other compensation for any services rendered in the performance of duties, other then the salary paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6745-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6745-10 shall be in effect on and after January 1, 2011. 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, § 4.02(B). 
Cross reference— Membership of firefighters in employees' retirement fund, § 31-30.  
Sec. 16-2. - Physical examination of firefighters. 
Every firefighter shall, prior to entering employment with the fire department, undergo a physical examination in accordance with city policy. 
(Ord. No. 1788; Code 1961, § 2-87; Ord. No. 6745-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6745-10 shall be in effect on and after January 1, 2011.  
Sec. 16-3. - Authority of chief or other officer in charge when answering alarm or operating at an emergency incident; penalty for refusal to obey orders. 
While any unit of the fire department is in the process of answering an alarm or operating at an emergency incident where there is imminent danger or the actual occurrence of fire or explosion or the uncontrolled release of hazardous materials which threaten life or property and returning to the station, the chief or other officer in charge at that time shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Maintain order at such emergency incident or its vicinity; 
(2)  Direct the actions of the firefighters at the incident; 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provision of Section 46.2-890, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, keep bystanders or other persons at a safe distance from the incident and emergency equipment; 
(4)  Facilitate the speedy movement and operation of emergency equipment and firefighters; 
(5)  Cause an investigation to be made into the origin and cause of the incident; and 
(6)  Until the arrival of a police officer, direct and control traffic in person or by deputy and facilitate the movement of traffic. 
The fire chief or other officer in charge shall display his firefighter's badge, or other proper means of identification. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, this authority shall extend to the activation of traffic-control signals designed to facilitate the safe egress and ingress of emergency equipment at a fire station. Any person or persons refusing to obey the orders of the fire chief, or his deputies or other officer in charge at that time shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The chief or other officer in charge shall have the power to make arrests for violations of the provisions of this section. The authority granted under the provisions of this section may not be exercised to inhibit or obstruct members of law enforcement agencies or rescue squads from performing their normal duties when operating at such emergency incident, nor to conflict with or diminish the lawful authority, duties and responsibilities of forest wardens, including, but not limited to, the provisions of Chapter II, Article 2, (Section 10.1-1104, et seq.) of Title 10.1, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. Personnel from the news media, such as the press, radio and television, when gathering the news, may enter at their own risk into the incident area only when the officer in charge has deemed the area safe and only into those areas of the incident that do not, in the opinion of the officer in charge, interfere with the fire department or rescue workers dealing with such emergencies, in which case the chief or other officer in charge may order such person from the scene of the emergency incident. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 14; Code 1961, § 25-30; Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1)  
Sec. 16-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6385-07, § 2, repealed § 16-4, which pertained to emergency medical service charge and collection fee. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 16-5. - Designation of fire lanes. 
The fire chief shall designate fire lanes for all parking lots and parking garages which are open to the public and which are designed to accommodate fifty (50), or more, vehicles. All fire lanes shall conform to the statewide fire prevention code. In designating fire lanes, the fire chief shall take into consideration the necessity for the efficient and effective use of fire apparatus, the nature and location of the property and structures to be protected, and the location of fire hydrants and other sources of water. The designated fire lanes shall be indicated by signs and by markings on the pavement or curb so as to clearly delineate them. 
(Ord. No. 4133-90)  
Sec. 16-6. - Fire protection service fee. 
There is hereby imposed on all property located within the City of Newport News a fire protection service fee which shall be based upon the size of each water meter serving the property in accordance with the following schedule: 
Meter Size 
(inches) 	Monthly Fee 
5/8	$ 1.35 
¾ 	1.35 
1 	2.05 
1½ 	2.70 
2 	4.05 
3 	5.40 
4 	5.40 
6 	6.80 
8 	6.80 
10 	6.80 
 
The fee imposed hereby shall be added to the service fee set forth in section 42-33 of this Code, but may be charged with the service fee as a single amount. 
(Ord. No. 4211-91, § 1; Ord. No. 6234-06; Ord. No. 6586-09, § 1; Ord. No. 7468-18, § 1) 
Note— Ord. No. 6586-09, § 2, provides for an effective date of July 1, 2009.  
Secs. 16-7—16-13. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1, adopted June 12, 1990, amended Art. II to read as herein set out in §§ 16-14—16-22. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. II, §§ 16-14—16-21, pertained to the fire prevention code and derived from Ord. No. 2332, §§ 17-1—17-6; Ord. No. 2880-82; Ord. No. 3002-83 and Ord. No. 3354-85. 
 
Sec. 16-14. - Enforcement; fire marshal's office. 
(a)  The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the fire marshal's office, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire chief. 
(b)  The fire chief shall designate the officer in command of the fire marshal's office, who shall be the fire marshal, and may also detail such members of the fire department to the bureau as shall, from time-to-time, be necessary. The fire marshal, the deputy fire marshals, the assistant fire marshals and the arson investigators shall have all of the authority granted to local fire marshals by state law and shall have the same police powers as a sheriff, police officer or law enforcement officer. 
(c)  The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, and supplements thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, and the same are incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length. 
(Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 6341-07; Ord. No. 6745-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6745-10 shall be in effect on and after January 1, 2011.  
Sec. 16-15. - Fire code inspection fee. 
(a)  There is hereby established an annual fire code inspection fee which shall be paid to the city pursuant to the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. The fee shall be charged to the owner for each premises that is subject to maintenance inspection under the Statewide Fire Prevention Code based upon the following schedule: 
Building Space 

(sq. ft.) 	Amount 
0—999 	$25.00 
1,000—5,000 	75.00 
5,001—10,000 	100.00 
10,001—20,000 	125.00 
20,001—50,000 	225.00 
50,001—100,000 	275.00 
100,001—200,000 	325.00 
>200,000 	375.00 
 
The fee hereby established shall not be charged to the United States of America, the Commonwealth of Virginia, its political subdivisions, or the City of Newport News. 
(b)  The fee established by this provision shall be due and payable from the date that a statement of account reflecting the charge is mailed by the city. The charges established by this provision shall be maintained in an open account in the name of the person or persons responsible for payment of this fee. Any account which is more than thirty (30) days delinquent may be forwarded to the city attorney for collection. In the event that the account is forwarded to the city attorney for collection, the person in whose name the account is maintained shall be liable to the city, in addition to the fire code inspection fee, for a collection fee in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), or twenty-five (25) percent of the outstanding balance on the account, whichever is greater, said collection fee representing administrative costs and attorney's fees to the city for collecting said debt. Tender of payment and acceptance of the amount originally due the city under subsection (a) above shall not constitute satisfaction of the account unless and until the collection fee is paid. 
(Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 4205-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4463-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4642-94; Ord. No. 5498-00; Ord. No. 6346-07, § 1)  
Sec. 16-15.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4463-93, § 1, adopted May 25, 1993, repealed § 16-15.1, which pertained to annual inspection of fire protection systems, fee. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 16-16. - Local board of appeals. 
The local board of appeals for hearing appeals from the decisions of the fire marshal made under the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code shall be the board of appeals, as appointed under the provisions of Article III, Chapter 13, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1)  
Sec. 16-17. - Appeal. 
An appeal to the local board of appeals shall be made within seven (7) days of the date of the notice or order of the fire marshal and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in section 13-65 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 6745-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6745-10 shall be in effect on and after January 1, 2011.  
Sec. 16-18. - Self-service gasoline dispensers. 
If the dispensing of Class 1 flammable liquids at a service station available and open to the public is to be done by a person other than the service station attendant, the nozzle shall be either an approved automatic-closing type without a hold-open latch, or an automatic-closing type nozzle with a hold-open clip that complies with NFPA-30A. 
(Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 5316-99)  
Sec. 16-19. - Adoption of NFPA Standards. 
There is hereby adopted, by reference, the National Fire Prevention Association Standard 1123, Code for Fireworks Display, and Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles. 
(Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 6745-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6745-10 shall be in effect on and after January 1, 2011.  
Sec. 16-20. - Fireworks permit required; permit fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, sell, possess, store, display, use, explode or manufacture pinwheels, sparklers, fountains or Pharaoh's serpents without a permit issued by the fire marshal. A fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid before such permit may be issued. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, display or explode any other fireworks without a permit issued by the fire marshal. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, fireworks do not include pyrotechnic bird scaring devices. 
(Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 4206-91, § 1; Ord. No. 6290-06; Ord. No. 6745-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6745-10 shall be in effect on and after January 1, 2011.  
Sec. 16-20.1. - Permit fee for explosives, ammunition and blasting agents permits. 
Permits required by Chapter 33, Explosives and Fireworks, of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code shall not be issued until a permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 4206-91, § 1; Ord. No. 6745-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6745-10 shall be in effect on and after January 1, 2011.  
Sec. 16-21. - Insurance required. 
Before the fire marshal shall issue any permit required by section 16-20 or section 16-20.1, the applicant for the permit shall submit evidence of liability insurance for the protection of persons and property from death, bodily injury and damage in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 4206-91, § 1)  
Sec. 16-22. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this article for which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1)  
Secs. 16-23—16-31. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1, adopted June 12, 1990, amended Article III (tit.) to read "Open Burning". Prior to inclusion of said ordinance the title of Art. III read, "Open Burning of Leaves". 
Cross reference— Open fires prohibited at automobile graveyards, § 8-14. 
 
Sec. 16-32. - Generally. 
Subject to state law and applicable air pollution regulations, the city council may, from time-to-time, authorize open burning upon such conditions as it shall deem advisable. 
(Ord. No. 2134, § 1; Code 1961, § 20-41; Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1)  
Sec. 16-33. - Prohibited during air pollution episode or when deemed advisable by fire chief. 
Open burning permitted under this article shall not be commenced and shall be immediately terminated upon declaration of an alert, warning or emergency stage of an air pollution episode, as described in part VII of the state regulations for the control and abatement of air pollution or when deemed advisable by the chief of the fire department, or his designated representative, to prevent a hazard to or an unreasonable burden upon public health or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2134, § 1; Code 1961, § 20-42) 
Cross reference— Air pollution control, Ch. 4.  
Sec. 16-34. - Fee for open burning permits; reinstatement fee. 
Open burning permits required by the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code shall not be issued until a permit fee has been paid. The fee shall be the sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00) plus thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per acre or fraction thereof. Reinstatement of a revoked permit shall require the payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee. 
(Ord. No. 4207-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4463-93, § 1)  
Sec. 16-35. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2134, § 1; Code 1961, § 20-44)  
Secs. 16-36—16-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE ALARMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7532-19, § 1, adopted July 1, 2019, amended the title of Art. IV to read as herein set out. The former Art. IV pertained to smoke detectors. 
 
Sec. 16-40. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Dwelling. Any building containing one (1) or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit. A room or combination of rooms containing living, sleeping and kitchen facilities for one (1) family. 
Hotel. Any building which is regularly used, offered for use, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations for one (1) or more persons for compensation. 
Motel. Any building or collection of buildings which is regularly used, offered for use, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations for one (1) or more persons for compensation. 
Owner. The holder of title in fee simple; any person, group of persons, company, association or corporation in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted; or any person who alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any building unit with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any building or building unit as owner, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgage vendee in possession, assignee of rents, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a building, or their duly authorized agent. 
Any such person, group of persons, company, association or corporation shall have joint and several responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Roominghouse. A dwelling regularly used, offered for use or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations for one (1) or more persons for compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2879-82; Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1)  
Sec. 16-41. - Smoke alarms required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to occupy, lease or rent any dwelling or dwelling unit or to operate, use or permit any building, or part thereof, to be operated or used as a hotel, motel or rooming house until smoke alarms have been installed in it in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. Smoke alarms installed pursuant to this section shall be installed only in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and shall be permitted to be either battery operated or AC powered. Such installation shall not require new or additional wiring and shall be maintained in accordance with the Statewide Fire Prevention Code and subdivision C 6 of § 36-105, Part II of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2879-82; Ord. No. 2966-82; Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 7532-19, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7532-19, § 1, adopted July 1, 2019, amended the title of § 16-41 to read as herein set out. The former § 16-41 pertained to smoke detectors required.  
Sec. 16-42. - Certification. 
The owner of any rented or leased dwelling unit shall provide to each tenant at the beginning of each tenancy, and at least annually thereafter, a certificate stating that all smoke alarms are present, have been inspected by the owner, his employee, or an independent contractor, and are in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 2879-82; Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 7532-19, § 1)  
Sec. 16-43. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Smoke alarms located in public or common areas of multi-family buildings shall be maintained in good working condition by the owner. 
(b)  Except for smoke alarms located in public or common areas of multi-family buildings, interim testing, repair, and maintenance of smoke alarms in rented or leased dwelling units shall be the responsibility of the tenant in accordance with § 55-225.4 or § 55-248.16 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2879-82; Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 7532-19, § 1)  
Sec. 16-43.1. - Records. 
The owner of any building subject to this article shall maintain records of the inspections, repairs and certificates required by sections 16-42 and 16-43 for a period of two (2) years. Such records shall be made available to the chief of the fire department, or his designated representative, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 4263-91)  
Sec. 16-44. - Exemptions. 
Nothing herein shall require the upgrading of any smoke alarms provided by the building code in effect at the time of the last renovation of such building, for which a building permit was required, or as otherwise provided in the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2879-82; Ord. No. 4053-90, § 1; Ord. No. 4629-94; Ord. No. 7532-19, § 1)  
Sec. 16-45. - Violations. 
Any person violating a provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2879-82; Ord. No. 7532-19, § 1)  
Secs. 16-46—16-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 16-50. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
False alarm means any fire alarm signal communicated, directly or indirectly, to the emergency communications center which is not generated by actual or potential fire or other life or property threatening activity requiring immediate fire or rescue response. False alarms include negligently or accidentally activated signals; signals which are the result of faulty, malfunctioning or improperly installed or maintained equipment; signals which are purposely activated to summon fire or rescue personnel in nonemergency situations; and alarm signals for which the actual cause is not determined. False alarms shall not include signals activated by unusually severe weather conditions or other causes which are identified and determined by the fire chief to be beyond the control of the user. 
Fire alarm system means any device or system which transmits a signal visibly, audibly, electronically, mechanically or by any combination of these methods, directly or indirectly, to the emergency communications center which indicates a fire or other threat to life or property at a premises requiring an immediate response by fire or rescue personnel to the scene. 
Nonemergency situation means any set of circumstances not involving perceived, actual or potential activity that constitutes an immediate danger to life or property. 
Premises means a single occupancy apartment, home or business with an alarm system within its control or a multiple occupancy apartment, home or business with a common fire alarm system where fire alarms for the individual units are tied to a common alarm panel operated and controlled by the owner or his agent. 
User means the occupant of any premises equipped with a fire alarm system or the owner of such premises if they are unoccupied or the owner of such premises for which a common fire alarm system is provided and tied to a common alarm panel operated and controlled by that owner or his agent. 
(Ord. No. 4202-91, § 1; Ord. No. 6347-07)  
Sec. 16-51. - Duty of users to instruct personnel as to proper operation. 
Fire alarm users shall instruct employees and others who may have occasion to activate an alarm that the alarm system shall be activated only in emergency situations requiring an immediate response by fire or rescue personnel. Alarm users shall also instruct appropriate employees in the operation of the fire alarm system, including deactivation and resetting of the alarm. 
(Ord. No. 4202-91, § 1)  
Sec. 16-52. - Names of persons familiar with system, etc., to be posted on premises; duty of such persons to respond to fire department request. 
Fire alarm system users shall post on the premises, in a conspicuous place visible from outside the premises, a sticker or other sign indicating the telephone numbers of at least two (2) responsible persons who are capable of deactivating and resetting the alarm system and of assisting the fire or rescue personnel, if necessary, and who may be notified by the fire department to respond to the scene. Such person or persons shall respond to the scene within one (1) hour after being requested to do so by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 4202-91, §1)  
Sec. 16-53. - Maintenance. 
Fire alarm users shall be responsible for seeing that alarm systems are maintained in good working order and that defects which could cause false alarms are promptly repaired. 
(Ord. No. 4202-91, §1)  
Sec. 16-54. - Testing of fire alarms. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the periodic testing of fire alarm systems, provided sufficient advance notice is given to the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 4202-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4935-96)  
Sec. 16-55. - False alarms prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any user to send a false alarm. 
(b)  For each false alarm after three (3) false alarms originating from the same premises within a ninety-day period, there is hereby imposed a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such false alarm. In no event shall a fee of more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day be charged for false alarms originating from the same premises. 
(c)  The fire chief shall bill each user responsible for the false alarm with the appropriate amount of penalty as set forth above. All such penalties shall be paid within thirty (30) days of billing. 
(Ord. No. 4202-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4463-93, § 1; Ord. No. 6745-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6745-10 shall be in effect on and after January 1, 2011.  
Sec. 16-56. - Exceptions. 
The civil penalty set forth in this article shall not apply to any premises equipped with a fire alarm system used, owned or occupied by the United States government or any of its agencies or instrumentalities or to the Commonwealth of Virginia, its agencies or political subdivisions, but all the other provisions of this article, including the termination of service, shall apply to them. 
(Ord. No. 4202-91, § 1)  
Secs. 16-57—16-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - AMBULANCE TRANSPORT FEES 
 
Sec. 16-60. - Imposition of fees. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by subsection (d), a service charge for basic life support transport (BLS), for advanced life support transport (ALS) and for ground transport mileage is imposed on each person being transported by an emergency medical services vehicle that is operated or maintained by the city. The funds received from the payment of this fee shall be paid into the general fund of the city to aid in defraying the cost of providing such service. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
Advanced life support (ALS)—Level 1: Medical treatment for [or] procedures provided to a patient beyond the scope of practice of an emergency medical technician (EMT) - basic and transportation by ground ambulance vehicle including the provision of medically necessary supplies and services which may include the provision of an ALS assessment and/or at least one (1) ALS intervention. 
Advanced life support (ALS)—Level 2: Medical treatment of [or] procedures beyond the scope of practice of an emergency medical technician (EMT) - basic and transportation by ground ambulance vehicle and the provision of medically necessary supplies and services, including: at least three (3) separate administrations of one (1) or more medications by intravenous/bolus or by continuous infusion (excluding crystalloid fluids); or ground ambulance transportation and the provision of at least one (1) of the ALS procedures listed below: 
(1)  Manual defibrillation/cardioversion; 
(2)  Endotracheal intubation; 
(3)  Central venous line; 
(4)  Cardiac pacing; 
(5)  Chest decompression; 
(6)  Surgical airway; or 
(7)  Intraosseous line. 
Basic life support (BLS): Services shall be medical treatment or procedures to a patient as defined in the National Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Education and Practice Blueprint for the emergency medical technician (EMT) - basic. 
Emergency medical services vehicle: Shall be defined as specified in the Code of Virginia, section 32.1-111.1, as amended. 
Emergency medical services vehicle response and treatment, no transport: Emergency medical services vehicle response to a call for service and emergency medical services, including, but not limited to, evaluation, are rendered, but where the individual receiving the emergency medical services was not transported by emergency medical services vehicle to a medical facility. 
Ground transport mileage: Mileage shall be assessed in statute miles from the location of the incident to a hospital or other facility where a patient is transported. 
Statute mile: An imperial unit of length equal to five thousand two hundred eighty (5,280) feet. 
(c)  The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish uniform rules and regulations for the administration and collection of the charges imposed by this section, including, but not limited to, payment standards for those persons who demonstrate economic hardship. Such rules and regulations shall comply with applicable laws and be submitted to, and approved by, the city council. 
(d)  The following rates shall apply for mileage and for BLS and ALS fees: 
Basic life support .....$500.00 
Advanced life support—Level 1 .....$600.00 
Advanced life support—Level 2 .....$750.00 
Patient transport mileage, per statute mile from pickup to medical facility or facilities .....$11.00 
Patient assessment fee (emergency medical services vehicle response with evaluation and/or treatment, no transport) .....$125.00 
(e)  No charge shall be imposed on persons in the following instances: 
(1)  Persons determined to be financially indigent by the city in accordance with administrative policies established pursuant to subsection (c) above; 
(2)  Persons in the custody of the Newport News City Sheriff, the City of Newport Department of Adult Corrections, or the City of Newport News Department of Juvenile Services; 
(3)  Persons in the custody of the city police department; 
(4)  Persons in the custody of the Hampton Roads Regional Jail of which the city is a participating member; 
(5)  During the time of a declared local emergency, the city manager may suspend the collection of the fees imposed under this article for a period of time up to fourteen (14) days or until the next regularly scheduled or special meeting of the city council whichever is less. The city council may extend the suspension of the collection of fees under this article for such period of time it deems necessary and appropriate; and 
(6)  City of Newport News employees and its volunteers transported for any work related injury or illness compensable under the Virginia Worker's Compensation Act. 
(f)  If the emergency medical services charge is not paid by the person receiving the service, or any person agreeing in writing to pay for said service, after notice to pay is given by the office of the city attorney, the ambulance service charge shall be immediately due and payable, and such person or persons shall be liable for the payment of such amount. In addition thereto, the aforesaid person or persons shall be liable to the city for a collection fee in the sum of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), said fee representing administrative costs to the city for collecting the debt. Tender of payment and acceptance of the amount originally due the city under subsection (d) above shall not constitute satisfaction, after written notice to pay is given by the office of the city attorney, unless and until the collection fee is paid. 
(Ord. No. 6124-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6385-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6680-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6869-12, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6869-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Secs. 16-61—16-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 16-70. - Established; composition. 
Section 44-146.19 of the Code of Virginia requires each political subdivision in the commonwealth to maintain an agency of emergency management. The fire department division of emergency management is hereby designated as the local agency of emergency management. There shall be a director of emergency management, who shall be the city manager, a coordinator of emergency management appointed by the city manager with the consent of the city council, and such other officers and employees, organized into branches, sections or other units, as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives of the city manager consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 6595-09, § 2)  
Sec. 16-71. - Responsibilities. 
The division of emergency management, under the direction and control of the director of emergency management, shall be specifically responsible for: 
(1)  Overall comprehensive coordination and management (including mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery) of declared or undeclared emergencies and disasters affecting the city, in order to protect public health and safety, and to preserve the lives, property and economy of the city and its citizens. 
(2)  Preparation and maintenance of the city's emergency operations plan in coordination with the various city departments and agencies. 
(3)  Designation, availability, preparation and maintenance of the city's primary, alternate and mobile emergency operations centers. 
(4)  Coordination of search and rescue (SAR) operations as the city's designated SAR coordinator. 
(5)  Participation as the city's emergency coordinator for the Peninsula Local Emergency Planning Committee. 
(6)  Public education on emergencies and disasters, including family emergency preparedness. 
(7)  Coordination with local organizations, businesses and industries to develop and maintain emergency and disaster contingency plans. 
(8)  Emergency management training and exercises for the city. 
(Ord. No. 6595-09, § 2)  
Sec. 16-72. - Powers and duties of coordinator of emergency management. 
The coordinator of emergency management shall manage the daily operations of emergency management, as assigned by the director of emergency management. 
(Ord. No. 6595-09, § 2)  
Sec. 16-73. - Oath of office. 
The director of emergency management and all persons appointed to serve the division of emergency management shall take an oath of office as required by Section 44-146.25 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 6595-09, § 2)  
Chapter 17 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sale of food at armory auditorium, § 7-21; sale of food in parks and recreation buildings, § 29-27; sale of food on streets, § 38-8; food regulations for public swimming pools, § 39-45; tax on meals sold by restaurants, § 40-190 et seq. 
State Law reference— Food and drink generally, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-361 et seq.; sanitary requirements in general, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-365 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
Food. The word "food" shall be taken to include all articles used by human beings for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether simple, mixed or compound, and all substances or ingredients used in the preparation thereof. 
Food establishment. The term "food establishment" shall be taken to mean any place in which articles of food or food products are manufactured, prepared, packed, stored and sold or distributed, and shall include hotels, inns, restaurants, lunch counters, delicatessens with seating for on-premise consumption, soda fountains, refreshment stands, confectioneries, push-carts, wagons and motor vehicles and mobile units and similar places. 
Potentially hazardous food. The term "potentially hazardous food, " shall mean any food or food ingredient, natural or synthetic, in a form capable of supporting (1) the rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms or (2) the slower growth of C. Botulinum. An internal temperature of forty-five (45) degrees Fahrenheit or below, or one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or above, is required during storage, transportation, or display. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 2; Code 1961, § 18-1; Ord. No. 4130-90; Ord. No. 5901-03, § 1)  
Sec. 17-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor and be punishable as such.  
Sec. 17-3. - Inspection of food; condemnation and destruction of unwholesome food. 
The health officer and such officer's representatives and agents are authorized, at any time, to inspect all meats, vegetables, fruit and other food products offered for sale within the city, and all diseased, putrid or unwholesome food shall, after due investigation, be condemned and destroyed by them. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 3; Code 1961, § 18-2)  
Sec. 17-4. - Sale of unwholesome food. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or expose for sale any kind of diseased or unwholesome food within the city. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 4; Code 1961, § 18-3)  
Sec. 17-5. - Sale of condemned food. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or expose for sale any food that has been condemned by the health officer, or any similar officer of any governmental agency, whether it be the federal, state, city or county government, as being unfit or unsafe for human consumption. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 5; Code 1961, § 18-4)  
Sec. 17-6. - Protection of food stored or offered for sale in street, open space, etc. 
(a)  No meat, dressed poultry, fish, confectionery, bread, pastry or cooked food of any kind, or berries, fruits, vegetables or other articles intended for human consumption without cooking or peeling, shall be kept or exposed for sale in or on any street or other public place, or in any lot or open space, or outside of any shop or store, or in any open window or doorway, without protecting the same from dust and flies by covering with suitable material or glass. 
(b)  No article intended for human consumption shall be stored, exposed or displayed on the surface of any street or floor of any open market house, or placed in any doorway or in front of any place of business, or in any other place accessible to dogs or other animals, but shall be raised at least eighteen (18) inches above the street, sidewalk, platform or landing. Such articles, when in process of delivery in or out of such store or other place of business, shall not remain so exposed more than thirty (30) minutes, unless conforming to the requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 117, §§ 7, 8; Code 1961, §§ 18-7, 18-8) 
Cross reference— General provisions as to sale of food on streets, § 38-8.  
Sec. 17-7. - Protection of food being transported. 
(a)  No food shall be transported through the streets of the city, without being covered so as to be protected from dust and flies. 
(b)  Bread, cakes, pies and other bakery products, unless wrapped or enclosed in baskets or other suitable containers, shall not be hauled through the streets in open wagons or motor vehicles, nor shall bread, cakes, pies and other bakery products be delivered from wagons or motor vehicles to dealers or consumers, unless wrapped or enclosed in baskets or other suitable containers. 
(c)  All baskets, trays, boxes, cases or other receptacles used by bakers, confectioners, restaurants, hotels and other food establishments for conveying their products from place to place outside of their places of business, or through or on the streets, shall have covers and be so constructed as to protect their contents from flies, dust, dirt or contamination. 
(Ord. No. 117, §§ 9, 10, 17; Code 1961, §§ 18-9, 18-10, 18-17)  
Secs. 17-8—17-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS GENERALLY [2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Sanitary requirements for food establishments generally, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-365 et seq.; restaurants and public eating places, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-18. - Permit and inspection. 
(a)  No person shall offer for sale any food, or operate a cafe, restaurant, public dining room, lunch counter or any other public place where food is sold for human consumption, or operate a soda fountain or soft drink establishment or any place where food is manufactured, made or prepared for human consumption within the city, unless such person shall first procure a permit from the health department; except that a person who sells only non-potentially hazardous food that has been pre-packaged and sealed in a food establishment approved by federal, state or local food establishment standards, or sells only fresh fruits and vegetables, is exempt from the requirement to obtain a health permit. 
(b)  Application for a permit required by this section shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the health officer, wherein the applicant shall agree to conform to ordinances, rules and regulations governing such places, and to permit such examinations and inspections as may be deemed necessary by the health officer. 
(c)  Before a permit required by this section is granted, it shall be the duty of the health officer to cause an inspection to be made of the premises in which the business is to be conducted, and to refuse such permit if the condition of the premises shall not conform to the requirements of this article. It shall further be the duty of the health officer to cause to be made, from time to time, an inspection of all premises and equipment where food and beverages are manufactured, made, prepared, sold or exposed for sale, and if such place or business is not conducted in conformity with this article and other city ordinances and the rules and regulations of the health department, the health officer may revoke or suspend the permit until such place is made clean and sanitary to the satisfaction of the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 117, §§ 11—13; Code 1961, §§ 18-11—18-13; Ord. No. 4130-90)  
Sec. 17-19. - Walls, ceilings and floors. 
(a)  The side walls and ceilings of every bakery, confectionery, creamery, cheese factory, restaurant kitchen or any other kitchen or food preparation area in which food is prepared for sale to the public shall be of smooth and cleanable construction, wainscoted and sealed, preferably with metal or other material which is washable and approved by the health department. 
(b)  Every building, room, basement or cellar occupied or used for the preparation, manufacture, packing, storing, sale or distribution of food shall have an impermeable floor made of tile, brick or other nonabsorbent material approved by the health department, which can be flushed and washed with clean water. All floor to wall junctures must be coved. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 19; Code 1961, § 18-19)  
Sec. 17-20. - Lighting, ventilation, plumbing, etc. 
(a)  Every building, room, basement or cellar occupied or used as a food establishment shall be properly lighted, drained, plumbed and ventilated. Exhaust fans and metal hoods, with ventilators, must be provided over ranges in all food establishments, when necessary to prevent odors and condensation and to promote cleanliness. 
(b)  Facilities required by this section shall be conducted with due regard for the purity and wholesomeness of the food therein produced, sold or stored, and with strict regard to the influence of such conditions upon the health of the operatives, employees, clerks or other persons therein employed. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 15; Code 1961, § 18-15)  
Sec. 17-21. - Toilet facilities. 
Toilets shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with rules and regulations of the health department and the provisions of the state and the City of Newport News codes requirements. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 3; Code 1961, § 18-23; Ord. No. 3706-88)  
Sec. 17-22. - Hand-washing facilities. 
(a)  Convenient hand-washing facilities, ample for the use of employees in and patrons of food establishments, shall be provided, and such facilities shall, at all times, be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Hot and cold running water, soap and approved sanitary towels shall be furnished. 
(b)  In food establishments constructed, or the ownership of which changes, after April 15, 1959, hand-washing facilities shall be provided in the kitchen or working area. The location of such hand-washing facilities shall be determined by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 24; Code 1961, § 18-24)  
Sec. 17-23. - Protection from flies, dust, etc. 
(a)  Every person in charge of any food establishment shall cause such establishment to be screened, enclosed or otherwise protected, so as to effectually protect the food from flies, dust or other contamination. 
(b)  All openings to the outer air in food establishments shall be effectively screened and doors shall be self-closing and open outward, unless other effective means are provided to prevent the entrance of flies. It shall be permissible to place and operate an adequate electric fan over the entrance. 
(Ord. No. 117, §§ 6, 20; Code 1961, §§ 18-6, 18-20)  
Sec. 17-24. - Separation of sleeping quarters. 
Sleeping places for persons employed in food establishments shall be separate and apart from any room in which food products are manufactured, stored or sold. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 21; Code 1961, § 18-21)  
Sec. 17-25. - General maintenance requirements. 
(a)  The floors, side walls, ceilings, furniture, receptacles, implements and machinery of every food establishment shall at all times be kept in a clean, sanitary condition. 
(b)  All interior woodwork in every bakery, confectionery, creamery, cheese factory, restaurant kitchen or any other kitchen or food preparation area in which food is prepared for sale to the public shall be washed clean with soap and water. 
(Ord. No. 117, §§ 1, 19; Code 1961, §§ 18-16, 18-19)  
Sec. 17-26. - Cleaning of receptacles, racks, tables, etc. 
All wheeled containers, trays, boxes, baskets, buckets and other receptacles, chutes, platforms, racks, tables, shelves and all knives, saws and other implements used for chopping, mixing, canning or any other process in a food establishment shall be thoroughly cleaned daily, or oftener when deemed necessary by the health officer for the preservation of health. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 17; Code 1961, § 18-17)  
Sec. 17-27. - Cleaning and sterilization of utensils. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any glass, cup, spoon, knife, fork or other utensil in the public sale or dispensing of liquids, beverages, drinks, food or other refreshments for consumption in or about the place of sale or dispensing, unless the same is first thoroughly cleaned and sterilized by means of steam, boiling water or approved chemicals. This requirement shall not apply to sanitary one-service utensils, made for one service only. 
(b)  If steam is used as the method of sterilization, utensils must be exposed, for at least fifteen (15) minutes, to at least one hundred seventy (170) degrees Fahrenheit, or for at least five (5) minutes at two hundred (200) degrees Fahrenheit, in a steam cabinet. If boiling water is used, the utensils shall be submerged in water at one hundred seventy (170) degrees Fahrenheit or more, for at least two (2) minutes. If chemicals are used, the utensils shall be submerged in an approved solution for at least two (2) minutes. 
(c)  Adequate facilities shall be maintained for the washing, rinsing and sterilization of all utensils used in the preparation, handling and serving of food and beverages at a food establishment. The following is considered the minimum equipment for washing, rinsing and sterilizing such utensils: Adequate facilities for heating water for cleaning and stationary wash and rinse vats of not less than three (3) compartments. An approved mechanical dishwashing machine may be used in lieu of a three-compartment sink. Where a dishwashing machine is used, adequate sinks shall be provided for pots and pans. The use of drying cloths or towels for eating utensils is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 14; Code 1961, § 18-14)  
Sec. 17-28. - Use of enameled utensils prohibited. 
The use, in a food establishment, of enameled pots, pans, knives, forks and other cooking and eating utensils is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 14; Code 1961, § 18-14)  
Sec. 17-29. - Sprinkling prior to sweeping, dusting or cleaning; use of sawdust prohibited. 
In food establishments, all sweeping, dusting and cleaning shall be preceded by sprinkling or other methods to allay the dust. The use of sawdust is prohibited in all eating establishments, bakeries, bake shops, dairies, creameries, cheese factories, food manufacturing plants and similar places. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 26; Code 1961, § 18-26)  
Sec. 17-30. - Use of common sugar bowls. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any restaurant or other commercial establishment serving food to provide or permit the use of common sugar bowls from which sugar must be dipped with a spoon. In restaurants or other commercial establishments serving food, sugar shall be served either in individual packages or in containers from which the sugar must be poured. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 8; Code 1961, § 21-7)  
Sec. 17-31. - Food storage containers. 
All food storage containers used in a food establishment must be of approved, easily cleanable material, such as metal, glass or approved plastic, properly labeled and capable of withstanding washing and sanitizing by hot water, steam or chemicals. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 29; Code 1969, § 18-29)  
Sec. 17-32. - Removal of food from stock containers. 
Waiters, waitresses, clerks and helpers in food establishments shall, in serving patrons, use forks, spoons or other clean instruments in removing, from stock containers, bread, butter, pies, cake, pickles and other articles of food to individual receptacles. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 18; Code 1961, § 18-18)  
Sec. 17-33. - Domestic animals prohibited; exception. 
No domestic animals shall be permitted to remain in any room for the manufacture, preparation, storage or sale of food or food products, except that seeing-eye dogs which are accompanying blind persons shall be permitted to enter restaurants and other food establishments. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 22; Code 1961, § 18-22) 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 17-34. - Cleanliness of employees; hair restraints; use of tobacco. 
(a)  All employees of food establishments shall be clean in person at all times. No employee in any way connected with the handling, cooking or preparing of any food shall engage in work, following a visit to the toilet, without thoroughly cleansing his or her hands. 
(b)  All employees of restaurants, lunch rooms, inns, cafeterias, ice cream parlors, bake shops, delicatessens, soda shops, meat markets and other food preparation places, when engaged in the preparation or dispensing of food, shall wear clean clothing. Hair nets, caps or other approved means of hair restraints shall be worn by all employees while preparing or serving food. The use of tobacco is prohibited while preparing or serving food. 
(Ord. No. 117, §§ 24, 25; Code 1961, §§ 18-24, 18-25)  
Sec. 17-35. - Report of employees with contagious diseases. 
The owner of any food establishment shall immediately report to the health officer the name of any employee whom such owner knows or suspects to be suffering from any contagious disease. 
(Ord. No. 2245; Code 1961, § 21-37)  
Secs. 17-36—17-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FOOD HANDLER'S CARD 
 
Sec. 17-46. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner, employee, operator, assistant or helper, to work or serve in any cafe, restaurant, dining room, lunch counter, boardinghouse, cafeteria, confectionery, soda fountain, delicatessen or any other place where a food permit is required to be issued under this chapter, or food is prepared and sold for human consumption, unless such person shall have first obtained a food handler's card issued by the health officer or such officer's authorized representative. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to employ or permit another person to remain employed in any place or establishment referred to in subsection (a) above unless such other person holds a valid food handler's card issued pursuant to this article. 
(c)  The food handler's card requirement may be waived by the health director for nonmanagerial employees of food establishments which maintain a high level of sanitation as determined by the health officer. 
(d)  Each food establishment must provide a minimum of one (1) manager who is certified by passing such written or oral tests as deemed necessary by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 2245; Code 1961, §§ 21-30, 21-37; Ord. No. 3706-88)  
Sec. 17-47. - Application. 
Application for a food handler's card shall be on a special form provided by the health department. It shall be unlawful for any person to give a false report on such application 
(Ord. No. 2245; Code 1961, § 21-31; Ord. No. 3706-88)  
Sec. 17-48. - Fee. 
A fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid to the health department for each food handler's card issued or renewed to defray the necessary administrative expenses. A fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged for each additional or replacement card. 
(Ord. No. 2245; Code 1961, § 21-38; Ord. No. 3706-88)  
Sec. 17-49. - To whom issued. 
Food handler's cards, as required by this article, shall be issued only to persons who have passed oral or written tests, furnished such information and laboratory specimens and submitted to such physical examination and tests as the health officer may require and who have received the equivalent of one (1) hour or more of classroom instruction in personal hygiene and food protection. 
(Ord. No. 2245; Code 1961, § 21-32; Ord. No. 3706-88)  
Sec. 17-50. - Term. 
Each food handler's card shall remain in force for not more then three (3) years or until revoked by the health officer for cause. 
(Ord. No. 2245; Code 1961, § 21-33; Ord. No. 3706-88)  
Sec. 17-51. - Renewal. 
Upon the expiration of a food handler's card, the holder thereof may renew the same by payment of the fee prescribed by section 17-48 and taking such training classes and/or tests as the health officer directs. The dates, time and location of these classes and/or tests will be determined by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 2245; Code 1961, § 21-34; Ord. No. 3706-88)  
Sec. 17-52. - Posting. 
The food handler's card required by this article shall be conspicuously posted in the food establishment in which the holder thereof is employed. 
(Ord. No. 2245; Code 1961, § 21-35; Ord. No. 3706-88)  
Sec. 17-53. - Use by person other than grantee. 
A food handler's card issued under the provisions of this article is not transferable and shall not be used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2245; Code 1961, § 21-36; Ord. No. 3706-88)  
Secs. 17-54—17-63. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5901-03, § 1, adopted March 11, 2003, repealed Art. IV, in its entirety, which pertained to meat and meat products. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis. 
 
Secs. 17-64—17-91. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Milk, milk products and dairies, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-420 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-92. - Adoption of state law as to production, processing and sale. 
(a)  The production, processing and sale of grade A pasteurized market milk and grade A pasteurized market milk products and other milk products sold in the city shall be in accordance with Sections 3.1-530.1 through 3.1-530.9, Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The production, processing and sale of ice cream, frozen desserts and similar products sold in the city shall be in accordance with sections 3.1-562.1 through 3.1-562.10, Code of Virginia. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate any provision of the state law adopted by this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each and every such violation shall constitute a separate offense.  
Sec. 17-93. - Service and storage in food establishments. 
(a)  Cream, milk, ice cream or other milk products used or served in food establishments shall be procured from a source that is approved by the health officer and shall be kept under refrigeration at a temperature not exceeding forty-five (45) degrees Fahrenheit. Approved ice cream dipper wells, properly drained and equipped with running water, shall be provided where bulk ice cream is served. 
(b)  The serving of dipped milk at any food establishment is hereby prohibited. All milk shall be kept in the original bottle or container. No milk or buttermilk shall be served or dispensed, either alone or in mixed drinks, at any food establishment, unless served or dispensed directly from, and immediately upon the opening of, the bottle or other container, as originally capped and labeled by the dairy or distributor from which the same was acquired. The entire contents of such bottle or container, when opened, shall be immediately dispensed or disposed of. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, grade A homogenized milk may be dispensed at food establishments from approved refrigerated dispensers which do not exceed five (5) gallons in capacity. 
(Ord. No. 117, §§ 27, 28; Code 1961, §§ 18-27, 18-28)  
Secs. 17-94—17-98. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ICE CREAM VENDORS 
 
Sec. 17-99. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Ice cream. The term "ice cream" shall mean and include ice cream, ice milk, frozen custards, sherbets, water ices and related foods and other similar products and those products manufactured or sold in semblance to or as substitutes therefor. 
Ice cream vendor. The term "ice cream vendor" shall mean any person who shall go upon the streets and ways of the city to sell ice cream. 
Vehicle. The term "vehicle" shall mean any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or public way. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 1; Code 1961, § 21A-1)  
Sec. 17-100. - Food handler's card required. 
It shall be unlawful for any ice cream vendor to sell or dispense any ice cream on a street or other public way, unless such vendor has a valid food handler's card issued pursuant to Article III of this chapter. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 4; Code 1961, § 21A-5)  
Sec. 17-101. - Vendors' vehicles—Signs and lamps. 
In addition to the requirements of Chapter 26 of this Code, every vehicle used by ice cream vendors in dispensing or selling ice cream shall have the following equipment thereon and in operation: 
(1)  A sign indicating "Frequent Stops" on the front and back of the vehicle, which shall be readable at a distance of one hundred (100) feet therefrom. 
(2)  A sign indicating "Caution Children" on the front and back of the vehicle, which shall be readable at a distance of one hundred (100) feet therefrom. 
(3)  Three (3) amber clearance lamps, twelve (12) inches apart, in a bar across the top of the vehicle, designed in such a manner as to show amber light to the front only, such lights to be visible a distance of five hundred (500) feet therefrom. 
(4)  Three (3) red clearance lamps, twelve (12) inches apart, in a bar across the top of the rear of the vehicle, designed in such a manner as to show red light to the rear only, such lights to be visible a distance of five hundred (500) feet therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 2; Code 1961, § 21A-2) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 26.  
Sec. 17-102. - Same—Insurance. 
Every person operating an ice cream vendor's vehicle shall, before operating such a vehicle within the city, secure, file and maintain with the city manager, or his designated representative, a current policy of insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the state, in a form to be approved by the city attorney, providing liability coverage on such vehicle in the sum of at least fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of one (1) person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury to or death of more than one person in any one (1) accident, and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for injury to or destruction of property of others in any one (1) accident. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 5; Code 1961, § 21A-4: Ord. No. 2887-82)  
Sec. 17-103. - Same—Operating regulations. 
All drivers or operators of an ice cream vendor's vehicle shall comply with the following: 
(1)  There shall be no operation of such vehicle after 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Such vehicle shall not be stopped to dispense or sell products therefrom on any street or public way having a speed limit above twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(3)  Such vehicle shall not be parked on any street when the operator is not engaged in dispensing or selling products therefrom. 
(4)  When stopping to dispense or sell products, the driver shall pull such vehicle to the curb of the street or shoulder of the road or public way and cut off the motor of such vehicle, except when the operation of the motor is necessary for producing the product. Such stop shall not be made within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection. 
(5)  The only noisemaking device to attract customers which may be used on the vehicle shall be a bell. Reasonable use of such bell shall be made when the vehicle is in motion or while stopped. Continuous ringing of the bell for more then four (4) seconds at a time is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 3; Code 1961, § 21A-3)  
Sec. 17-104. - Same—Violation of section 17-101, 17-102 or 17-103. 
A violation of section 17-101, 17-102 or 17-103 shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 6; Code 1961, § 21A-6)  
Chapter 18 - GAMBLING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State Lottery Law, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-4000 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Gambling device. A "gambling device" includes: 
(1)  Any device, machine, paraphernalia, equipment or other thing, including books, records and other papers, which are actually used in an illegal operation or activity. 
(2)  Any machine, apparatus, implement, instrument, contrivance, board or other thing, including but not limited to, those depending upon the insertion of a coin or other object for their operation, which operates, either completely automatically or with the aid of some physical act by the player or operator, so that, depending upon elements of chance, it may eject something of value or determine the prize or other thing of value to which the player is entitled; provided, that the return to the user of nothing more than additional chances or the right to use such machine is not deemed something of value within the meaning of this subparagraph; and provided further, that machines that only sell or entitle the user to items of merchandise of equivalent value that may differ from each other in composition, size, shape or color, shall not be deemed gambling devices within the meaning of this subparagraph. 
Such devices are no less gambling devices if they indicate beforehand the definite result of one (1) or more operations but not all the operations, nor are they any less gambling devices if, apart from their use or adaptability as such, they also sell or deliver something of value on a basis other than chance. 
Illegal gambling. The making, placing or receipt of any bet or wager in the city of money or other thing of value, made in exchange for a chance to win a prize, stake or other consideration or thing of value, dependent upon the result of any game, contest or other event the outcome of which is uncertain or a matter of chance, whether such game, contest or event occurs or is to occur inside or outside the limits of this city, shall constitute illegal gambling. 
Operator. The term "operator" includes any person, firm or association of persons who or which conducts, finances, manages, supervises, directs or owns all or part of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 1; Code 1961, § 19-1; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325.  
Sec. 18-2. - Illegal gambling generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who illegally gambles shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. If an association or pool of persons illegally gamble, each person therein shall be guilty of illegal gambling. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 2; Code 1961, § 19-2; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11(a)(3). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326.  
Sec. 18-3. - Winning by fraud. 
If any person, while gambling, cheats or by fraudulent means wins or acquires for himself or herself or another money or any other valuable thing, such person shall be fined no less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) times the value of such winnings. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 3; Code 1961, § 19-3; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-327.  
Sec. 18-4. - Permitting gambling to continue in one's premises. 
If the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in control of any place or conveyance knows, or reasonably should know, that it is being used for illegal gambling, and permits such gambling to continue without having notified a law-enforcement officer of the presence of such illegal gambling activity, such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 4; Code 1961, § 19-4; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11(a)(1). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-329.  
Sec. 18-5. - Aiding or abetting operation of illegal gambling activity. 
Any person, other than those specified in other sections of this chapter, who knowingly aide, abets or assists in the operation of an illegal gambling activity, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 5; Code 1961, § 19-5; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11(a)(2). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-330.  
Sec. 18-6. - Illegal possession of gambling device. 
A person is guilty of illegal possession of a gambling device when such person manufactures, sells, transports, rents, gives away, places or possesses, or conducts or negotiates any transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody or use of, any gambling device, while believing or having reason to believe that such device is to be used in the advancement of any unlawful gambling activity. Illegal possession of a gambling device shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 6; Code 1961, § 19-6; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11(a)(1). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-331.  
Sec. 18-7. - Forfeiture of money, gambling devices, etc., seized from illegal gambling enterprise. 
All money, gambling devices, office equipment and other personal property used in connection with an illegal gambling enterprise or activity, and all money, stakes and things of value received or proposed to be received by a winner in any illegal gambling transaction, which are lawfully seized by any law-enforcement officer or which shall lawfully come into such officer's custody shall be forfeited to the city by order of the court in which a conviction under this chapter is obtained. Such court shall order all money so forfeited to be paid over to the city and, by order, shall make such disposition of other property so forfeited as the court deems proper, including the award of such property to any city or state agency or charitable organization for lawful purposes; or, in case of the sale thereof, the proceeds therefrom to be paid over to the city. Such forfeiture shall not extinguish the rights of any person, without knowledge of the illegal use of such property, who is the lawful owner or who has a lien on the same which has been perfected as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 11; Code 1961, § 19-11; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-386.30.  
Sec. 18-8. - Certain acts not deemed "consideration" in prosecution under chapter. 
In any prosecution under this chapter, no consideration shall be deemed to have passed or been given because of any person's attendance upon the premises of another; his execution, mailing or delivery of an entry blank; his answering of questions, verbally or in writing; his witnessing of a demonstration or other proceeding; or any one (1) or more thereof, where no charge is made to, paid by, or any purchase required of him in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 7; Code 1961, § 19-7; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia,. § 18.2-332.  
Sec. 18-9. - Exceptions from chapter—Contests of speed or skill. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any contest of speed or skill between men, animals, fowl or vehicles, where participants may receive prizes or different percentages of a purse, stake or premium dependent upon whether they win or lose, or dependent upon their position or score at the end of such contest. 
(b)  Any participant who, for the purpose of competing for any such purse, stake or premium offered in any such contest, knowingly and fraudulently enters any contestant other than the contestant purported to be entered or knowingly and fraudulently enters a contestant in a class in which such contestant does not belong, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 8; Code 1961, § 19-8; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
Cross reference— Penalty for Class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11(a)(3). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-333.  
Sec. 18-10. - Same—Games of chance in private residences. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to make it illegal to participate in a game of chance conducted in a private residence, provided such private residence is not commonly used for such games of chance and that there is no operator, as defined in section 18-1. 
(Ord. No. 2258, § 9; Code 1961, § 19-9; Ord. No. 3095-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334.  
ARTICLE II. - BINGO 
 
Sec. 18-20. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful to conduct bingo games during any one (1) calendar day at any time other than the times as herein set forth: 
Monday: 	1:00 p.m. to midnight 
	
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday: 	12:01 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to midnight 
	
Sunday: 	12:01 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. and noon to midnight 
 
(Ord. No. 4966-96)  
Chapter 19 - SOLID WASTE, LITTER AND RECYCLING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6188-05, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2005, effective March 1, 2006, amended Ch. 19, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 19 pertained to similar subject matter. Subsequently, Ord. No. 6443-07, adopted December 11, 2007, effective February 1, 2008, amended Ch. 19, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Disposal of dead animals, §§ 6-10, 6-27; automobile graveyards, Ch. 8; premises of automobile graveyard to be kept free of rubbish and waste matter, § 8-10; unlawful accumulations of rubbish, § 13-180 et seq.; open burning of leaves, § 16-32 et seq.; pawnbrokers; junk and secondhand dealers; buyers of old gold and silver, Ch. 30; discharge of garbage into sewerage system, § 33-50. 
State Law reference— Virginia Waste Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 et seq.; removal of trash, garbage, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901; waste and recycling, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-927 et seq.,; mailing of summons for violation of trash removal ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76.2. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to (i) provide for a system of collection and disposal of residential solid waste and residential recyclable materials generated in the city, (ii) establish a system of fees and charges necessary to defray the costs associated with such collection and disposal, (iii) prohibit the accumulation of litter within the city, and (iv) provide for penalties for failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-2. - Administration. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the director of the department of public works and his staff under the direction and control of the city manager. 
The provisions of this chapter may be overridden in the event of an emergency situation such as a natural or manmade disaster. In such a case, the director of public works will conduct a debris and trash removal program as can best be accommodated by the demands of the emergency and may continue for a length of time determined necessary by the director of public works. 
The director of public works may grant a temporary modification from any provision contained in this chapter, if he finds in writing that: (i) the strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship; (ii) such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same vicinity; and (iii) the authorization of the modification will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-3. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Authorized container. A term collectively referring to authorized trash containers and authorized recycling containers approved by the director and assigned by the city to residential and multi-family dwelling units. 
Authorized recycling container. A storage and collection receptacle or container designed for placement and collection of residential recyclable material which has been authorized to be used as such by the director. 
Authorized trash container. A storage and collection receptacle or container designed for placement and collection of residential garbage and residential trash which has been authorized to be used as such by the director. 
Business day. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday of each week, excluding city observed holidays, inclement weather days and any other weekday on which the department's administrative offices are closed. 
Bulk waste. Residential solid waste that is not suitable because of size or weight to be placed in authorized trash containers. These items include, but are not limited to, appliances ("white goods"), furniture, mattresses, large yard toys, yard furniture and other large items associated with and incidental to the ordinary conduct of a residential dwelling unit, including residential building material waste. "Bulk waste" is not clothes, bagged waste, toys, or any other small items that could be placed in an authorized trash container but have been placed at curbside in cardboard boxes, bags or other containers. Bagged grass clippings and bagged leaves are considered bulk waste because the plastic bags in which they are placed are not considered recyclable and the labor involved to remove the contents is not cost-effective. 
Commercial waste. Waste generated by any activity, including business activity conducted in a residential dwelling unit, including waste generated at apartments and condominiums that are not eligible for and do not receive city collection services, not incidental to the ordinary conduct of a residential dwelling unit. "Commercial waste" does not include vegetative waste generated by a person engaged by a resident to perform routine lawn care at the resident's dwelling unit. 
Contractor. A person who performs a service for a fee. 
Contractor waste. Solid waste produced or generated during the construction, remodeling or repair of structures or fixtures; or the removal of trees, parts of trees, or limbs by a contractor. 
Cubic yard. A measure of volume as applied to bulk waste. The mathematical formula typically used to determine a pile of bulk waste is as follows: One-half (½) the base width of the pile multiplied by the height of the pile multiplied by length of the pile (½W×H×L). However, to assist the public in determining volume, the following examples are provided: 
One (1) cubic yard—Equivalent to the size of two (2) ninety-gallon trash containers. 
Two (2) cubic yards—Equivalent to the size of four (4) ninety-gallon trash containers. 
Three (3) cubic yards—Equivalent to the size of six (6) ninety-gallon trash containers. 
Six (6) cubic yards—Equivalent to the size of twelve (12) ninety-gallon trash containers. 
Nine (9) cubic yards—Equivalent to the size of eighteen (18) ninety-gallon trash containers. 
Department. The Newport News Department of Public Works. 
Director. The Director of the Newport News Department of Public Works, together with the department's staff as assigned or designated by the City Code or the Director. 
Dwelling unit. A single housing unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, which contains permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation within the unit, at all times, including both residential dwelling units and multi-family dwelling units that are billed as single-family use through the waterworks department. 
Dumpster. A metal or plastic container generally used for automated collection of non-residential solid waste containing doors and lids which may be secured to prevent the contents of the dumpster from escaping. 
Exigent circumstances. Exigent circumstances include, but are not limited to, inclement weather, seasonal increases in volume, equipment failure, acts of God and any other circumstance which causes an interruption of normal department operations. 
Hazardous waste. Any waste regulated by state or federal law which, by reason of properties or quantities, is considered hazardous and therefore requires special disposal, including but not limited to (i) petroleum and petroleum based products, thinners and distillates; and (ii) toxic chemicals. 
Land-clearing debris. Discarded material associated with the removal of natural and manmade objects from property with the intent to create open space on the property. 
Liquid waste. Not a "gas" or a "solid" as those terms are commonly defined, or may become such due to changes in temperature. 
Litter. Solid waste intentionally or carelessly thrown or deposited outdoors on the ground or into water, and/or not into a container designed to accept such litter, generally small enough to be easily carried by a person, including but not limited to cans, bottles, food containers and wrappers, cigarette packs and butts, newspapers, coffee and soft drink cups, and other small metal, paper and plastic products. 
Multi-family container. A container authorized by the director for collection of solid waste generated by multi-family residential dwellings. 
Multi-family dwelling. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units entirely surrounded by a yard. 
Non-conforming multi-family dwelling. A multi-family dwelling characterized by a non-conforming use of land - any use of a lot which was previously lawful, but which does not conform to the applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, either on the effective date of Chapter 45 of the City Code or as a result of any subsequent amendment thereto. 
Non-residential property. Property which is neither zoned residential, nor on which an occupied residential dwelling unit is located. 
Non-residential solid waste. A term collectively referring to any solid waste emanating from or generated on non-residential property. 
Non-residential waste. A term collectively referring to any waste emanating from or generated on non-residential property. 
Occupied residential dwelling unit. A dwelling unit that is currently being used by its occupants as a residential dwelling unit which is served by active residential water service provided by the city. 
Odor. An unpleasant sensation that results when human olfactory receptors in the nose are stimulated by a aroma emanating from a solid waste container. 
Person. A human being or any legal entity, unless otherwise intended by the context in which the term is used. 
Recyclable material. Solid waste material that has been authorized by the director to be placed in an authorized recycling container, specifically excluding hazardous waste. 
Resident. A person residing in a residential dwelling unit in the city. 
Residential building material waste. Wood, metal, vinyl, and/or other extra, unused or waste material generated from the remodeling or repair of a residential dwelling unit by its owner or occupant, specifically excluding hazardous waste. 
Residential dwelling unit. A term referring to a single-family residential dwelling or a two-family residential dwelling. 
Residential trash. Readily putrescible discarded materials composed of animal, vegetable or other organic matter which are incidental to the ordinary conduct of a residential dwelling unit, specifically excluding hazardous waste. 
Residential recyclable material. Certain glass, plastic, metal, paper products, and other materials authorized by the director to be placed in an authorized recycling container which have been generated by occupants of a residential dwelling unit, specifically excluding hazardous waste. 
Residential solid waste. A term collectively referring to bulk waste, residential vegetative waste, residential trash, residential recyclable material, and residential trash, specifically excluding hazardous waste. 
Residential trash. Discarded solid waste composed of plastic, paper, cardboard, metal or other packaging material and containers which are incidental to the ordinary conduct of a residential dwelling unit which may be disposed of in an authorized trash container, but specifically excluding hazardous waste, contractor generated waste, and commercial waste. 
Residential water service. Water service provided by the city through a residential water account. 
Single-family residential dwelling. A structure that (i) contains only one (1) dwelling unit, and (ii) is served by residential water service provided by the city. 
Solid waste. Any waste that is not a "gas" or "liquid," as those terms are commonly defined, or may become such due to changes in temperature. 
Solid waste container. A manmade enclosed container used to store solid waste. 
Special waste. Any waste material which, because of its physical characteristics, chemical makeup, or biological nature requires either special handling procedures and permitting, or poses an unusual threat to human health, equipment, property, or the environment. This definition will include asbestos to the extent it is not otherwise designated hazardous waste by law. 
Street. The paved or vehicular travel portion of a public or private way in the city suitable for use by solid waste collections vehicles. 
Trash. Discarded materials composed of plastic, paper, cardboard, metal or other packaging material and containers, specifically excluding recyclable materials and hazardous waste. 
Two-family residential dwelling. A structure that contains only two (2) dwelling units which share a common wall, floor or ceiling, and is either entirely surrounded by a yard or served by residential water service, or both. 
Vegetative waste. Branches, twigs, brush, shrubs, and tree limbs resulting from lawn maintenance activities incidental to the ordinary conduct of a residential dwelling unit. Vegetative waste does not include tree limbs or logs which exceed six (6) feet in length or six (6) inches in diameter, tree stumps, soil, loose grass clippings, loose leaves or other loose vegetative material. 
Waste. Materials and products (i) which have little or no economic value, or (ii) have been thrown away, disposed of, discarded or abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7204-15)  
Sec. 19-4. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a violation of any provision of this chapter where specified shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. In addition, violations shall be subject to Article IX of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-5. - Costs of cleanup. 
In addition to any other penalty, cost, payment, or forfeiture provided for by law or in this chapter, all costs incurred by the city to clean up, remove, or otherwise properly dispose of solid waste not otherwise allowed under this chapter ("illegal waste") and hazardous waste shall be the responsibility of and charged to the person responsible for such illegal or hazardous waste. Collection of such costs by the city from such person responsible for the illegal or hazardous waste may be by any method or procedure authorized by law for the collection of debts owed to the city. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-6. - Commercial waste containers. 
No person, business or commercial establishment shall dispose of waste in a commercial waste container not owned or leased by that person, business or commercial establishment without the expressed permission of the owner or lessee of the commercial waste container. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Secs. 19-7, 19-8. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND RECYCLING 
 
Sec. 19-9. - Eligibility for collection. 
All city residents who meet the criteria below are required to pay a residential solid waste user fee regardless of whether they actually use the service. The service is provided and supported by the equitable contribution of all residents who meet the criteria below. 
To be eligible for collection, a service address must meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)  A permanently occupied dwelling unit occupied by the owner or lessee. 
(2)  An active water account by the current occupant. 
(3)  Active consumption - metered residential water service that uses at least seven hundred fifty (750) gallons of water during a single water billing cycle. 
(4)  Paying a solid waste user fee. 
(5)  Must be used as a single-family or a two-family residential dwelling or "grandfathered" multi-family dwellings (see section 19-13). 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-10. - Collection, generally. 
The combined total of all bulk waste and residential vegetative waste cannot exceed six (6) cubic yards per weekly collection. Residential trash, bulk waste, residential vegetative waste, and residential recyclable material collection services shall be provided only to residential units meeting eligibility requirements as provided for in section 19-9 and shall be collected according to the following parameters: 
(1)  Residential trash placed in authorized trash containers in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be collected in accordance with the fees contained in Article IV and on a schedule prepared by the director. 
(2)  Bulk waste placed at curbside in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be collected in accordance with the fees contained in Article IV and on a schedule prepared by the director, except that bulk waste placed at curbside that exceeds six (6) cubic yards per week shall result in an additional collections charge as provided in Article IV. Waste not meeting the definition requirements of bulk waste shall not be collected. 
(3)  Residential vegetative waste placed at curbside in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be collected in accordance with the fees contained in Article IV and on a schedule prepared by the director, except that residential vegetative waste placed at curbside that exceeds six (6) cubic yards per week shall result in an additional collections charge as provided in Article IV. Vegetative waste placed in bags cannot exceed sixteen (16) thirty-nine-gallon trash bags per weekly collection. Bags must be of clear plastic to allow contents to be observed. The total vegetative waste collected per week without an addition charge is six (6) cubic yards. Waste not meeting the definition requirements of residential vegetative waste shall not be collected. 
(4)  Residential recyclable material placed in authorized containers at curbside in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be collected in accordance with the fees contained in Article IV and on a schedule prepared by the director. Waste not meeting the definition requirements of residential recyclable material shall not be collected. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-11. - Collection schedule; exception. 
(a)  Collection of residential trash shall be provided to occupied residential dwelling units throughout the city on a one (1) time per week basis according to a schedule prepared by the director. 
(b)  Collection of residential recyclable materials, bulk waste and residential vegetative waste shall be provided to occupied residential dwelling units on a schedule established by the director based on the needs of the city's residents. Although collection of large appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, dryers and other large white goods will be made on bulk waste collection days, residents must contact the department prior to 4:00 p.m. on the last business day before such resident's bulk waste collection day to schedule the collection of such large appliances. The owner or property manager of multi-family locations which receive city serve shall schedule collections needed at the designated locations. In addition, the owner/management will ensure that the white goods for collection are separate from other items and in a location where they can be accessed for collection and not interfere with the normal collection operations of the bulk waste. 
(c)  Upon request, the director may provide additional collection services to occupied residential dwelling units upon payment to the city of an additional fee as provided in Article IV of this chapter. 
(d)  The director may make exceptions to collection schedules in times of exigent circumstances; however, missed collections will be collected as soon as possible. Notice of changes in collection schedules will be promptly provided to affected residents by any reasonable means considering the nature of the exigent circumstance. Should any "pilot" program be implemented, special procedures for the same may be published. All ordinances shall apply during any such pilot program. 
(e)  Residential solid waste that is inaccessible to collection vehicles shall not be collected. Inaccessibility includes, but is not limited to the following: debris blocked by or in close proximity to cable boxes, mail boxes, fences, street signs, vehicles, and/or under low wires or overhead powerlines. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-12. - Vacant residential dwelling units. 
(a)  Although residential solid waste collections are not generally provided to vacant residential dwelling units by the city, one (1) collection service consisting of no more than one (1) residential container and one (1) six (6) cubic yard truckload will be provided to vacated residential dwelling units up to sixty (60) days following the departure of the occupant and upon request of the property owner. If the request for collection is made after the sixty-day grace period, a charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) will apply, provided that the residential solid waste fee account was current at the time of the request and the residential solid waste meets all other criteria for collection. Additional collections may be provided to the property owner upon request and payment of the collection fees for additional collections provided for in Article IV of this chapter. Solid waste resulting from demolition, and renovation and repair work, shall not be eligible for collection. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section or in section 19-31, it shall be unlawful for any person to place solid waste or recyclable materials generated from a vacant residential dwelling unit on the city's rights-of-way for any reason. It will be the responsibility of the property owner or property manager of such property to abate and bear the expense of disposal of any debris resulting from tenant departure and any illegal dumping. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-13. - Multi-family residential dwellings and mobile home parks. 
(a)  Multi-family residential dwellings and mobile home parks are not eligible to receive solid waste or recycling collections services. 
(b)  Multi-family dwellings and mobile home parks receiving residential solid waste and recycling collection services prior to January 1, 2005, may continue to receive such services; however, such services shall be provided through a central drop-off or curbside collection, as determined by the director. Central drop-off areas include solid waste container collection sites and bulk waste collection sites. These areas shall be fully enclosed by a fence or fence-like structure which provides a sight barrier, is accessible to collection vehicles, and surrounds a concrete pad upon which bulk waste and solid waste collection containers must be placed. These areas are the responsibility of the owner or property manager to remove and keep free of all city code violations. The director may terminate services for failure to meet any of these requirements. 
(c)  Multi-family dwellings and mobile home parks that cease to use residential solid waste collection services shall not thereafter be eligible for solid waste or recycling collection services. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-14. - Collection alternatives for properties which are ineligible for solid waste collection. 
(a)  The owners and occupants of all non-residential property, multi-family dwellings, and non-conforming multiple-family dwellings shall make arrangements for solid waste collection services from private entities which provide such services. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place non-residential solid waste or non-residential recyclables on the city's rights-of-way for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-15. - Collections on private streets. 
(a)  Collection of residential solid waste from dwellings located on private streets will be made by the city provided: 
(1)  The private street is (i) an all-weather type roadway, (ii) of sufficient width for the collection vehicle to travel safely, and (iii) permits the collection vehicle to safely turn around and exit; 
(2)  Solid waste is set out for collection at the edge of the private street in the same manner as otherwise provided in this section for public streets; and 
(3)  The owners of such private streets understand and agree that upkeep, maintenance and repairs necessary for waste collection vehicle travel over such streets and turn-around area shall be the responsibility of and provided by the abutting property owners, associations thereof, or occupants, and not the city. 
(b)  Regulations for collection applicable to public streets shall be applicable to private streets. 
(c)  In the event collection on a private street cannot be made, an alternate collection location may be designated by the director where practicable. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-16. - Disposal of residential solid waste at drop-off facility and residential vegetative waste at the compost facility. 
(a)  Residents may dispose of residential solid waste, including residential tires, at the city's solid waste drop-off facility at no charge, so long as the waste is within the limits and meets all requirements of this chapter, as well as the eligibility requirements in section 19-9. Tires may be disposed of at this facility so long as no more than four (4) residential tires without rims are disposed of per week, not exceeding twelve (12) such residential tires per calendar year. Proof of residency, such as a valid Virginia driver's license, shall be required prior to utilizing the city's residential drop-off facility. Residents may also be required to exhibit any required permits for review by city personnel prior to disposal of such residential solid waste. Residents may dispose, per week, of up to six (6) cubic yards of concrete, brick, rock, and gravel, provided each piece does not exceed six (6) inches in diameter. 
(b)  Residents, and contractors with a principal office located in the city, may dispose of an unlimited amount of residential vegetative waste, specifically excluding stumps and tree roots, waste contaminated with dirt, logs over six (6) inches in diameter or six (6) feet in length, and grass clippings or other bagged waste from any one (1) residential dwelling unit at the city's compost facility free of charge. If residential vegetative waste is delivered by a contractor, the contractor must present an invoice signed by the resident identifying the work site as evidence that the waste results from work performed within city limits. 
(c)  If residential solid waste residential vegetative waste, or bulk waste is of such character as to violate the provisions of this chapter, or exceeds the limits of the city's equipment or budgetary resources, the director may refuse to accept same at the drop-off facility or compost facility. 
(d)  Petroleum contaminated soil, liquid waste, special waste and hazardous waste shall not be delivered to or accepted for disposal at the city's drop-off facility or compost facility. 
(e)  Waste that is prohibited by federal or state waste management facility operating regulations shall not be delivered to or accepted for disposal at the city's drop-off facility or compost facility. The director shall have the authority to determine what solid waste will be acceptable for disposal. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to scavenge or tamper with any material item or debris in the compost or drop-off facility. 
(g)  All persons using the city's drop-off facility and compost facility shall be subject to the operating rules and regulations of the facilities, as well as the directives of the personnel operating the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-17. - Penalties for violations of this article. 
(a)  Violations of a specific provision of this article are addressed in Article IX. 
(b)  In no event shall the civil penalties for multiple violations arising from the same set of operative facts exceed a total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) in a given year. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Secs. 19-18, 19-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE AND SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS 
 
Sec. 19-20. - Placement of residential solid waste. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, store or deposit, or allow to be placed, stored or deposited, any waste, specifically including hazardous waste, in an authorized container, or in or on any of the city's public rights-of-way, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Residential trash shall only be placed or kept in an authorized trash container. If the total number of bags of leaves, small branches and sticks does not exceed three (3) bags, they shall be placed in authorized containers for collection so long as the container top will stay closed. 
(c)  Residential recyclable materials shall only be placed or kept outdoors in an authorized recycling container. 
(d)  Bulk waste, residential vegetative waste and white goods, shall not be commingled; they shall be placed in separate groups for collection in an area adjacent to authorized containers as otherwise provided for in this article. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, authorized containers set out for collection, which have been filled to such an extent that the city's automated collection devices are unable to safely lift the container, will not be collected. 
(f)  Waste which has been placed at curbside for collection in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be promptly removed by the owner or occupant of the dwelling unit from which such waste was generated, and properly disposed of by such owner or occupant in accordance with law. 
(g)  Waste must be generated from the property from which it is being collected. Waste to be collected from such property must be placed so it abuts the property from which it is generated. Waste may not, under any circumstances, be placed on vacant lots. 
(h)  For special conditions which require waste to be placed in a location other than adjacent to the property from which it was generated, the director may designate an adequate area for the automated container or bulk waste to be placed. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-21. - Authorized containers. 
(a)  Each resident who is eligible for service (see section 19-9) will be provided one (1) standard authorized trash container by the city. Upon request, one (1) additional trash container may be delivered to a residential dwelling unit upon payment of the delivery charge for such container as provided in Article IV of this chapter. Each container is billed at the same rate per container and will be charged accordingly. 
(b)  Each resident who is eligible for service (pursuant to section 19-9) will be provided one (1) standard authorized recycling container by the city. Upon request one (1) additional recycling container may be delivered to a residential dwelling unit upon payment of the delivery charge for such container as provided in Article IV of this chapter. 
(c)  Each resident who is eligible for service pursuant to section 19-9, may exchange, on a one-time basis, a standard authorized trash container and a standard recycling container for a container of a different size at no exchange cost. Additional exchanges may be granted upon payment of the exchange or delivery fee as provided for in Article IV. 
(d)  Authorized containers shall be left at the property when a resident vacates a property. Residents who move out shall contact the department's solid waste division when the resident vacates the premises. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-22. - Maintenance of authorized containers. 
(a)  Authorized containers assigned to residential dwelling units shall be the responsibility of and kept and maintained by the occupants of such units in a clean and sanitary manner so as to prevent the breeding of flies or vectors, or the release of odors. 
(b)  Dumpsters and multi-family containers assigned to multi-family dwellings and mobile home parks shall be the responsibility of and maintained by the owner of such units and the property manager of such units in a clean, disinfected, and sanitary manner so as to prevent the breeding of flies or vectors, or the release of odors. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-23. - Placement of authorized containers, bulk waste and residential vegetative waste for collection; exception. 
(a)  Residential trash shall be set out for collection entirely within fully closed authorized trash containers and placed on the street abutting the residential dwelling unit for which the container was assigned, as near to the curb as possible, and far enough away from other containers, vehicles, utility lines and boxes, poles, mail-boxes, and other objects so as to facilitate collection by automated collection vehicles. Such placement shall not restrict access to public sidewalks, pathways and bicycle paths. Where there is no curb, authorized containers shall be placed next to the edge of the road pavement in the same manner as if there were a curb. For proper automated collection, the authorized trash container shall be placed in such a manner as to have sufficient clearance on each side so as to be accessible to the automated collections vehicle with the container handle facing away from the street or right-of-way. If an authorized trash container is obstructed in such a manner as to prohibit the automated collection vehicle from dumping the container, the container's contents will not be collected. Waste placed in containers other than authorized containers will not be collected. 
(b)  Residential recyclable materials shall be set out for collection entirely within a fully closed authorized recycling container and placed on the street abutting the residential dwelling unit for which the container was assigned, as near to the curb as possible, and far enough away from other containers, vehicles, utility lines and boxes, poles, mail-boxes, and other objects so as to facilitate collection by automated collection vehicles. Such placement shall not restrict access to public sidewalks, pathways and bicycle paths. Where there is no curb, authorized containers shall be placed next to the edge of the road pavement in the same manner as if there were a curb. For proper automated collection, the residential recycling container shall be placed in such a manner as to have sufficient clearance on each side so as to be accessible to the automated collections vehicle with the container handle facing away from the street or right-of-way. If a residential recycling container is obstructed in such a manner as to prohibit the automated collection vehicle from dumping the container, the container's contents will not be collected. Bottles, jars, cans, and similar vessels shall be rinsed free of putrescible material, and lids and caps shall be removed, before placing same in a residential recycling container. Waste placed in containers other than authorized containers will not be collected. 
(c)  Although bulk waste shall not be required to be placed in an authorized container, it shall be otherwise placed at curbside for collection in generally the same manner as provided in subparagraph (a) of this section, except that it shall be placed adjacent to and separate from authorized containers, and far enough from such containers to allow pickup by collection vehicles. If such bulk waste is placed in a manner that prohibits the collections vehicle from collecting it, the bulk waste will not be collected. 
(d)  Residential vegetative waste set out for collection shall be placed in generally the same manner as provided in subparagraph (a) and (b) of this section except that residential vegetative waste shall be placed adjacent to and separate from authorized containers and bulk waste, and far enough from such containers and bulk waste to allow collection by collections vehicles. Such waste shall not be contaminated with soil, trash, or other waste such as grass and leaves commonly thrown away in the course of maintaining lawns and gardens. If such vegetative waste is placed in a manner that prohibits the collections vehicle from collecting it, or if the vegetative waste is contaminated, it will not be collected. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-24. - Time of placement of residential solid waste for collection; removal. 
(a)  Authorized containers for residential trash and bulk waste shall be set out for collection as otherwise provided in this article not earlier than 3:00 p.m. the day preceding the scheduled collection day and not later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. Residential vegetative waste shall be set out no earlier than 7:00 a.m. of the Saturday before the designated day of collection. 
(b)  Authorized containers shall be removed from the street and stored on the side or rear of the dwelling to which it is assigned as soon as possible after collection, but in no instance shall authorized containers be permitted to remain on the street after midnight of the day of collection. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6449-08, § 1)  
Sec. 19-25. - Scavenging from, tampering with, or vandalizing contents of authorized containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or tamper with the contents of any authorized automated or recycling container, bulk waste or residential vegetative waste set out for collection pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or vandalize an authorized container. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove assigned containers from the property assigned and relocate same to another property or location. 
(1)  Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months, and a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), either or both. 
(2)  In lieu of the imposition of confinement in jail, the court may order the defendant to perform community service in litter abatement activities. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-26. - Loss or damage to authorized containers. 
(a)  Authorized containers assigned to residential dwelling units by the city are and shall remain property of the city. 
(b)  Damage to, loss, or removal of an authorized container assigned to a residential dwelling unit shall be the responsibility of the holder of the residential water account for the dwelling at the time such damage, loss or removal is discovered by the director, and such holder of the residential water account shall be liable for all costs associated with replacing the container. 
(c)  Persons moving from one (1) address in the city to another address in the city, or from the city to another locality shall leave all authorized containers at the dwelling to which the containers have been assigned. Residents which have two (2) authorized containers shall notify the department's solid waste division upon moving to schedule retrieval or re-delivery of said additional containers at no additional cost. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-27. - Preparation and placement of leaves and grass clippings for collection. 
(a)  Leaves and grass clippings may be placed in authorized trash containers for collection at such times and locations as otherwise provided in this article. Whenever space within the authorized trash container allows, bagged vegetative waste or small, crushable bulk waste shall be placed in the authorized container. If the total number of bags of leaves, small branches and sticks does not exceed three (3) bags, they shall be placed in the authorized containers so long as the lids stay closed. 
(b)  If leaves and grass clippings cannot be physically placed in authorized trash containers, leaves and grass clippings shall be placed in transparent plastic bags and set out for collection by the city at such times and locations as otherwise provided in this article for authorized containers. Transparent plastic bags must be grouped at curbside adjacent to and separated from other residential solid waste placed at curbside for collection. Leaves and grass clippings placed in non-transparent plastic bags or other types of unauthorized containers will not be collected. 
(c)  During such times of the year that are set aside for loose leaf collection, residents may place loose leaves at curbside for collection by the city, however no other waste or litter may be commingled with the loose leaves. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-28. - Unacceptable and uncollectible solid waste. 
It shall be unlawful to place certain waste at curbside for any reason, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Hazardous waste or any other waste prohibited by any applicable law from being placed curbside or delivered to or accepted for disposal at the city's solid waste drop-off facility or compost facility. 
(2)  Commercial waste and contractor waste. 
(3)  Land-clearing waste. 
(4)  Automotive engines, bodies, drive trains, and other automotive parts. 
(5)  Riding lawn mowers or any part of such equipment. 
(6)  Lawn mowers, tillers, weed eaters, trimmers and other lawn implements that contain a gasoline engine. 
(7)  Boats and personal watercraft. 
(8)  Gasoline engines. 
(9)  Oil drums, chemical drums, or other containers that have been used to store petroleum and chemical products, paint or other liquids. 
(10)  Glass. 
(11)  Rocks, dirt, sand, sod, concrete, cement, masonry material (bricks, cinder blocks, etc.), plaster, tile or drywall material. 
(12)  Ashes and other burnt waste. 
(13)  Bagged waste outside the container with the exception of residential vegetative waste as otherwise provided for in this article. 
(14)  Asbestos shingles and siding. 
(15)  Utility trailers, house trailers, campers, camper shells, truck bed liners, and truck bed covers and caps. 
(16)  Propane tanks. 
(17)  Dark/non-transparent bags. 
(18)  Tree debris larger than six (6) inches in diameter or six (6) feet long. 
(19)  Tree stumps. 
(20)  Residential vegetative waste contaminated with dirt. 
(21)  Any item longer than six (6) feet (i.e. metal pole, lumber). 
(22)  Outbuildings larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet placed at curbside for collection. 
(23)  Tires. 
(24)  Asbestos products. 
(25)  Debris, litter or rubbish placed curbside that is considered dangerous or constitutes a nuisance, and which removal is required within twenty-four (24) hours, and for which a notice has been served. (See Article IX, paragraph (b)(4)b. for penalty specific to this violation. 
(26)  Any other waste determined by the director to be unacceptable for collection. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-29. - Termination of solid waste collection services. 
The director may terminate solid waste collection services to any dwelling upon failure of its owner(s) or occupant(s) to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-30. - Evictions and moveouts. 
No later than thirty-six (36) hours after an eviction or moveout, and placement of any resulting solid waste at curbside, the real property owner, owner's agent, or property manager shall remove the solid waste, or may request the solid waste division of the department to remove the solid waste on a one-time basis at the fee rate as provided for in section 19-43. If the owner, owner's agent or property manager fails to remove the solid waste within thirty-six (36) hours of placement at curbside, the city may cause the solid waste to be removed and charge the property owner for such service at the rate provided for in section 19-43. The charges set forth in this section shall be billed to and constitute a legal obligation of the real property owner. Solid waste placed at curbside under this section shall be arranged, packaged, bundled, or placed in an authorized container so as to facilitate efficient collection, and prevent scattering. Upon completion of the one-time collection, the property shall not receive further collection services until all requirements have been met as provided for in section 19-9 (Eligibility for collection). Evictions shall be called in to the department's solid waste division advance to avoid prolonged debris piles from accumulating additional waste. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-31. - Penalties for violations of this article. 
(a)  Violations of a specific provision of this article with the exception of section 19-25, are referenced in Article IX. 
(b)  In no event shall the civil penalties for multiple violations arising from the same set of operative facts exceed a total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) in a given year. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Secs. 19-32—19-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE FEES 
 
Sec. 19-40. - Responsibility for payment of residential solid waste fees. 
(a)  All fees for residential solid waste collections services enumerated in this article shall be charged to and the responsibility of the holder of the residential water account serving the dwelling from which the solid waste was collected, or the owner of the property in the event the property is unoccupied or the residential water account has been terminated for any reason. 
(b)  All fees established by this article shall be due and payable from the date that a statement of account reflecting the charge is mailed by the city. The charges established by this provision shall be maintained in an open account in the name of the person responsible for payment of the fees. Any account which is more than thirty (30) days delinquent may be forwarded to the city attorney for collection. In the event that the account is forwarded to the city attorney for collection, the person in whose name the account is maintained shall be liable to the city, in addition to the solid waste fee, for a collection fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) or thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3 ) percent of the outstanding balance on the account, whichever is greater, said fee representing administrative costs and attorney's fees to the city for collecting said debt. Tender of payment and acceptance of the amount originally due the city shall not constitute satisfaction of the account unless and until the administrative collection fees are paid. 
(c)  In addition to any other remedies provided herein, the city may terminate residential solid waste collection services to any residential dwelling unit, or group of residential dwelling units receiving water through a master meter, if any solid waste fees are delinquent for more than sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-41. - Residential solid waste collection fees. 
(a)  On and after July 1, 2018, residential solid waste fees shall be collected by the city in accordance with the following schedule based upon the size of the authorized container: 
(1)  For each standard residential trash container—Seven dollars and thirty cents ($7.30) per week per container. 
(2)  For each medium residential trash container—Five dollars and eighty-four cents ($5.84) per week per container. 
(3)  For each three hundred (300) gallon or larger containers—Seven dollars and thirty cents ($7.30) per week per unit times eighty (80) percent of the number of units. 
(b)  There shall be no additional charge for the collection of authorized recycling containers. 
(c)  There shall be no additional charge for collection of bulk waste properly placed at curbside that does not exceed six (6) cubic yards. 
(d)  There shall be no additional charge for collection of residential vegetative waste properly placed at curbside that does not exceed six (6) cubic yards. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6485-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6785-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6871-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6963-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7056-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7168-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7267-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7460-18, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7267-16, § 1, adopted May 10, 2016, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2016.  
Sec. 19-42. - Container delivery and exchange fees. 
(a)  The cost for additional authorized containers, lost containers and containers damaged other than normal wear and tear during the process of collection so as to be uncollectible by an automated collections vehicle are as follows: 
(1)  Residential trash container—Eighty dollars ($80.00). 
(2)  Residential recycling container—Forty dollars ($40.00). 
(b)  The city will exchange one (1) size of an authorized container for another size at no charge, however, exchange fees for additional container exchanges shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  Additional residential trash container exchanges—Fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(2)  Additional residential recycling container exchanges—Fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(c)  To promote recycling and reduce landfill costs as well as provide more room in the residential trash containers for items that might otherwise be set out as bulk, the city may offer authorized recycling containers at no charge for limited periods as the director may authorize. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-43. - Additional collections fees. 
Residents may request that the director provide additional residential solid waste collections, except residential recycling container collections, upon payment of the following fees: 
(1)  Additional residential trash container collection—Fifty dollar ($50.00) per container. 
(2)  Additional bulk waste collection—A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed for each cubic yard of debris in excess of six (6) cubic yards. For example, a resident with twelve (12) cubic yards of debris would pay one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00). 
(3)  Additional residential vegetative waste collection—A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed for each cubic yard of debris in excess of six (6) cubic yards. For example, a resident with twelve (12) cubic yards of debris would pay one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00). 
(4)  [Interpretation of "total" combined waste/debris.] Paragraphs (2) and (3) above are not to be construed as indicating that six (6) cubic yards of bulk waste and six (6) cubic yards of vegetative waste are allowed per resident per collection day. A resident may only have a total of six (6) cubic yards of debris (bulk and vegetative debris combined) for collection on their collection day. Reference section 19-10. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-44. - Evictions and moveouts. 
For removal by the city of solid waste placed at curbside as the result of evictions and moveouts of persons from real property, the real property owner shall pay to the city a collection fee in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per truckload or part thereof if requested prior to placement at curbside. 
(2)  Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per truckload or part thereof if not requested prior to placement at curbside. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Secs. 19-45—19-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RELIEF FROM SOLID WASTE FEES 
 
Sec. 19-50. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Affidavit. The residential solid waste fee affidavit provided for in this article. 
Application. The residential solid waste fee relief application provided for in this article. 
Billing period. A period of time for which the residential solid waste fees are charged. 
Combined gross income. All income and money received from all sources, without deductions or exclusions, by the applicant and all other persons living in the dwelling for which relief is sought. 
Dwelling. The full-time residence of the applicant for whom relief is requested under this article. 
Property. The residential dwelling for which residential solid waste fee relief is eligible. 
Relief. Exemption from the payment of all or a portion of the residential solid waste fees of the city according to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-51. - Authorized. 
Residential solid waste fee relief shall be provided to qualified applicants who are eligible in the amounts and in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-52. - Administration; rules and regulations of director. 
The relief provided for in this article shall be administered by the director according to the provisions of this article. The director is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, proscribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations, in conformance with and pursuant to the provisions of this article, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for relief and administer the relief program. The director may specifically require the production of income tax returns to establish income. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-53. - General prerequisites to relief; affect of residency in hospital, nursing home, etc.; proration. 
(a)  Relief shall be granted to qualified applicants subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The applicant is currently, and remains for the tax year for which relief is requested, a customer in good standing with the Newport News Waterworks Department for receipt of water service at the dwelling. Relief shall be applied for standard service of one (1) authorized trash container, one (1) authorized recycling container, and bulk waste collection service. Additional services provided shall not be eligible for relief. 
(2)  The combined gross income of the applicant and all persons residing in the dwelling during the calendar year immediately preceding the tax year for which relief is sought shall not exceed the income limits as provided in Table 19-55. 
(3)  The applicant normally resides in the dwelling. 
(b)  The fact that persons who are otherwise qualified for relief pursuant to this article are admitted to hospitals, nursing homes or other facilities for physical or mental care for short periods of time shall not disqualify an otherwise qualified applicant. The term "short periods of time" shall only include periods of time of less than thirty (30) consecutive days in any one (1) billing period or less than one hundred twenty (120) aggregate days in any one (1) tax year. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7204-15)  
Sec. 19-54. - Applicant's affidavit; director's certification to treasurer. 
(a)  Persons requesting solid waste fee relief may file an application and an affidavit with the director at any time. 
(b)  The application and affidavit required by this section shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the director, the names of all persons residing in the dwelling for which relief is sought, as well as their individual gross incomes. 
(c)  If, after such investigation as the director deems appropriate, he shall cause the amount of the relief to be deducted from the applicant's residential solid waste fee liability beginning with the next billing for water service. In the event there is insufficient time to credit the relief on the next bill, such relief will be carried over and credited on the next regularly scheduled water service bill. 
(d)  Residential dwelling units having physically or mentally disabled persons as the sole adult occupant or occupants thereof may receive non-curbside residential trash, and residential recycling collection services upon application to and approval of the director. Applications for such non-curbside collection services shall be submitted to the director annually in writing accompanied by a treating physician's statement of the occupants' inability to place the automated container at curbside. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-55. - Amount of relief. 
Applicants qualifying for relief shall be relieved of liability for the residential solid waste fee in those portions and in accordance with Table 19-55. 
Table 19-55 

ANNUAL COMBINED

GROSS INCOME LIMITS 

NUMBER OF PEOPLE

LIVING IN DWELLING* 
RELIEF 	1 	2 	3 	4 	5 	6 
100% 	$13,837.00 	$14,390.00 	$14,966.00 	$15,565.00 	$16,187.00 	$16,835.00 
67% 	15,814.00 	16,447.00 	17,104.00 	17,789.00 	18,500.00 	19,240.00 
33% 	17,790.00 	18,502.00 	19,242.00 	20,011.00 	20,812.00 	21,644.00 
 
*For dwelling units housing over six (6) persons, add five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional person beyond the sixth (6th) person. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-56. - Termination of relief upon change in status. 
Changes with respect to income or other factors occurring during a billing period for which an application and affidavit have been filed, which have the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided for in this article, shall terminate relief beginning with the next billing period. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Secs. 19-57—19-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LITTER 
 
Sec. 19-60. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, track on, sweep into, spill or otherwise deposit, or cause to be deposited, any litter, in or upon any street, sidewalk, gutter, storm drain, or other public place or public property owned or controlled by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who throws, deposits, tracks on, spills or causes to be deposited any litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, gutter, storm drain, or other public place, within the city to fail to immediately remove the same. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the deposit of litter in approved public or private containers set out for deposit and collection of such litter. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-61. - Deposit on private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on any private property within the city except that the owner or person in control of such private property may maintain sufficient private receptacles for the deposit and collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any other private property. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-62. - Duty of owners or occupants of property to keep adjacent areas free of litter. 
Persons owning or occupying places of business shall keep the lots, parking lots, driveway aprons and outside serving areas, used in any way with such places of business free of litter. The owner or manager of a mobile home park or other multi-family residential community shall provide for areas to be used for centralized trash collection and bulk waste collection and keep same free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-63. - Manner of placing in receptacles. 
Persons placing litter in public or private receptacles shall do so in such manner as to prevent such litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-64. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Secs. 19-65—19-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - NON-RESIDENTIAL WASTE AND RECYCLING; REPORTS 
 
Sec. 19-70. - Containers required for non-residential waste. 
(a)  Any person who generates non-residential waste shall provide for the proper collection and disposal of such waste. Such person shall provide dumpsters or other rigid plastic or metal waste containers with tight fitting covers for the deposit of such waste awaiting collection. The number, capacity and collection frequency of such containers shall be sufficient to prevent the occurrence of an accumulation of waste on the property, unsanitary condition or a public nuisance. 
(b)  Waste generated by a business or commercial establishment may not be placed in a city street litter receptacle or authorized containers. 
(c)  No person shall dispose of waste in a non-residential solid waste container not owned or leased by or for that person without the express permission of the owner or lessee of such container. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-71. - Reporting requirements for generators of non-residential waste. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, every person who generates non-residential waste in the city shall submit an annual report for each calendar year ending on December 31 to the director on or before February 1 of the following year. Such reports shall be required only from non-residential waste generators that utilize as a minimum a six (6) cubic vegetative waste container, or the equivalent. 
(b)  Such annual report shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the director and shall include as a minimum the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the reporting party. 
(2)  The total quantity of solid waste recycled by the reporting party, by commodity, during the reporting period. 
(3)  The name and address of the person to which the recyclables were delivered for recycling. 
(4)  The total quantity by weight of solid waste, by commodity, that has been the subject of source reduction or reuse. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-72. - Reporting requirements for haulers or recyclers. 
(a)  Persons licensed for waste hauling, recycling or scrap metal recovery shall submit an annual report for each calendar year ending on December 31 to the director by February 1 of the following year. 
(b)  Such annual report shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the director and shall include as a minimum the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the reporting party. 
(2)  The total quantity of solid waste generated in the city, by commodity, that was recycled or transported to be recycled by that person during the reporting period. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-73. - Contents of reports. 
(a)  The reports required under the two (2) preceding sections shall be based on actual weight. Where actual weight cannot be accurately determined, the weight may be reported using carefully estimated data. All such reports shall include a description of the basis for the reported data. 
(b)  Recyclables identified in the report shall include only those recyclables delivered to market from within the city. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-74. - Proprietary information. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to require any person to report information of a proprietary nature. Where any reporting party declines to report any information otherwise required hereunder based upon a determination that such information is of a proprietary nature, the reporting party shall specify in its report the nature of the information withheld and the basis for its determination that such information is of a proprietary nature. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Secs. 19-75—19-79. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ILLEGAL DUMPING 
 
Sec. 19-80. - Dumping waste on public or private property unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump waste on public property, including a public highway, right-of-way, property adjacent to such highway or right-of-way, or on private property without the written consent of the owner thereof or his agent. It is unlawful to bring waste from any other locality for disposal or dumping within the city limits. 
(b)  If any person is charged with a violation of this section, and the matter alleged to have been illegally dumped or disposed of has been ejected or removed from a motor vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle from which the waste has been ejected or removed shall be presumed to be the person ejecting or removing of such matter; provided, however, such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(c)  If any person is charged with a violation of this section, and the waste alleged to have been illegally dumped or removed has been ejected from a motor vehicle or transported to the disposal site in a motor vehicle, the law enforcement officer may utilize the procedures provided in § 46.2-936 of the State Code. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-81. - Penalty for violation of this article. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months, and a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), either or both. 
(b)  In lieu of the imposition of confinement in jail, the court may order the defendant to perform community service in litter abatement activities. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Sec. 19-82. - Article not applicable to disposal in landfills. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the lawful disposal of solid waste in approved public or private landfills. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1)  
Secs. 19-83—19-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 19-90. - Schedule of fines and fees. 
(a)  The following is a list of fineable offenses under Chapter 19: 
(1)  Blocked or inaccessible bulk waste [Reference section 19-11(e)]. 
(2)  Blocked or inaccessible automated container [Reference section 19-11(e)] 
(3)  Blocked or inaccessible recycling container [Reference section 19-11(e)] 
(4)  Outbuildings larger than one hundred fifty (150) square feet placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(22)] 
(5)  Unauthorized container placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-3, "authorized container" definition] 
(6)  Contractor generated debris placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(2)] 
(7)  Land clearing debris placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(3)] 
(8)  Hazardous or special waste placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(1)] 
(9)  Litter [Reference section 19-60(a)] 
(10)  Tires placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(23)] 
(11)  Removal of containers from assigned property [Reference section 19-25(c)] 
(12)  Trash in recycling container placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-23(b)] 
(13)  Loose vegetative debris placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(20)] 
(14)  Debris set out at vacant property or vacant lot placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-20(g)] 
(15)  Debris set out at vacant property after eviction has been collected [Reference section 19-31] 
(16)  Debris set out for collection after sixty (60) days of grace period [Reference section 19-12(a)] 
(17)  Debris placed at curbside for collection outside of designated hours of placement [Reference section 19-24(a)] 
(18)  Storing containers at side or rear of dwelling and leaving containers overnight on streets after collection [Reference section 19-24(b)] 
(19)  Appliance placed at curbside without a scheduled appointment for collection [Reference section 19-11(b)] 
(20)  Oversized limbs or logs placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(18)] 
(21)  Tree stumps placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28] 
(22)  Mixed (commingled material) piles placed for collection [Reference section 19-20(d)] 
(23)  Asbestos shingles, siding or other material containing asbestos placed at curb for collection [Reference section 19-28(14)] 
(24)  Automotive parts placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(4)] 
(25)  Riding lawn mowers or parts placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(5)] 
(26)  Lawn mowers placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(6)] 
(27)  Boats placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(7)] 
(28)  Gas engines placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(8)] 
(29)  Oil drums and chemical drums place at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(9)] 
(30)  Propane tanks placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(16)] 
(31)  Paint placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(9)] 
(32)  Liquids or containers thereof placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(9)] 
(33)  Glass placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(10)] 
(34)  Rock, concrete, cement, bricks, cinder, Quikrete, or an item similar thereto, placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(11)] 
(35)  Dirt, soil or sod placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(11 and 20)] 
(36)  Tile, drywall, sheetrock placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(11)] 
(37)  Ashes or other burnt waste placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(12)] 
(38)  Bagged waste or refuse placed outside the container excluding loose vegetative debris in clear bags placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(13)] 
(39)  Bagged waste placed for bulk waste collection excluding loose vegetative debris in clear bags placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(13)] 
(40)  Dark, non-transparent bags placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(17)] 
(41)  Utility trailers, house trailers, campers placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(15)] 
(42)  Oversized logs (over six (6) feet long or six (6) inches in diameter) placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(18)] 
(43)  Any waste contaminated with dirt placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(20)] 
(44)  Any item longer than six (6) feet placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-28(21)] 
(45)  Eviction not called in for scheduled appointment [Reference section 19-31)] 
(46)  Illegal dumping [Reference 19-80(a)] 
(47)  Scavenging/tampering with or vandalizing waste placed in the public right of way for collection [Reference section 19-25)] 
(48)  Excess of six (6) cubic yards of debris placed at curbside for collection [Reference section 19-10] 
(b)  Fines for violations under this chapter shall be assessed based on both the severity and the repetitive occurrence of a violation. Severity of violation will be a reflection of the impact the violation may likely have on the aesthetics of the area, an additional expense to the city as a result of the violation, or a health, safety or environmental hazard. (See paragraph (1) below for a detailed breakdown of violations and fines.) The repetitive occurrence of a violation reflects a violation that is not an isolated occurrence, consequently the fine shall increase with each repeated offense. (See paragraph (2) below for a detailed breakdown of violations and fines.) 
(1)  Fines based on severity. 
a.  The following fines are based on the violation being a simple nuisance, blight or eyesore, or not acceptable for collection. Each violation shall be assessed a ten dollar ($10.00) fine per day. 
(i)  Blocked bulk waste that is not accessible for collection 
(ii)  Blocked authorized trash container that is not accessible for collection 
(iii)  Blocked authorized recycling container that is not accessible for collection 
(iv)  Unauthorized containers (which are not current city issue) 
(v)  Rocks, concrete, cement, bricks, cinder, plaster, Quikrete, or an item similar thereto, and other like materials placed on the curb for collection 
(vi)  Glass or items containing glass placed at curb for collection 
(vii)  Boats or parts of boats placed at curb for collection 
(viii)  Tile, drywall, sheetrock and like materials placed at curb for collection 
(ix)  Dirt, soil, sod placed at curb for collection 
(x)  Utility trailers, house trailers, campers, truck covers or caps placed at curb for collection 
(xi)  Any waste contaminated with dirt placed at curb for collection 
(xii)  Tires with rims attached or more than four (4) tires per collection week, or more than twelve (12) tires placed at curb per annum placed at curb for collection 
(xiii)  Improper sized tires placed at curb for collection 
(xiv)  Any solid waste placed for collection outside of the right of way. 
(xv)  Any item longer than six (6) feet in length placed at curb for collection 
(xvi)  Appliances at curbside for collection with no appointment scheduled 
b.  The following fines are based on the violation having the potential to result in other violations or undue expense to the city. Each violation shall be assessed a twenty dollar ($20.00) fine per day. 
(i)  Trash placed in recycling container for collection 
(ii)  Overfilled trash containers with the lid not tight fitting 
(iii)  Waste in bags placed outside trash container or recycling container, excluding loose vegetative debris in clear bags 
(iv)  Waste in bags placed at curb for bulk waste collection, excluding loose vegetative debris in clear bags 
(v)  Hot ashes or other burnt waste placed either in trash cart or at curbside for bulk waste collection 
(vi)  Dark bags 
(vii)  Mixed or commingled piles placed for bulk waste collection 
(viii)  Bulk waste in excess of six (6) cubic yards per day 
c.  The following fines are based on the violation being a blatant offense of the code. Each violation shall be assessed a thirty dollar ($30.00) fine per day. 
(i)  Contractor generated debris placed at curb for collection 
(ii)  Oversized tree limbs or logs placed at curb for collection 
(iii)  Land clearing debris placed at curb for collection 
(iv)  Tree stumps placed at curb for collection 
(v)  Debris placed at vacant property at curb after sixty-day grace period has ended 
(vi)  Debris at vacant property placed at curb for collection after eviction debris has been collected (these properties are no longer eligible under sixty-day grace period) 
(vii)  Debris placed at curbside on a vacant lot for collection 
d.  The following fines are based on the violation being a health, safety or environmental hazard. Each violation shall be assessed a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine per day. 
(i)  Hazardous or special waste placed at curb for collection 
(ii)  Asbestos siding/shingles or other material containing asbestos (friable and non-friable) placed at curb for collection 
(iii)  Automotive parts placed at curb for collection 
(iv)  Riding lawn mowers or parts placed at curb for collection 
(v)  Lawn mowers with a gas engine placed at curb for collection 
(vi)  Gas engines placed at curb for collection 
(vii)  Oil and chemical drums and tanks placed at curb for collection 
(viii)  Propane tanks and other pressurized tank placed at curb for collection 
(ix)  Paint, chemicals, liquids placed at curb for collection 
(x)  Tires placed at curb for collection 
(xi)  Any items deemed not eligible for disposal at the designated disposal facility placed at curb for collection 
(2)  Fines based on repetitive occurrence of violations. 
a.  In keeping with the city's intent to first educate before issuing penalties, the first offense of any violation shall result in a documented notification of the violation (a "field notice"). This will serve merely as a courtesy to inform the resident that a violation may have occurred and to warn the resident that a repeated violation could result in more severe administrative action. 
b.  A second offense shall result in a second field notice, again specifying the violation and noting the number of occurrences; however, no fine will be issued. 
c.  Third and subsequent offenses shall result in a citation, which would carry with it a monetary fine as indicated below: 
Occurrence* 	Action 	Dollar Amount

of Fine
1st Notice 	Warning 	None 
2nd Notice 	Warning 	None 
3rd Notice 	Citation and Fine 	Face value of violation per Article IX(b) 
4th Notice 	Citation and Fine 	Two (2) times the face value of the violation per Article IX(b) 
5th Notice 	Citation and Fine 	Three (3) times the face value of the violation per Article IX(b) 
Additional Notices 	Citation and Fine 	Three (3) times the face value of the violation per Article IX(b) 
 
*Occurrences outside the most recent forty-eight-month time period shall not be counted. If, for example, a resident has not been cited for any violation in the previous forty-eight (48) months, no citation that occurred prior to the forty-eight (48) months would be factored into determining the next type of citation. 
d.  Beginning the eighth calendar day after the date the citation was issued, charges for fines shall be assessed if the violation is not remedied and shall accumulate daily until balance is paid in full. Payment shall be made to the Solid Waste Division, Public Works Department, City of Newport News. 
(3)  Fines of a miscellaneous nature. 
a.  Eviction not called in for scheduled appointment at least three (3) working days prior to set out. Normally, a private eviction called-in in advance of the set out of debris would be due a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); however, a set out that was not called in for an appointment will be charged a fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00). This does not apply to Sheriff-initiated evictions, which are not assessed a fee. 
b.  Illegal dumping. This is a criminal offense and therefore not punishable as a civil fine. 
c.  Scavenging/tampering with city property. This is a criminal offence and therefore not punishable as a civil fine. 
d.  Litter. This is a criminal offense and therefore not punishable as a civil fine 
(4)  Fees for special services (e.g. excess bulk). 
a.  Excess of six (6) cubic yards of debris placed at curbside for collection. A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be assessed for each cubic yard of debris in excess of six (6) cubic yards. For example, a resident with twelve (12) cubic yards of debris would pay one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00). This fee is in addition to the fine set forth in (b)(1)b.viii. above. 
b.  Debris, litter or rubbish placed curbside that is considered dangerous or constitutes a nuisance, and which removal is required within twenty-four (24) hours, and for which a notice has been served, and failure to comply within the specified time period, shall be charged two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per truck load or partial truck load and shall be charged to the property owner or occupant responsible for placing the material curbside. 
c.  These fines are cumulative rather than exclusive penalties, and in no way supersede any other penalties set forth in this chapter unless otherwise noted. 
(Ord. No. 6443-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6449-08, § 1)  
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND SANITATION GENERALLY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2953-82, adopted July 12, 1982, repealed Ch. 20, Art. III, §§ 20-37—20-42, relating to accumulations of debris, litter or rubbish, derived from the following: Ord. No. 178, § 19; Ord. No. 328, §§ 1—5; Ord. No. 893, § 1, Code 1961, §§ 21-20—21-26; Ord. No. 2605-79. 
Cross reference— Accumulations of debris, litter or rubbish, § 13-180 et seq.; litter generally, § 19-20 et seq. 
State Law reference— Health, Code of Virginia, title 32.1; mosquito control districts, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-187 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Health department generally. 
(a)  There is hereby established a department of public health to consist of a director of public health and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders of the director consistent therewith. The council may also enter into contractual agreements with the state board of health for health services. 
(b)  The department of public health shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Enforcing all laws and ordinances and all lawful rules and regulations and promotion of public health and sanitation. 
(2)  The protection of the inhabitants of the city from contagious, infectious and other diseases. 
(3)  The abatement of nuisances detrimental to public health. 
(4)  The operation of city hospitals, sanatoria and laboratories and the furnishing of medical aid and care to the indigent. 
(5)  The conducting of clinics, nursing and educational services for the preservation and promotion of public health. 
(6)  The collecting of morbidity and vital statistics. 
(7)  Such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department by ordinance. 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, § 4.02(B).  
Sec. 20-2. - Appointment, qualifications and general powers of director of health. 
(a)  The director of public health shall be appointed by the city manager. Such director shall be a graduate of an approved medical school and licensed to practice medicine in the state. 
(b)  The director of public health, under the supervision of the city manager, shall be the head of the department of public health and shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. 
(c)  The director of public health shall have all the powers and duties with respect to the preservation of the public health which now are or may hereafter be conferred or imposed on such director by the laws of the state, as well as all the powers and duties conferred or imposed on such director by the ordinances of the city. The director shall have power to make rules and regulations for the preservation of the public health, not inconsistent with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city.  
Sec. 20-3. - State rules and regulations for control of communicable disease. 
(a)  The rules and regulations for the control of communicable disease in humans, as adopted by the state department of health on September 23, 1954, as amended, a copy of which is on file in the health department of the city, are the rules and regulations for the control of communicable disease in humans in the city and are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and they shall have the force and effect of law within the city. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with or in any manner resist the director of public health or any agent of the health department in the enforcement of the rules and regulations adopted by this section or in discharging any duty imposed by such rules and regulations. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate or disobey, or refuse, omit or neglect to comply with, any of the rules and regulations adopted by this section, or violate the provisions of subsection (b) above or any instruction or direction of the director of public health given pursuant to such rules and regulations, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3; Code 1961, § 21-29) 
State Law reference— Control of communicable diseases generally, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-36 et seq.  
Sec. 20-4. - Sanitary nuisances generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of public health to have made frequent inspections of all parts of the city for the detection and abatement of sanitary nuisances. It shall be the director's duty and the director is hereby vested with authority to cause to be abated any and all conditions in the city which constitute a nuisance or are detrimental to the public health and, when necessary, to institute legal proceedings therefor and for the recovery of the expense incurred by the city in abating any nuisance. 
(b)  When any person shall be in possession of any property, or have charge thereof within the city, as executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or agent, such person shall be deemed, for the purpose of this section, to be the owner of such property, and shall be bound to obey all orders of the director of public health in regard to nuisances, sanitation or other matters, so far as the same may affect such property, in the same manner, and subject to the same penalties and fines, as if such person were actually the owner of such property, and notice to such person shall be deemed to be sufficient. 
(c)  Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the director of public health that there exists upon any land or premises in the city any nuisance or other offensive or unwholesome matter, it shall be the duty of the director to serve notice on the person who placed the matter or created the nuisance, or if such person cannot be ascertained, upon the renter or lessee, and if there be more than one (1) renter or lessee, then upon all the renters or lessees, of the land or premises, or if unoccupied, upon the owner thereof, to cause such nuisance to be abated or such matter to be removed from such land or premises within the period of time designated in such notice, or the same will be done by the city at the expense of such person or of the occupant or of the owner, as the case may be. When such land or premises is unoccupied, such notice shall be served upon the owner thereof, if a resident of the city, and if not, then upon the owner's agent in charge thereof. In case no such owner or occupant or other person can be found on whom to serve the notice, the director is authorized to give notice by publication for five (5) days in one (1) of the newspapers of the city. 
(d)  Any such person creating or any such occupant, or the owner of such land or premises, if unoccupied, who shall fail to cause such abatement or the removal of such matter within the time specified in such notice, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor and each day such nuisance or matter shall be permitted to remain upon such land or premises, after the expiration of the time specified in the notice, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(e)  If such nuisance or matter remains on any such land or premises after the expiration of the time specified in the notice, the director of public health shall cause the same to be abated or removed therefrom, at the expense of the person causing the condition, or of the occupant or owner of such land or premises, as the case may be, and such expense shall be collected as fines are collected, or by suit or other legal procedure instituted by the city attorney when a statement of the expense has been furnished the attorney by the director of public health. The director of public health shall furnish the city attorney with a statement of expense in all such cases. 
(Ord. No. 257, §§ 2—4; Code 1961, §§ 21-1—21-3) 
State Law reference— General authority of city to compel abatement or removal of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115.  
Sec. 20-5. - Use of water from open wells or springs; condemnation of unsafe wells, springs, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner thereof to use or permit others to use, for drinking purposes, the water from any open well or spring existing within the corporate limits of the city, and the director of public health is empowered to condemn and close any well, spring, cistern or pond which, in the director's opinion, constitutes a menace to the health of the neighborhood in which it exists. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 9; Code 1961, § 21-8) 
Cross reference— Water supply, Ch. 42.  
Sec. 20-6. - Expectorating in public places. 
(a)  No person shall spit, expectorate or deposit any sputum, saliva, mucus or any form of saliva or sputum upon the floor, stairway or any other part of any theater, public hall, church or other public building, or upon the floor or any other partof any public conveyance in the city, or upon any sidewalk abutting on any public street, alley or lane in the city. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Printed copies of this section shall be posted conspicuously in all public places, buildings, theaters, and the like. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 5; Code 1961, § 21-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-322.  
Sec. 20-7. - Use of common drinking cups. 
(a)  The use of a common drinking cup or other vessel in any public place in the city is hereby prohibited. Instead of such common cups, there shall be provided either sanitary drinking cups, which shall not be used more than once, or bubbling fountains, so constructed that the lips of the person using them will not come in contact with any part of the fountain. The term "common," for the purpose of this section, shall be construed to mean "used by more than one (1) person." 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 257, § 6; Code 1961, § 21-5)  
Sec. 20-8. - Use of common towels. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, furnish or keep in place, in any hotel, office building, railway train, railway station, factory, workshop, public or private school, or public lavatory or washroom, any towel for the common public use, or for use by employees in such establishments, and no person in charge or control of any such place shall permit in such place the use of a common towel, intended or reasonably available for common use by more than one (1) person, without being laundered after such use. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00); provided, that no towel shall be deemed to be a common towel, or towel intended or available for common use, if it is a towel arrangement which has been approved by the state department of health. 
(Ord. No. 257, § 7; Code 1961, § 21-6)  
Secs. 20-9—20-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOSQUITO CONTROL 
 
Sec. 20-19. - Violations of article. 
Any violation of this article shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor, unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 8; Code 1961, § 21-19)  
Sec. 20-20. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, collections of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed are those contained in ditches, ponds, pools, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cellars, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets or other similar water containers. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 2; Code 1961, § 21-12)  
Sec. 20-21. - Responsibility of tenants, landlords and others under article. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the person responsible for the condition of any premises is the person using or occupying the same, or in case no person is using or occupying the premises, the person who, by law, is entitled to the immediate possession of the same, or in case the premises are used or occupied by two (2) or more tenants of a common landlord, or grounds appurtenant to a house occupied by two (2) or more tenants of a common landlord, then the landlord shall be the person responsible. Each tenant, however, is responsible for that part of the premises which he or she occupies to the exclusion of the other tenants. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above, in case the premises are occupied by a tenant under a yearly or monthly tenancy, or under a lease for not more than a year, or under any lease whereby the lessor is expressly or impliedly obligated to keep the premises in repair, and the collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed is owing to the disrepair of the building, or to any natural quality of the premises or to any condition that existed at the time when the tenant entered into possession, or to anything done on the premises by the landlord during the existence of the tenancy or lease, then, and in such case, the landlord is the person responsible. 
(c)  Any person who has caused to exist, on any premises of which he or she is not the owner, landlord, occupant or tenant, any collection of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed is responsible, as well as the owner, landlord, tenant or occupant, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 6; Code 1961, § 21-17)  
Sec. 20-22. - Right of entry to enforce article. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the director of public works or the director's authorized representative may, at all reasonable times, enter in and upon any premises within the city. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 7; Code 1961, § 21-18)  
Sec. 20-23. - Certain collections of standing or flowing water prohibited and declared to be nuisances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so as to effectually prevent such breeding. 
(b)  Collections of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed are hereby declared to be nuisances and detrimental to the public health. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 21-11, 21-13)  
Sec. 20-24. - Evidence of mosquito breeding. 
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding there. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 3; Code 1961, § 21-14)  
Sec. 20-25. - Prescribed methods of treatment of collections of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed. 
To effectually prevent the breeding of mosquitoes, collections of water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed shall be treated by one (1) or more of the following methods approved by the director of public works or such director's authorized representative: 
(1)  Screening with wire netting of at least sixteen (16) meshes to the inch each way, or any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying every seven (7) days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying or cleaning. 
(3)  Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the director of public works or the director's authorized representative. 
(4)  Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free from vegetable growth and other obstructions and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish. 
(5)  Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the director of public works or the director's authorized representative. 
(6)  Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 4; Code 1961, § 21-15; Ord. No. 7043-14)  
Sec. 20-26. - Failure to take action to prevent mosquito breeding after notice to do so; action by city. 
In case the person responsible for the condition of premises on which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed fails or refuses to take the necessary measures to prevent their breeding, within three (3) days after notice in writing has been given by the director of public works or the director's authorized representative, or within such longer time after such notice as may be specified in the notice, the person responsible shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation of this article for each day after the expiration of three (3) days from the day on which such notice is given him, or for each day after the expiration of the time specified in the notice, as the case may be, that the person responsible fails or refuses to take such measures. In case of such failure or refusal of the person responsible, the director of public works or the director's representative is authorized to take the necessary measures to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes and all necessary costs incurred for that purpose shall be a charge against the person responsible. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 5; Code 1961, § 21-16)  
Secs. 20-27—20-29. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 20-27—20-29, providing for a mosquito control district and a mosquito control commission under the supervision of the department of public works, derived from Ord. No. 2838-81, § 1, were repealed by Ord. No. 3272-84.  
Secs. 20-30—20-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - USE OR PRESENCE OF LEAD-BASED PAINT OR SUBSTANCES IN OR UPON DWELLINGS 
 
Sec. 20-40. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Child care facility. Means a structure or portion thereof in which children under six (6) years of age are present on a regular basis, including any structure used primarily as a residence, school, nursery, day care center, clinic, treatment center or other facility catering to the needs of children including any outbuildings, fencing or other structure used in conjunction therewith. 
Director. The term "director" shall mean the director of the Peninsula Health District or his authorized representative. 
Immediate lead-based paint or substance hazard. An immediate lead-based paint or substance hazard exists when the lead-based paint or substance hazard is reachable and chewable or contains damaged (cracking, chipping, loose, chewed) paint. 
Lead poisoning. Means a blood level at an elevation hazardous to health as established by the health director. 
Lead-based paint or substance. The term "lead-based paint or substance" shall include, but shall not be limited to, any pigmented liquid substance applied to surfaces by brush, roller or spray; lead-bearing putty, ceramics, plumbing sealers; and any other substances that contains 1.0 mg/cm 2 or more of lead as measured by the X-ray fluorescence analyzer, or contains more than 0.5 percent lead by weight by wet chemical analysis. 
Lead-based paint or substance hazard. A lead-based paint or substance hazard exists when the X-ray fluorescence analyzer (XRF) or wet chemical analysis reading is positive as defined in this article. 
Owner. The holder of the title in fee simple and any person, group of persons, company, association or corporation in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. The term "owner" shall also mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, lessee, or any other person, firm or corporation having control of a building, or their duly authorized agents. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as if he were the owner in fee simple. 
State Code. Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
X-ray fluorescent analyzer. A portable X-ray device used in identifying lead-based paint hazards which can measure content in painted surfaces within ±0.2 mg/cm 2 . 
(Ord. No. 5366-99)  
Sec. 20-41. - Prohibited use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or apply, or cause to be used or applied, paint or any other substance when it contains 1.0 mg/cm 2 or more of lead as measured by the X-ray fluorescence analyzer, or when it contains more than 0.5 percent lead by weight in the total nonvolatile content of liquid paint or in the dried film of paint already applied as determined by wet chemical analysis, to exterior or interior surface or dwellings, dwelling units or child care facilities, and their appurtenant outbuildings, fences and yard soil. 
(Ord. No. 5366-99)  
Sec. 20-42. - Presence of lead-based paint constituting a health hazard a violation; notice of violation; removal of paint or substances. 
(a) It shall be unlawful if, upon inspection by the director or his authorized representative, it is found by measurement using the X-ray fluorescence analyzer or by wet chemical analysis, that a lead-based paint or substance is present on any dwelling, dwelling unit, or child care center, or upon any outbuildings, or fence's appurtenant thereto or in the yard soil of the premises, such that it is in excess of the limits prescribed in section 20-41 and creates a health hazard, or where a referral is received from a state or county health official or from a hospital or other health agency, indicating that person who resides in or makes use of such premises has an elevated blood lead level, and it is found that a lead-based paint or substance is present and is creating a health hazard. 
(b) The director, or his duly authorized representatives, shall issue a written notice of the violation of this section to the owner, which notice shall include an order to eliminate the immediate hazards within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, and all hazards within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice. Additional time may be granted to remove, abate or remedy such hazard, at the discretion of the director, but in no event shall the time limited be granted to extend beyond one hundred twenty (120) days. 
(c)  The lead-based paint or substance hazards specified in the notice provided for above shall be completely removed to the base surface; the methods used for such removal shall not present a hazard to health from fumes, dust or vapors, by inhalation or absorption through the skin or mucous membranes, and shall be in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and safety standards and practices of the city and of applicable state and federal agencies. 
(Ord. No. 5366-99)  
Sec. 20-43. - Cover of surface in lieu of removing paint or substance. 
In lieu of removal of lead-based paint or substances pursuant to section 20-42, the accessible surface may be covered with a durable material approved by the director such as, but not limited to, plaster or approved interior paneling. The repainting of a surface with a nonlead-based paint shall not be deemed to be satisfactory compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 5366-99)  
Sec. 20-44. - Landlord or owner not to evict occupants to avoid order under article. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or landlord found to be in violation of section 20-41 or section 20-42 to evict, or cause to be evicted, the occupants of a dwelling unit for the purpose of avoiding an order under this article to remove or adequately cover any lead-based painted surface or substance. 
(Ord. No. 5366-99)  
Sec. 20-45. - Reports of lead poisoning by health officials, physicians, etc. 
Every public health official, physician or director of a laboratory, hospital or other treatment facility who diagnoses or suspects the existence of lead poisoning in any person shall immediately notify, in writing, the director of such fact. Such notification shall include the name and age of the individual, name of parents, if a minor, or employer, if an adult, and present address. 
(Ord. No. 5366-99)  
Sec. 20-46. - Additional violation. 
Any owner or any other person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter relating to the removal of the covering of lead-based paint which poses a hazard to the health of pregnant women and children under the age of six (6) years who occupy the premises shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court convicts pursuant to this subjection and sets a time by which such hazard must be abated, each day the hazard remains unabated after the time set for the abatement has expired shall constitute a separate violation of this Code. Upon a reasonable showing to the court by a landlord as defined in § 55-248.4 of the State Code, that such landlord is financially unable to abate the lead-based paint hazard, the court shall order any rental agreement related to the affected premises terminated effective thirty (30) days from the entry of the court order. For the purposes of the preceding sentence, termination of the rental agreement shall not be deemed noncompliance by the landlord pursuant to § 55-248.21 of the State Code. 
(Ord. No. 5366-99)  
Secs. 20-47—20-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS AND BODY PIERCING SALONS  
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-50. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of the article shall apply to all tattoo establishments and body piercing salons as herein defined. In addition to the health and sanitation requirements of the building maintenance code, tattoo establishments and body piercing salons for which building permits are issued subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be constructed in accordance with provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and this article. The purpose of this article shall be to protect the health, safety and general welfare of those persons frequenting tattoo establishments and body piercing salons establishments in the city. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to medical doctors, veterinarians, registered nurses or any other medical services personnel licensed pursuant to Title 54.1 of the state code in performance of their professional duties. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-51. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings are respectively assigned to them by this section unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context within which such words are used: 
Tattooing or body piercing tool means a needle or other tool or instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin and used to apply a tattoo, pierce the body or used in the process of either. 
Body piercing means the act of penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar, generally permanent in nature. Body piercing does not include the use of a mechanized, pre-sterilized ear-piercing system that penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear or both. 
Body piercing salon means any place in which a fee is charged for the act of penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar, generally permanent in nature. "Body piercing" does not include the use of a mechanized, presterilized ear-piercing system that penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear or both. Body piercing salon also means any place which applies or offers to apply body piercings to any person. 
Common space means all portions of the premises used in common by more than one (1) tenant or occupant and not under the exclusive control of any tenant or occupant. 
Day means a calendar day. 
Disinfection means a reduction in numbers of pathogenic organisms to a level where bacterial and viral infections will not occur. 
Health authority means the Director of the Newport News Department of Public Health or his or her designated representative. 
Month means a calendar month. 
Operator means a person who owns, controls, operates, conducts, or manages a tattoo establishment or a body piercing salon. 
Patron means any person who enters a tattoo establishment or body piercing salon for the purpose of inquiring about a tattoo or body piercing or obtaining a tattoo or body piercing. 
Permit means the tattoo establishment permit or body piercing salon permit required by this article. 
Person means, without limitation, a person, firm, partnership, corporation, company, limited liability company, partnership, or entity, or any other term that denotes a human being or legal entity. 
Premises means a tattoo establishment or body piercing salon, including any restroom, waiting room, hall, lounge, storage room or accessory buildings appurtenant to such tattoo establishment or body piercing salon and the area surrounding the tattoo establishment or body piercing salon forming an enclosure in which the tattoo establishment or body piercing salon is located or where tattooing or piercing is practiced, and which is under the control of the operator, or used by either of them directly or indirectly in connection with the application or practice of tattooing or body piercing. 
Sterilization means the process of removal of all microorganisms by subjecting them to autoclaving for at least sixty (60) minutes at a minimum pressure of fifteen (15) pounds per square inch and temperature of not less than two hundred fifty (250) degrees Fahrenheit. 
Tattoo means to place designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or other marks upon or under the skin of any person made with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent make-up or permanent jewelry, by the aid of needles or any other tool or instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
Tattoo establishment or tattoo parlor means any place in which is offered or practiced the placing of designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent make-up or permanent jewelry, by the aid of needles or any other tool or instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. 
Tattoo parlor means a tattoo establishment. 
Work station means any area where tattooing or body piercing is performed. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-52. - Enforcement, penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the health authority. 
(b)  The health authority is authorized to make and adopt rules and guidelines as are deemed necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article, which rules and guidelines shall not be in conflict with or an enlargement of any of the provisions of this article or the state code. 
(c)  Except where otherwise provided, whomever violates any provision of this article, by doing a prohibited act, or failing to perform a required act, or failing to perform permitted acts in the prescribed manner, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any second or subsequent violation shall be punished as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-53. - Right of entry purposes of inspection. 
For the purpose of enforcing the regulations of this article, the health authority is authorized to enter upon and into any tattoo establishment or body piercing salon in the city, unannounced, at any time persons are present in the establishment or salon to inspect same. No person shall hinder, interfere with or prevent any inspection authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-54. - Permit prerequisite; posting compliance with article. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a tattoo establishment or body piercing salon until such person has obtained a tattoo establishment permit or body piercing salon permit from the health authority. Prior to issuance of such a permit, the operator shall first make an application therefor on a form prescribed by the health authority, wherein the operator shall agree to conform to all federal, state and/or local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations governing tattooing and body piercing, and to permit such examinations and inspections of the tattooers and body piercers, premises, and equipment as may be deemed necessary by the health authority to insure compliance with sanitary and disease control laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  In order to defray the costs of administering this article, there is hereby imposed a permit fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a one-year licensing period from January 1 to December 31. All permits issued during the course of a calendar year shall expire December 31 of that year, regardless of the date issued. For any person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this section after the first day of January, the permit fee shall be prorated as follows: between January 1 and on or before March 31, the full permit fee shall be paid; between April 1 and on or before June 30, three-fourths (¾) of the permit fee shall be paid; between July 1 and on or before September 30, one-half (½) of the permit fee shall be paid; and after September 30 of the licensing year, one-fourth (¼) of the permit fee shall be paid. 
(c)  The permit shall not be issued until payment of the application fee, a certificate of occupancy as required by this code and the building code has been issued, and demonstration of compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable federal, state and/or local laws, including the city's zoning ordinance. 
(d)  A current permit issued by the health authority pursuant to this article shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment. The permit shall be valid for the period issued unless revoked or suspended by the health authority. The health authority may suspend or revoke such permit for a violation of any provision of this article or of any written rule of the health authority. 
(e)  If an operator owns, controls, operates, conducts, or manages more than one (1) tattoo establishment or body piercing salon, the operator shall obtain and pay for a separate permit for each such tattoo establishment or body piercing salon located in the city. 
(f)  The permit issued by the health authority shall not be transferable to another operator or from one (1) establishment or location to another. 
(g)  Prior to expansion or modification of any permitted tattoo establishment or any body piercing salon, the operator shall notify the health authority of such expansion or modification and supply the health authority with sufficient information for the health authority to determine if the expanded or modified plans comply with the requirements of this article. Upon the health authority's finding that the expansion or modification meets with the requirements of this article, the health authority shall issue an amended tattoo establishment or body piercing salon permit. 
(h)  The operator shall file and continuously maintain with the health authority, along with the permit application and any renewal thereof, the following information for each person practicing tattooing or body piercing in his/her tattoo establishment or body piercing salon: (i) name of the tattooer/body piercer, (ii) permits held by the tattooers/body piercers and (iii) the identification of the issuing authority and position or job title. The operator shall also submit proof of vaccination as required by section 20-72. The operator shall amend the list accordingly and submit it to the health authority immediately upon the addition of a tattooer or body piercer. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-55. - Unlawful to apply tattoos or body piercings unless licensed; minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the practice of tattooing or body piercing to or on any other person, regardless of whether remuneration is charged or paid in any form, unless the person applying the tattoo or body piercing has been issued a license by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Board of Barbers and Cosmetology, or its successor, as a body piercer or a tattooer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to apply or perform tattooing or body piercing on any other person who is less than eighteen (18) years of age, hereinafter referred to as a "minor," if the person applying the tattoo or body piercing knows or has reason to believe the person on which the tattoo or body piercing is to be applied is a minor. Exceptions to this prohibition include only those instances when the minor is (i) accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian during the entire process, or (ii) when the tattoo or piercing is applied by or under the supervision of a medical doctor, registered nurse or other medical services personnel licensed pursuant to Title 54.1 of the state code, in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-56. - Center for Disease Control and Prevention's guidelines; disclosure. 
It shall be unlawful to apply or perform tattooing or body piercing on any patron unless the tattooer or body piercer complies with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's guidelines for "Universal Blood and Body Fluid Precautions" and provides the patron with the following disclosure: 
(1)  Tattooing and body piercing are invasive procedures in which the skin is penetrated by a foreign object. 
(2)  If proper sterilization and antiseptic procedures are not followed by tattooers and body piercers there is a risk of transmission of bloodborne pathogens and other infections, including, but not limited to, human immunodeficiency viruses (also known as HIV), and hepatitis B or C viruses. 
(3)  Tattooing and body piercing may cause allergic reactions in persons sensitive to dyes or the metals used in ornamentation. 
(4)  Tattooing and body piercing may involve discomfort or pain for which appropriate anesthesia cannot be legally made available by the person performing the tattoo or body piercing unless such person holds the appropriate license from a Virginia health regulatory board. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-57. - Correction of violations, hearing, suspension or revocation of permits. 
In addition to the criminal penalties provided by this article, the health authority may institute the following administrative procedures relative to an operator's permit: 
(a)  (1)  Suspension of permits: Whenever a violation of this article is found, the health authority may issue a written notice and order to the permit holder citing such conditions, specifying the corrective action to be taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be taken. If deemed necessary, such order shall state that the permit is immediately suspended, and all operations at the tattoo establishment or body piercing salon shall be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such a notice and order is issued shall comply immediately therewith. If such person, within ten (10) days of receiving an order requiring corrective action or an order of suspension, makes a written petition to the health authority for a hearing, a hearing on the matter shall be afforded as soon as reasonably possible. If after hearing on the matter, the health authority determines that the facts still warrant a suspension of the permit, he may do so for a period not to exceed six (6) months. 
(2)  Reinstatement of suspended permits: Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time following the period of suspension, make application for reinstatement of the permit. Within ten (10) days following receipt of a written application for reinstatement, including a sworn statement signed by such person that in his or her opinion the facts or conditions causing suspension of the permit have been corrected, the health authority shall make a reinspection of the premises. If the health authority determines that the applicant has remedied the violations and is in compliance with the requirements of this article, the permit shall be reinstated. 
(b)  (1)  Revocation of permits: For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article, or for interference with the health authority in the performance of his or her duties, the permit may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the health authority. Prior to such action, the health authority shall provide notification to the permit holder in writing. Unless a written application for a hearing is filed with the health authority by the permit holder within ten (10) days from receipt of notice, the permit will be revoked. A permit may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto. 
(2)  Reinstatement of revoked permits: Any person whose permit has been revoked may, after the expiration of one (1) year from the date of the revocation notification or the date of the notification of a decision following a revocation hearing, whichever is later, make application for a new permit. If the health authority determines that the requirements of this article have been satisfied and the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this article, a new permit shall be issued. 
(c)  Representation at hearings: For hearings before the health authority, all parties shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and to present witnesses, evidence and testimony. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-58. - Responsibilities of operators, tattooers and body piercers generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator to obtain the necessary licenses and permits, and be responsible for the observance of the requirements of this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each individual tattooer or body piercer to observe of the requirements of this article insofar as they refer to his/her conduct and the care of his/her tattooing or body piercing tools. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-59. - Plans and specifications for tattoo establishments and body piercing salons. 
In addition to building code and other code requirements, whenever a tattoo establishment or a body piercing salon is constructed, newly established in an existing building or structure, moved to another location, or remodeled, properly prepared plans and specifications for the construction, remodeling and layout shall also be submitted to the health authority for review and approval before construction, or remodeling is begun or a certificate of occupancy is issued therefor. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, construction materials of work areas, details as to entrances, partitions, windows, openings, ventilation, vestibules, toilets, water supplies and such other details as may be required by the health authority to determine that the plans and specifications comply with the requirements of this article and promote a healthful and sanitary environment for the practice of tattooing or body piercing. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-60. - Prohibited representations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to state or imply in any advertisement or publication, whether written or oral, that the person is endorsed or approved by the city or any of its departments, or by any of its officers or employees in their official capacities, or is conducted in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Secs. 20-61—20-69. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SANITARY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 20-70. - Tattoo establishments and body piercing salons, equipment and supplies. 
(a)  Every tattoo establishment and every body piercing salon shall have the following facilities and equipment: 
(1)  Toilet facilities located within the same building as the tattoo establishment and the body piercing salon, accessible without going outside such building or through space exclusively controlled by another, and which may be reached by a line of travel not exceeding two hundred (200) feet. Handwashing facilities with running hot and cold water must be easily accessible to the users of the toilet facilities. An adequate supply of toilet tissue, single-use towels and soap must be provided in the toilet facility. 
(2)  At least one (1) service sink or mop basin with running hot and cold water for custodial purposes and not for patron use as a hand sink; provided, that where a part of the building is used as other than a tattoo establishment and body piercing salon, it shall be sufficient if the plumbing fixture for custodial purposes is provided within the building if it can be reached by a line of travel not exceeding one hundred (100) feet without going outside of the building and is not used in connection with any dwelling unit. 
(3)  A least one (1) sink located within the tattoo establishment or the body piercing salon with running hot and cold water for the cleaning of instruments used in the practice of tattooing and body piercing. 
(4)  An adequate supply of EPA registered, hospital grade disinfectant. 
(5)  Closed storage cabinets for tools, instruments, needles, supplies, clean linens and other materials used in the practice of tattooing or body piercing. 
(6)  Suitable covered containers for all waste materials. 
(7)  Suitable storage space for custodial equipment and supplies. 
(8)  Suitable dispensers for all single-service articles, pigment preparations, and other materials such as cotton balls or swabs. 
(9)  Sufficient number of tools, instruments or sets of tools or instruments to allow continuation of patron service while previously used tools and instruments or sets of same are being cleaned and sterilized. 
(10)  Within six (6) feet of each work station, a hand sink with a soap and towel dispenser shall be provided for handwashing purposes only. The hand sink shall be equipped with foot, knee or elbow operated faucets and supplied with running hot and cold water. 
(b)  The minimum equipment for each work station when in use shall be as follows: 
(1)  A chair. Chairs with head rests shall have a changeable covering. 
(2)  A table. The table shall have a smooth, nonabsorbent, easily cleanable surface and shall be in good repair. 
(3)  One (1) closed cabinet for the storage of clean tattoo or body piercing tools. 
(4)  Suitable dispensers for all single-service articles. 
(5)  Every work station shall have at least one (1) covered waste receptacle; however, where there are multiple work stations, there shall be at least one (1) covered receptacle for every two (2) stations. 
(6)  A non-combustible drape or curtain and dividing partitions of suitable material, construction and dimension to afford privacy to the patron within the work station. The dividing partitions shall comply with the dimensions identified in section 20-71(e). 
(c)  Smoking, eating, drinking, or applying makeup is prohibited in the room in which tattooing or body piercing is performed. 
(d)  Animals shall at all times be prohibited in a tattoo establishment or a body piercing salon, except for service animals used to assist patrons with disabilities or used by public officials in their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-71. - Sanitation and design requirements for buildings. 
(a)  The windows, floors, walls and ceilings of all tattoo establishments and all body piercing salons, together with all the appurtenances therein, and all tattooing tools and body piercing tools, appliances and other equipment used in connection therewith, shall be kept at all times in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair. All tools, instruments, and needles shall be sterilized and in good repair prior to each utilization in the practice of tattooing and body piercing. The premises shall be free of rodents and vermin. Walls and floors must be constructed of material that is smooth, nonabsorbent and washable. Floor mats, if used, must be smooth, nonabsorbent and washable. 
(b)  Floor and walls of toilet rooms shall be of nonabsorbent materials. All toilet room doors shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(c)  All rooms used for the purpose of tattooing or body piercing shall be provided with artificial illumination uniformly distributed so as to give an illumination intensity of seventy-five (75) footcandles or more at the working surfaces at each work station. Such illumination shall be reasonably free from glare. 
(d)  All rooms used for the purpose of tattooing or body piercing shall be provided with openable window area equal to at least five (5) percent of the floor area for ventilation purposes, except that a mechanical or positive ventilation system may be substituted for, or supplement, ventilation using openable windows. When such mechanical ventilation systems are used, rooms shall be provided with facilities for at least five (5) air changes per hour. The atmosphere in each tattoo establishment and each body piercing salon shall be maintained reasonably free of odors, noxious substances or any objectionable air contaminant. 
(e)  For the purpose of providing adequate ventilation where a tattoo establishment or a body piercing salon is divided into semi-enclosed work stations, the following shall apply: At least one (1) side of the work station shall be completely open with privacy maintained by a non-combustible opaque drape or curtain. When ventilation using openable windows is provided and there are partitions on at least two (2) sides of the work station, there shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches of open space between the top of the dividing partition and the ceiling, and a minimum of four (4) inches of open space between the bottom of the dividing partition and the floor. No such dividing partition shall be higher than six (6) feet from the floor. When mechanical ventilation is provided, the side dividing partitions may be flush with the floor, but shall not be higher than six (6) feet from the floor. Combustible drapes or curtains shall not be used for work stations. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-72. - Health and personal hygiene for tattooers or body piercers. 
(a)  Every tattooer or body piercer in a tattoo establishment or a body piercing salon shall cleanse his or her hands thoroughly with soap and hot running water immediately before serving each patron. Every tattooer or body piercer must wear on his or her hands single use examination gloves while engaged in the practice of tattooing or body piercing. 
(b)  Employees, or any person, engaged in the practice of tattooing or body piercing upon a patron shall at all times be dressed in clean attire. 
(c)  No person affected with open, weeping, bleeding, or infected lesions, wounds, or other conditions of the skin or scalp, or affected with an acute respiratory infection, shall work in any area of a tattoo establishment or a body piercing salon in any capacity in which there is a likelihood they could contaminate tattooing or body piercing equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or pathogenic organisms. 
(d)  No person shall engage in the practice of tattooing or body piercing if a licensed health care practitioner has advised the person that the continued practice of tattooing or body piercing poses a communicable disease risk to patrons. 
(e)  All persons employed in a tattoo establishment or a body piercing salon shall furnish such information, permit such physical examination and submit such laboratory specimens as the health authority may require for the purpose of determining freedom from communicable disease. 
(f)  No operator shall employ a tattooer or body piercer (including the operator if he or she works as a tattooer or body piercer) until the tattooer or body piercer has been vaccinated against Hepatitis B. Prior to beginning work, the tattooer or body piercer shall present a copy of his/her medical record or other documentation from a licensed health care provider or immunization clinic, which demonstrates that he/she has been immunized against Hepatitis B. Alternatively, the tattooer or body piercer may present documentation that a blood test demonstrates that he/she is protected against Hepatitis B. The operator and tattooer or body piercer shall retain this document, or a copy of it, and present it to the health authority when requested and when requesting or renewing a permit. A person may begin work as a tattooer or a body piercer when he or she has received a single dose of Hepatitis B vaccine. However, such person shall continue to work as a tattooer or a body piercer only if he or she completes the immunization series for Hepatitis B within one (1) year of the date of the initial vaccination dose. If a tattooer or a body piercer does not complete the series within this time period, he or she shall cease work as tattooer or body piercer at the end of that period. A tattooer or a body piercer may resume the practice of tattooing or body piercing only upon presentation of documentation indicating that he or she has completed the vaccine series. The operator shall be responsible for ensuring and documenting that all tattooers and all body piercers in their employment are in compliance with this Hepatitis B vaccination requirement. The operator shall further be responsible for notifying the health authority in writing of any tattooer or body piercer who fails to complete the Hepatitis B vaccination series. 
(g)  All tattooers or body piercers shall complete annual blood borne pathogen training approved by the health authority. Each tattooer or body piercer shall present a certificate documenting that he or she has received this training upon request by the health authority. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-73. - Sanitation of tattooing and body piercing tools. 
(a)  Every tattoo establishment or body piercing salon shall be provided with, and shall use, proper facilities for cleansing, disinfection and fungicidal treatment of all tattooing or body piercing tools, instruments and implements employed in the practice of tattooing or body piercing. Sinks or containers for disinfecting and fungicidal solutions shall be of such size as will accommodate all tattooing or body piercing tools to be disinfected or treated against pathogens or fungi. A sufficient amount of approved disinfectant solution must be provided at all times for the proper disinfection of all tattooing or body piercing tools. Specimens may be taken from time to time by the health authority to determine whether or not the tattooing or body piercing tools so used in such establishments are free from pathogenic organisms and fungi, and whether or not the disinfecting and fungicidal materials are suitable for their purposes. 
(b)  No tattoo establishment or body piercing salon shall use for the service of any patron any tattoo or body piercing tool that has not been thoroughly cleansed, disinfected, and sterilized. 
(c)  Sinks or containers used for disinfecting purposes shall be thoroughly cleaned daily and refilled with fresh solution. 
(d)  Closed cabinets and covered containers used for the storage of supplies, clean linen and disinfected tools shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. Cleaning shall include washing with a disinfecting solution. 
(e)  When not in use, tattoo and body piercing tools not used to pierce the skin shall not be left exposed on the work table, but shall be cleaned, disinfected and placed in a clean closed drawer or cabinet. 
(f)  Sterilization of tattoo or body piercing tools and other instruments and implements used in the practice of tattooing and body piercing and which touch a patron's skin shall be accomplished by exposure to live steam for at least sixty (60) minutes at a minimum pressure of fifteen (15) pounds per square inch and temperatures of not less than two hundred fifty (250) degrees Fahrenheit in an autoclave, which has been inspected by and approved for use by the health authority. The operator shall be responsible for maintaining a log which indicates that the autoclave has been checked during each cycle and meets the aforementioned standards. Each load of tattooing or body piercing tools shall contain an indicator that demonstrates that the proper temperature has been achieved. A biological indicator shall be used at least every two (2) weeks to demonstrate that the procedure used is capable of killing bacteria. The health authority is authorized to approve alternative sterilization methods. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-74. - Sanitation of disposable articles. 
(a)  All disposable articles must be stored in a sanitary manner and dispensed properly, in accordance with OSHA guidelines, where applicable. All disposable material must be discarded immediately after use. 
(b)  Only disposable, single use needles shall be used to apply tattoos or create body piercings. The needles shall be maintained in a sterile condition until used. These instruments shall not be reused, and shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable state laws. The operator shall maintain invoices or other records sufficient to demonstrate that they have obtained and used an appropriate number of instruments to apply the tattoos or body piercings listed in a logbook maintained on the premises. These invoices and other documentation shall be presented to the health authority upon request. 
(c)  All hazardous waste, body fluids, and medical waste of any kind shall be disposed of in accordance with the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality(s Regulated Medical Waste Regulations, 9 VAC 20-120-10 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. After use, all single-use needles, razors, and other such sharp instruments shall be immediately disposed of in accordance with the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality's Regulated Medical Waste Regulations, 9 VAC 20-120-10 et seq., as may be amended from time to time. Documentation of compliance shall be presented to the health authority upon request. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-75. - Hygienic practices of tattooing and body piercing. 
(a)  All tools and other implements or materials used in the service of a patron shall be removed from the work table immediately after the service of each patron and shall be placed in the proper container. Jars containing jellies, inks, dyes, or pigments shall be kept covered at all times when not in use. 
(b)  All work surfaces shall be cleaned and disinfected promptly after each patron's tattoo application or body piercing has been completed. Other surfaces or materials with blood thereon shall also be cleaned and disinfected, or disposed of as infectious waste. 
(c)  All inks, dyes and pigments shall be specifically manufactured for performing tattoo procedures and shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, such cups and their contents shall be discarded. 
(d)  The shared use of shaving mugs and shaving brushes is prohibited. 
(e)  The making of shaving lather in a wash basin or lavatory for use in serving a patron is prohibited. 
(f)  Alum or any material used to stop the flow of blood must be used only in the form of a powder or liquid and applied only with sterile gauze or sterile absorbent cotton. 
(g)  Where jellies are provided in jars or similar containers, they shall be removed with a clean spatula for the use of each patron. Unused portions of jellies remaining from service on a patron shall be discarded. Pigments, once removed from an original container, shall be discarded after use. 
(h)  Soap in cake or stick form shall not be used, except where packaged for individual use and used for one (1) person only. 
(i)  Tattooers and body piercers shall not remove, or attempt to remove, a wart or a mole or treat any skin or other disease of a patron. 
(j)  Preparations may not be used unless they are used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-76. - Tattoo establishment and body piercing salon patron. 
(a)  Tattooers and body piercers shall not apply tattoos or perform piercings on any patron when the skin of the patron within six (6) inches of the application area is inflamed, contains pus or is erupted unless such patron submits a certificate from a duly licensed physician stating that such inflammation or eruption is not communicable. Tattoos and body piercings shall not be applied or carried out within six (6) inches of an infected area of skin or skin covered with a rash. 
(b)  Tattooers and body piercers shall not knowingly serve any patron who is afflicted with a fungus infection, nor shall they serve any patron whom they suspect of being infected with any communicable disease. 
(c)  Records shall be kept of the name and address of each patron, description of the tattoo or body piercing, phone number of the patron, if available, and date of service. The records shall be retained for one (1) year from date of service. 
(d)  The tattooers or body piercers shall provide each patron who receives a tattoo or a piercing with a written instruction sheet detailing the procedures the patron should use for after care of the tattoo or piercing, indications that the tattoo or body piercing may have become infected, a recommendation to have a possibly infected tattoo or body piercing evaluated by a physician or other licensed health care professional, and instructions to report the possibly infected tattoo or body piercing to the health authority. 
(e)  Operators, tattooers and body piercers shall refuse service to any person whom the tattooers, body piercer or operator knows, or has reason to believe, is intoxicated or under the influence of legal, illegal or controlled drugs or substances, such that an informed decision by such person as to receiving the tattoo or body piercing can not be made. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Sec. 20-77. - Separability clause. 
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article in its entirety or any part thereof other than that so declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 6332-07)  
Chapter 21 - HOTELS AND SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1, adopted March 12, 2013, effective on and after January 1, 2014, amended chapter 21 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 21 pertained to similar subject matter. History notes have been retained for sections with the same subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation 
Cross reference— Use of common towels in hotels prohibited, § 20-8; tax on transients obtaining board and lodging at hotels and similar establishments, § 40-135 et seq. 
State Law reference— Defrauding hotels, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-188; hotels generally, Code of Virginia, title 35.1; liens of innkeepers, Code of Virginia, § 43-31 et seq.; rights of persons with disabilities, Code of Virginia, § 51.5-44. 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Generally. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall have the meanings set out in this section, except in cases where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  Lodging unit means living and sleeping quarters for a person or persons. 
(c)  Minor means an individual less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(d)  Person means any individual, firm, owner, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, and unincorporated association governmental body, municipal corporation, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, agent, occupant or other legal entity. 
(e)  Hotel and motel means any building, structure or place containing ten (10) or more lodging units wherein transient guests are lodged for compensation on a daily or weekly basis. 
(f)  Transient guest is one who stays for less than thirty (30) days at a hotel or motel. 
(g)  Law enforcement personnel means any law enforcement officer, fire marshal or any of his assistants, fire inspector, or sworn special conservator of the peace employed by the city or health department. 
(h)  Records mean the name and home address of each guest or person renting or occupying a room, including adults and minors, kept electronically or in a book/register inscribed with ink or indelible pencil. 
(i)  Extended stay hotel means a building or group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations for ten (10) or more persons not members of a resident family and used for temporary occupancy of transients and containing cooking facilities in more than fifty (50) percent of the individual units, and from which ingress and egress is made to rooms from individual outside entrances. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-2. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. In addition to any penalties imposed for each violation, a judge hearing the case shall order the person responsible for the violation to correct the violation, and each day's default in such correction shall constitute a violation of and a separate offense under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-3. - Enforcement. 
Any law enforcement officer, fire marshal or any of his assistants, fire inspector, sworn special conservator of the peace or any person functioning as a Newport News Public School Attendance Officer is authorized and shall have authority to enforce all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-4. - Severability. 
Severability is intended throughout and within all the provisions of this chapter. If any provision (including inter alia any word, phrase, sentence, paragraph, subsection or section), or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is judicially declared to be invalid, the remaining provisions and their application shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-5. - Access to premises and records. 
Any law enforcement personnel shall have access at all reasonable times to all hotels and motels, except the private room of a guest, unless so authorized by other laws or ordinances, for the purpose of investigating any complaint or enforcing any law, ordinance or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-6. - Numbering of rooms or units. 
Each unit in any hotel or motel shall be numbered in a plain, conspicuous manner. Such numbers shall be at least three (3) inches high and shall be placed at eye level on the outside of the outer door of each lodging unit, and no two (2) lodging units shall bear the same number. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-7. - Guest register generally. 
(a)  Every person operating any hotel or motel in the city shall at all times keep and maintain therein a record, either electronic or in a book/register inscribed with ink or indelible pencil, the name and valid address of each adult guest or person renting or occupying a room, except in cases where a third-party registered travel agent or legal entity is responsible for making travel arrangements for individuals or parties. The name of all minors shall be recorded and kept if such persons are not accompanied by an adult. Such book or register shall be signed by the person renting a room, or someone of his authority, and the proprietor of such hotel or motel, or his agent, shall thereupon electronically enter or write, with ink or indelible pencil, opposite such name so registered, the number of the room assigned to and occupied by such guest, together with the time when such room is rented. Until all of the aforesaid entries have been made electronically or in such book or register, no guest shall be permitted to occupy privately any room in such hotel or motel. 
(b)  When the occupant of a room so rented shall quit and surrender the same, it shall be the duty of the proprietor of such hotel or motel, or his agent, to enter the time thereof electronically or in such book or register opposite the name of such occupant. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 5; Code 1961, § 25-23; Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-8. - False registration by guests. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, or cause to be written, or knowingly permit to be written, in any electronic record, book or register in any hotel or motel in the city, any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person registered therein. Photo identification or other acceptable form of identification may be required to be produced at registration. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 26; Code 1961, § 25-24; Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-9. - Prolonged registration or occupancy of rooms by minors. 
It shall be the duty of every person in charge or operating or owning a hotel or motel within the city to keep a list, either in the register or separately, of the names and ages of all minors, together with the names and addresses of their parents or guardians, who shall register or rent or occupy any room or series of rooms therein for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days. If such list is kept separately from the register, it shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times pursuant to section 21-5 of this chapter. This section shall not apply to active duty military members who are in the area on valid work order. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-10. - Giving false information to obtain lodging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain lodging for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years in any hotel or motel by giving to the proprietor, owner, manager, agent, person in charge or keeper thereof false information as to such person's age, or false information as to the relationship to such person of any alleged parent or guardian, or any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who shall obtain lodging in any such establishment by giving any such false information. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-11. - Renting or occupying room for illegal or unlawful purposes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or occupy any room in any hotel or motel in this city for illegal or unlawful purposes, or for the proprietor, manager or other person in charge of any such hotel or motel to rent, assign to or permit any person to occupy any such room, with knowledge that they intend to use it for illegal or unlawful purposes. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-12. - Letting same room more than once in one night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to let any room in any hotel or motel in the city more than once between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the next day, except in the case of a pre-scheduled and documented business contract. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 28; Code 1961, § 25-26; Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-13. - Length of stay in hotel or motel. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put up or stay at any hotel or motel for longer than thirty (30) days in a sixty (60) day period. It shall also be unlawful for the owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of a hotel or motel to permit or allow a person to stay at a hotel or motel in excess of thirty (30) days in a sixty (60) day period. This section shall not apply to extended stay hotels, as defined in this ordinance. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a stay in excess of thirty (30) days in a sixty (60) day period may occur in the following situations: 
(1)  Where there is a written contract or document between a hotel or motel and a business, corporation, firm, individual or governmental agency to house employees or individuals on valid work orders; 
(2)  Where there is a written contract between the hotel or motel and a governmental, charitable or insurance agency to house families in crisis who are receiving temporary housing assistance from said governmental, charitable or insurance agency; or 
(3)  Where the zoning administrator authorizes in writing, after consultation with the human services director, a stay for an additional period of up to ninety (90) days to prevent residents from becoming homeless. In the event that the department of human services is unable to identify appropriate alternative housing within ninety (90) days, this ninety (90) day period may be extended in writing by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  The written contract, document, and authorization noted above shall be kept on file and must be available for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-14. - Receipt for payment received. 
A receipt showing payment received shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-15. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, conduct or operate any hotel or motel in the city, unless he has a valid permit to do so issued pursuant to this chapter. The permit shall be posted in a public place in a conspicuous location for public viewing. Proof of an applicable permit shall be the burden of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-16. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this chapter shall make application therefore to the city manager or his designee on a form to be prescribed by him, which application shall include a fee payment of one hundred dollars ($100.00); state the name, if any, of the hotel or motel; the location where the same will be maintained, conducted or operated; the names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership thereof, if privately owned; the names and addresses of all officers and trustees thereof, if owned by a non-incorporated association; the names and addresses of the officers thereof, if owned by a corporation; and the name and address of the person who will be in actual charge of the operation thereof. The application will also identify how many rooms are available for rent. The application shall also contain the name and address of any other hotel or motel operated, owned or managed by he permittee even if not in the City of Newport News. The application shall also contain any additional information the city manager or his designee requires. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-17. - Inspection. 
Upon receipt of a complete application for a permit, the city manager or his designee shall investigate the facts stated therein and shall cause an inspection to be done of the premises by the departments of codes compliance, fire, police and health to ensure there are no outstanding violations of any applicable local, state or federal law on the property. The police department shall also provide information on calls for service and a record of arrests at the location for the year preceding the application or renewal. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-18. - Permit issuance, expiration and renewal. 
If the city manager or his designee determines from the investigation that the hotel or motel is in compliance with the permit conditions, a permit shall be granted. Otherwise, the permit shall be denied. If issued, the permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance. The permit may be renewed annually after an investigation and inspection as required for new permits pursuant to section 21-17. If a hotel or motel has passed the annual investigation and inspection and had no violations of federal, state or local laws or regulations for two (2) consecutive years, upon permit renewal, a permit which is valid for a three (3) year period will be issued. If a hotel or motel is found to have violated any federal, state or local laws or regulations during the three (3) year period of the permit, the permit may be revoked by the city and the hotel or motel will again be required to apply for permit renewal on an annual basis. Prior to denying or refusing to renew a permit, the city manager or his designee shall first give the applicant at least fifteen (15) days' written notice and an opportunity to be heard. Notice may be sent by mail to the applicant at the address given on the permit application, which shall constitute sufficient service thereof. The city manager or his designee shall pursue criminal charges; seek an injunction, or both, against any person or persons operating a hotel or motel without a currently valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-19. - Permit conditions. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following general conditions, and any additional specific conditions noted by the city manager or his designee in the permit: 
(1)  The motel or hotel shall be operated and maintained in conformance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the zoning code, building code, fire code, health code, business license code, criminal code, and the provisions of this ordinance; 
(2)  The person or persons in charge of operating or owning the motel or hotel shall promptly notify the Newport News Police Department of any actual or suspected criminal violations, including, but not limited to, violations of the compulsory school attendance laws; contributing to the delinquency of a minor; trespassing; prostitution; and controlled substance possession, manufacturing or distribution; and 
(3)  The city shall have the right to inspect the premises to ensure compliance with all permit conditions. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-20. - Transfer. 
A permit issued under this chapter shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-21. - Suspension and revocation of permits. 
The city manager or his designee may at any time, after giving at least fifteen (15) days' written notice and an opportunity to be heard by the permittee, revoke or suspend for such length of time as he may deem proper any permit applied for or issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation by the permittee in the procurement of such permit; 
(2)  Any violation of any applicable local, state or federal law; 
(3)  Failure to comply with the general or specific terms of the permit; and 
(4)  Any illegal or unlawful acts caused, allowed or permitted to be done by the permittee or his designated manager or operating agent. 
The notice referred to above may be sent by mail to such permittee at the address given by him on the application for the permit, which shall constitute sufficient service thereof. The city manager or his designee shall pursue criminal charges; seek an injunction, or both, against any person or persons operating a hotel or motel without a currently valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Sec. 21-22. - Does not authorize operation of establishment not conforming to laws and ordinances. 
No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the operation of any hotel or motel that does not conform to the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 6950-13, § 1)  
Chapter 21.1 - HUMAN RIGHTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; fair housing, Ch. 15.1. 
State Law reference— Virginia Human Rights Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3900 et seq.; Fair Employment Contracting Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4200 et seq.; human rights ordinances and commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-965. 
 
Sec. 21.1-1. - Declaration of policy. 
It is the policy of the City of Newport News: 
(1)  To safeguard all individuals within the city from unlawful discrimination because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, marital status or disability, in places of public accommodation, including educational institutions and in real estate transactions; in employment; to preserve the public safety, health and general welfare; and to further the interests, rights and privileges of individuals within the city; and 
(2)  To protect citizens of the city against unfounded charges of unlawful discrimination. 
(Ord. No. 3857-89)  
Sec. 21.1-2. - Unlawful discriminatory practice defined. 
Conduct which violates any city ordinance prohibiting discrimination, any Virginia statute or regulation governing discrimination, Title 7 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as amended, or the Fair Labor Standards Act on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, marital status or disability shall be an "unlawful discriminatory practice" for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3857-89)  
Sec. 21.1-3. - Construction of chapter; other programs to aid persons with disabilities, minors and the elderly. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed liberally for the accomplishment of the policies herein. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal, supersede or expand upon any of the provisions of any other city, state or federal law relating to discrimination because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, marital status or disability. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or alter any program, service, facility, school, or privilege which is afforded, oriented or restricted to a person because of disability or age from continuing to habilitate, rehabilitate, or accommodate that person. 
In addition, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any governmental program, law or activity differentiating between persons on the basis of age over the age of eighteen (18) years: 
(1)  Where such differentiation is reasonably necessary to normal operation or such activity is based upon reasonable factors other than age; or 
(2)  Where such program, law or activity constitutes a legitimate exercise of powers of the city for the general health, safety and welfare of its citizens. 
Complaints filed with the commission alleging unlawful discriminatory practice under a Virginia statute which is enforced by a Virginia agency shall be referred to such agency. The commission may investigate complaints alleging an unlawful discriminatory practice under a federal statute and attempt to resolve same through conciliation. Unsolved complaints shall thereafter be referred to the federal agency with jurisdiction over the complaint. Upon such referral, the commission shall have no further jurisdiction over the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 3857-89)  
Sec. 21.1-4. - Newport News Human Rights Commission. 
The Newport News Community Relations Committee hereafter shall be known as the Newport News Human Rights Commission. 
(Ord. No. 3857-89)  
Sec. 21.1-5. - Composition, appointment and terms of commissioners. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of eleven (11) members appointed by the city council as follows: 
(1)  Nine (9) adult members shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years each. 
(2)  Two (2) youth members shall be appointed for terms of one (1) year each. The council shall solicit input from the department of human services for these appointments. Youth members shall not have voting rights. 
(b)  As a transition measure, the adult members serving at the time of amendment to this section shall continue to serve for the terms and subject to the limitations then applicable to them. Two (2) youth members shall be appointed to terms beginning September 1, 2004, and ending August 31, 2005. 
(c)  Appointed members shall hold office during their respective terms and until their successors are appointed. Vacancies shall be filled by council appointments for the unexpired portion of a term. 
(d)  Membership on the commission shall be broadly representative of the community so as to protect the interests stated in this chapter. 
(e)  Any member of the commission may be removed by the council if it finds that removal is in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3857-89; Ord. No. 6062-04; Ord. No. 6683-10, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6683-10 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 21.1-6. - Powers and duties of the commission. 
(a)  In addition to the other powers and duties prescribed by this Code, the commission has the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary from among its members. Youth members shall not serve as officers. 
(2)  To adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its business. 
(3)  To receive, investigate, seek to conciliate, refer to another agency, hold hearings, and make findings and recommendations upon complaints alleging unlawful discriminatory practices. 
(4)  To make studies and to make the results thereof available to the public. 
(5)  To render at least annually a comprehensive written report to the city council. 
(6)  To inquire into incidents which may constitute unlawful acts of discrimination or unfounded charges of unlawful discrimination under city, state or federal law. 
(7)  To hold hearings on any matter within its authority. 
(b)  The commission shall have no power to issue subpoenas, award damages, or grant injunctive relief. 
(c)  No power may be exercised by the commission unless agreed to by a majority of the nine (9) adult members of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 3857-89; Ord. No. 6062-04)  
Sec. 21.1-7. - Procedure for issuance of subpoena duces tecum. 
Whenever the commission has reasonable cause to believe that any person has engaged in or is engaging in any unlawful discriminatory practice, and the commission, after a good faith effort to obtain the data and information necessary to determine whether a violation has occurred, has been unable to obtain such information, it may request the city attorney to apply to the judge of the circuit court of the jurisdiction in which the respondent resides or is doing business for a subpoena duces tecum against any person refusing to produce such data and information. The judge of the court, upon good cause shown, may cause the subpoena to be issued. Any person failing to comply with such subpoena shall be subject to punishment for contempt by the court issuing the subpoena. For purposes of this section "person" includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association, legal representative, mutual company, joint stock company, trust, unincorporated organization, employee, employment agency, labor organization, joint labor-management committee, or an agent thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3857-89)  
Sec. 21.1-8. - Filing with commission deemed filing with other state agencies. 
Filing of a written complaint with the commission shall be deemed filing with any state agency for the purpose of complying with any time limitation on the filing of a complaint, provided the time limit for filing with the other agency has not expired. The time limit for filing with other agencies will be tolled while the commission is either investigating the complaint or making a decision to refer it. Complaints under this chapter shall be filed with the commission within one hundred eighty (180) days of the alleged discriminatory event. 
(Ord. No. 3857-89)  
Sec. 21.1-9. - Confidentiality. 
It shall be unlawful for any officer, employee or member of the commission to make public, prior to a public hearing pursuant to section 21.1-6, investigative notes and other correspondence and information furnished to the commission in confidence with respect to an investigation or conciliation process involving an alleged unlawful discriminatory practice; however, nothing in this section shall prohibit the distribution of information taken from inactive reports in a form which does not reveal the identity of the parties involved or other persons supplying information. A violation of this section shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3857-89)  
Chapter 22 - LIBRARY SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to provide, or aid in the support of, public libraries, § 2.02(F). 
Cross reference— Membership of library system employees in employee retirement fund, § 31-30. 
State Law reference— Libraries generally, Code of Virginia, title 42.1; local libraries, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-33 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term "board," "library board" or "board of trustees" shall mean the Newport News Public Library Board of Trustees created by Article II of this chapter.  
Sec. 22-2. - Single system created. 
From and after the fifteenth day of September, 1968, all public libraries in the city shall be, and the same are hereby, designated as constituting one (1) single system to be known as the Newport News Public Library System. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 1; Ord. No. 1157, § 1; Ord. No. 1162, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-117; Ord. No. 2296)  
Sec. 22-3. - Appointment and qualifications of director of libraries and information services and assistants. 
The city manager shall appoint a director of libraries and information services; and such director may appoint assistants, subject to the approval of the city manager. The qualifications necessary for the position of director or approved assistant shall be determined by the city manager, with the advice and recommendations of the library board. 
(Ord. No. 2296; Ord. No. 2778-81; Ord. No. 3228-84, § 1)  
Sec. 22-4. - General powers and duties of director. 
The director shall be the head of the public library department. The director, under the supervision of the city manager, shall have general management and control of the Newport News Public Library System. He shall also have the power to make rules and regulations, consistent with the ordinances of the city, for the conduct of the system's business. 
(Ord. No. 2296; Ord. No. 2788-81; Ord. No. 3228-84)  
Sec. 22-5. - Library budget estimate. 
The director, with the assistance of the library board, shall submit an annual budget estimate to the city manager or his designee covering the period corresponding to the fiscal year of the city. Such budget estimate shall be in detail and itemized in a form prescribed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 11; Code 1961, § 2-127; Ord. No. 2296; Ord. No. 2788-81; Ord. No. 3228-84, § 1)  
Sec. 22-6. - Director's annual report. 
At the end of each fiscal year, the director, with the assistance of the library board, shall submit to the city manager or his designee an annual report reflecting the financial condition of the Newport News Public Library System, including the various sums of money received and the sources thereof and the amount of funds expended during the year, and for what purposes. The annual report shall also reflect the number of books and periodicals on hand, the number added during the year, the number of books lost or missing, the number of books loaned during the year, the number of fixtures added and any other physical improvements, together with the cost thereof, and such other statistical and informational data as may be requested by the city manager or deemed necessary or desirable by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 15; Code 1961, § 2-131; Ord. No. 2296; Ord. No. 2788-81; Ord. No. 3228-84, § 1)  
Sec. 22-7. - Perpetuation and maintenance of Martha Woodroof Hiden Virginiana Collection. 
The Newport News Public Library System shall perpetuate and maintain the Martha Woodroof Hiden Virginiana Collection transferred to the city by the Newport News Public Library, Incorporated, together with future additions thereto, as a reference collection not subject to separation, circulation or withdrawal. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 16; Code 1961, § 2-132; Ord. No. 2296)  
Sec. 22-8. - The Newport News Public Library System Foundation. 
The city manager is authorized to accept, on behalf of the city and for use by and in support of the Newport News Public Library System, any and all funds donated by the Newport News Public Library System Foundation. 
(Ord. No. 7601-19, § 1)  
Secs. 22-9—22-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD 
 
Sec. 22-18. - Created. 
There is hereby created a board to be known as the Newport News Public Library Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 2; Code 1961, § 2-118; Ord. No. 2296) 
Charter reference— Authority to create library board, § 17.03.  
Sec. 22-19. - Composition; qualifications, appointment and terms of members. 
(a)  The library board shall consist of fourteen (14) members who must be residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the city council as follows: 
(1)  Twelve (12) adult members shall be appointed. 
(2)  Two (2) youth members shall be appointed. The council shall solicit the input of the department of human services for these appointments. Youth members shall not have voting rights. 
In addition, the superintendent of schools or his designee shall be a member of the board with full voting rights. 
(b)  Terms of office shall be as follows: 
(1)  The twelve (12) adult members shall serve for terms of four (4) years. As a transition measure, the adult members serving on the board at the time of adoption of this section shall continue to serve for the terms and [be] subject to the limitations then applicable to them. 
(2)  The two (2) youth members shall serve for terms of one (1) year. 
(c)  Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for unexpired terms. 
(d)  Youth members shall not serve as officers. 
(Ord. No. 1153, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 1162, § 4; Ord. No. 1173, § 4; Code 1961, §§ 2-119—2-121; Ord. No. 2296; Ord. No. 6063-04; Ord. No. 6683-10, § 3; Ord. No. 6918-12, § 1) 
Charter reference— Library board to consist of such number of members or trustees as council may provide, § 17.03; authority of council to provide for staggered terms for members of boards and commissions, § 17.02; vacancies on library board to be filled for unexpired portion of term, § 17.03; limitation on length of service by members or trustees of boards or commissions, § 17.02.  
Sec. 22-20. - Members to serve without compensation. 
Members of the library board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 3; Code 1961, § 2-119; Ord. No. 2296)  
Sec. 22-21. - Election and term of chairman. 
The library board shall elect one (1) of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one (1) year or until reelected or until his successor is elected. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 9; Code 1961, § 2-125; Ord. No. 2296)  
Sec. 22-22. - Secretary. 
The director of libraries and information services shall be the ex officio secretary of the library board and shall be responsible to the board for the custody and safekeeping of the records and proceedings of the board and such other records as may be committed to the custody of the director by the board. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 13; Code 1961, § 2-129; Ord. No. 2296; Ord. No. 2788-81; Ord. No. 3228-84, § 1)  
Sec. 22-23. - Meetings; adoption of rules. 
The library board shall meet annually or at the call of the chairman and it shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business. 
(Ord. No. 1153, § 9; Code 1961, § 2-125; Ord. No. 2296)  
Sec. 22-24. - Functions. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) below, the library board shall advise and make recommendations concerning policy and administration to the director of libraries or the city manager on any library matter. 
(b)  Decisions and recommendations of the board shall be made by vote of the adult members of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2296; Ord. No. 2788-81; Ord. No. 6063-04) 
Editor's note— Bracketed material added by the editor to bring this section into conformance with changes in other sections of this chapter effected by Ord. No. 3228-84, § 1. 
Charter reference— Library board to have such authority, powers and duties as may be provided by ordinance, § 17.03.  
Secs. 22-25—22-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LAW LIBRARY 
 
Sec. 22-35. - Established; location. 
There is hereby established at 2501 Washington Avenue, in the space provided by the city, a public law library. 
(Ord. No. 551, § 1; Ord. No. 635, § 1; Code 1961, § 21B-1; Ord. No. 4049-90; Ord. No. 6636-09)  
Sec. 22-36. - Part of city library system; supervision; duties of director of libraries and information services. 
The public law library shall be a part of the general library system of the city. The supervision and control of such law library shall be under the director of libraries and information services, who shall be charged with the duty of employing the necessary personnel and operating the law library in the same manner as all other branch libraries are operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 551, § 2; Ord. No. 635, § 2; Code 1961, § 21B-2; Ord. No. 2788-81; Ord. No. 3228-84, § 1)  
Sec. 22-37. - Purchases generally; advisory committee for purchases. 
Law books, legal reports and other legal material for the law library shall be purchased through regular municipal channels. In view of the technical subjects covered and in order to make the library of maximum value to all concerned, there is hereby created an advisory committee of three (3) members, who shall be attorneys at law, to be appointed by the city council for terms of two (2) years, which committee shall have the duty to select the books and material to be purchased by the library director. 
(Ord. No. 551, § 3; Ord. No. 635, § 3; Code 1961, § 21B-3) 
Cross reference— Purchases generally, § 2-552 et seq.  
Sec. 22-38. - Appropriation prerequisite to purchases. 
No purchase or contract to purchase books or other material for the law library shall be made unless funds are appropriated for the same by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 551, § 4; Ord. No. 635, § 4; Code 1961, § 21B-4)  
Sec. 22-39. - Availability of books, reports and papers to public and removal of same from library. 
The books, reports and papers in the law library shall be made available, without cost, for use, research and reference by any citizen of the city. Such books, reports and papers shall not be removed from the library, except that books, reports and papers may be removed from the library upon written order of any of the judges of the courts of record or judges of courts not of record for temporary use by any of such judges, or by written request of the chief magistrate, any magistrate, the city attorney, any assistant city attorney, the commonwealth's attorney, any assistant commonwealth's attorney or the library director, for temporary use. After such authorized temporary use such books, reports, and papers shall be returned to the law library by the judge or other person who ordered or requested them or by any person ordered or directed by such judge. 
(Ord. No. 551, § 5; Ord. No. 635, § 5; Ord. No. 875, § 1; Code 1961, § 21B-5; Ord. No. 7569-19, § 1)  
Sec. 22-40. - Mutilating, defacing, etc., books, documents or papers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface, destroy or, except as authorized by section 22-39, remove any book, document or paper belonging to the public law library. A violation of this provision shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor and, in addition thereto, the offender shall be required to pay to the city the damage to the books, papers or documents thus mutilated, defaced, destroyed or removed. 
(Ord. No. 551, § 6; Ord. No. 635, § 6; Code 1961, § 21B-6)  
Sec. 22-41. - Assessment of additional court costs to support library. 
(a)  The city does hereby impose and provide an assessment, as part of the costs incident to each civil action filed in the courts located within the boundaries of the city, in the sum of four dollars ($4.00). 
(b)  Assessments provided for in this section shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed and remitted to the city treasurer and held by the treasurer, subject to disbursements by the city council for the acquisition of law books and law periodicals for the establishment, use and maintenance of a law library, which shall be open for the use of the public. Such disbursements may include compensation to be paid to librarians and other necessary staff for the maintenance of such library and acquisition of suitable quarters for such library. 
(c)  The assessments provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law but shall not apply to any action in which the state or any political subdivision thereof or the federal government is a party and in which the costs are assessed against the state, political subdivision thereof or federal government. 
(Ord. No. 486, §§ 1—3; Code 1961, §§ 12-3.1—12-3.3; Ord. No. 2769-81; Ord. No. 3928-89, § 1; Ord. No. 5388-00; Ord. No. 6041-04) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Chapter 23 - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4969-96, amended Ch. 23 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 23 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Authority of city relative to licenses and license taxes, § 2.02(A). 
Cross reference— Dog licenses, § 6-33 et seq.; vehicle licenses, § 26-48 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 40. 
State Law reference— Licenses generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3700 et seq.; city taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3509 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Adoption of state law and guidelines. 
(a)  As to all questions in regard to the duty and conduct of officers of the city in collecting and enforcing the taxes and fees imposed by this chapter, and in regard to questions of construction and for definitions of terms used in this chapter, and the rules and regulations applicable to putting the same in operation, reference is hereby made to Title 58.1, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, for the assessment, levy and collection of taxes and fees for the current year, or to so much thereof as is applicable to this chapter and is not inconsistent with it and the general ordinances of the city, and for fixing the powers, rights, duties and obligations of city officers and other persons affected by this chapter, the provisions of such Title 58.1, so far as applicable, are hereby adopted, without being specifically quoted herein. 
(b)  For purposes of determining the proper category within which to place a business, profession or occupation in determining tax and fee liability, the Newport News Commissioner of the Revenue shall utilize the current edition of the "Guidelines for Business, Professional and Occupational License (BPOL) Tax" as published by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Taxation, or successor document. Those businesses, professions and occupations for which no guidance is available shall be taxed or charged a fee in accordance with section 23-36 of this chapter, unless otherwise provided in state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-2. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the United States of America, Commonwealth of Virginia, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the council of the City of Newport News, Virginia, whether or not codified in the Code of the City of Newport News, Virginia, to the extent of any conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes and fees imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings, and upon the persons engaged in business within the City of Newport News, Virginia from the date of the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter unless otherwise required by the context: 
Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One (1) or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one (1) or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one (1) of the other includable corporations. As used in this subdivision, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes total gross receipts and total gross income. 
(2)  Two (2) or more corporations if five (5) or fewer persons are individuals, estates or trusts owning stock possessing: 
a.  At least eighty (80) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least eighty (80) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation, and 
b.  More than fifty (50) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than fifty (50) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one (1) or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation, is a non-stock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subdivision shall refer to the non-stock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
(3)  Two (2) or more entities if such entities satisfy the requirements in subdivision (1) or (2) of this definition as if they were corporations and the ownership interests therein were stock. 
Acted responsibly means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
Assessment means a determination as to the fee and rate of tax, the measure of which the fee and tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of fee and tax, including additional or omitted fees and taxes, that are due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the commissioner or a proper self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by the commissioner when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the commissioner, or an employee of the commissioner, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax and fee are paid. A return filed or tax and fee paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax and fee, as the case may be. 
Assessor or assessing official means the Newport News Commissioner of the Revenue or an employee or authorized agent of the Newport News Commissioner of the Revenue. 
Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. The base year for contractors subject to Section 58.1-3715 shall be the year in which they are required to obtain a business license in the city. Upon prior written approval from the commissioner of the revenue, a business may use the same fiscal year as for federal income tax purposes, however, written approval is not required when the fiscal year is the calendar year. 
Broker means an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
Business means a person who engages in a course of dealing in the city which requires the time, attention and labor of such person for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one (1) business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. The term "business" shall include the terms "profession," "trade," "calling" and other like terms. 
Carnival means an aggregation of shows, amusements, concessions, eating places and riding devices, or any of them, operated together at one (1) general location, moving from place to place, whether or not the same are owned and actually operated by separate persons. 
Circus means a public entertainment consisting of any combination of performances by acrobats, clowns and trained animals. 
City means the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
Commissioner means the Commissioner of the Revenue of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
Commodity means staples such as wool, cotton, etc. which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
Contractor shall have the meaning prescribed in Section 58.1-3714(D) of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
Dealer means any person, other than a motor vehicle dealer, engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for thirty (30) consecutive days or more, excluding weekends, holidays or other "closed" days. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
Direct seller means any person who: 
(1)  Engages in the trade or business of selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products primarily in private residences and maintains no public location for the conduct of such business; and 
(2)  Receives remuneration for such activities, with substantially all of such remuneration being directly related to sales or other sales-oriented services, rather than to the number of hours worked; and 
(3)  Performs such activities pursuant to a contract between such person and the person for whom the activities are performed and such contract provides that such person will not be treated as an employee with respect to such activities for federal tax purposes. 
Entity means a business organization, other than a sole proprietorship, that is a corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, or limited liability partnership duly organized under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or another state. 
Events beyond the taxpayer's control means and includes, but is not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the commissioner, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
Events beyond the taxpayer's control shall not include inability to pay for whatever reason. 
Field representative means a special conservator of the peace employed by the commissioner. 
Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities, or other investments. 
Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Chapter 37 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. 
Itinerant merchant means every person who does not have a definite place of business but who shall engage in, do or transact any temporary or transient business in the city and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, shall hire, lease, use or occupy any land, building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public room, or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, motels, lodging houses, private houses or other private establishments, or in any street, alley or other public place, for a period of less than one (1) year. 
License means a document that may be issued by the commissioner to a taxpayer who, or which, is doing, or has done, business in the city. 
Licensee means the person to whom the commissioner has issued a license. 
License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
Motor vehicle dealer means a "motor vehicle dealer" or "dealer" as defined in Section 46.2-1500 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Peddler means any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter the same, or actually sell or barter the same, shall be deemed to be a peddler. All persons who do not keep a regular place of business, whether it be a house or vacant lot or elsewhere, open at all times in regular business hours, and at the same place, who shall offer for sale goods, wares and merchandise, shall also be deemed peddlers under this section. All persons who keep a regular place of business open at all times in regular business hours and at the same place, who shall, elsewhere than at such regular place of business, personally or through their agents, offer for sale or sell and, at the time of such offering for sale, deliver goods, wares or merchandise, shall also be deemed peddlers. 
Person means an individual, or a form of organization for the conduct of business including, but not limited to, companies, corporations, partnerships, and limited liability companies and partnerships. 
Personal services means rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this chapter, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this chapter unless exempted from local license tax by Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Section 58.1-3701. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
Purchases means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. A wholesale merchant may elect to report the total gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine the cost of manufacture or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
Real estate services means providing a service with respect to the purchase, sale, lease, rental, or appraisal of real property. 
Retailer or retail merchant means any person who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser. 
Security shall have the same meaning as in the Virginia Securities Act (Section 13.1-501 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended), or in similar laws of the United States of America regulating the sale of securities. 
Services means labor purchased. 
Show and sale means an exhibition, consisting of a group of persons or merchants, to stimulate the sale of goods, wares and merchandise. 
Tax commissioner means the Tax Commissioner of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Taxpayer means any person who has been assessed with a license tax or fee, or who is determined by the commissioner to be engaged in business, or who has paid a license tax or fee, or who is subject to the payment of a license tax or fee. 
Treasurer means the treasurer of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
Wholesaler or wholesale merchant means any person who sells goods, wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial and industrial users which, because of the quantity, price and other terms, indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5298-99; Ord. No. 5516-00)  
Sec. 23-4. - Levy and purpose of taxes and fees. 
For each and every year, beginning January 1 of each year and ending December 31 following, until changed or amended, there is hereby imposed and levied, and there shall be collected for each such years, until changed or amended, an annual business license tax or fee as set forth in this chapter on persons engaged in business in the city. The revenue from such license taxes and fees shall be used by the city for the purpose of providing funds for the operation of the city's government, the payment of the city's debt and for other municipal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-5. - License requirement; exemptions. 
(a)  Every person engaging in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business") in the city as defined in this chapter, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license on forms provided by the commissioner for each such business if: (i) the person has a definite place of business in the city; (ii) there is no definite place of business anywhere and the person resides in the city; or (iii) there is no definite place of business in the city but the person operates amusement machines or is classified as an itinerant merchant, peddler, carnival, circus, contractor subject to § 58.1-3715 [of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended], or public service corporation. 
(b)  A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business and for each business operated in the city. 
(c)  A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one (1) license for all such businesses if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business is licensable at the location and has satisfied all requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of the city; (ii) all of the businesses are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses at the highest rate; (iii) if the business is a motor vehicle dealer who does not elect to use the alternate method as provided in article II hereof; and (iv) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of all businesses and their total gross receipts. 
(d)  Each person subject to a license tax or fee shall apply for a license prior to beginning business if he was not licensed in the city on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the commissioner. Any person who engages in a business without obtaining a required license or after being refused a license, shall not be relieved of the tax and fee imposed by this chapter. 
(e)  All license taxes and fees imposed by this chapter, except as otherwise herein provided, shall be deemed to be due on the date of the beginning of the business, employment or profession. Any person prosecuting any licensable business, employment or profession on or before the 1st day of January of any year shall file the appropriate license application with the commissioner on or before the 1st day of March of such year and the license tax and fee shall be paid to the commissioner or the treasurer as designated collectors of the city's business license taxes and fees on or before the 1st day of March, except as otherwise herein provided. The commissioner is also a designated collector of business license taxes and fees, and such sums collected by the commissioner shall be deposited with the treasurer no later than the next business day after receipt by the commissioner. Any person beginning a business after the 1st day of January of any year, unless otherwise stated, shall first file with the commissioner an application for a license covering such business and the license tax and fee shall be paid to the commissioner or treasurer, as designated collectors of the city's business license taxes and fees, on or before the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of beginning business or the 1st day of March of the license year, whichever is later. 
(f)  The commissioner may grant an extension of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, in which to file an application for a license, for good cause. The extension may be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax or fee, subject to adjustment to the correct tax or fee at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(g)  In addition to any fines imposed for a violation of this chapter, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax or fee due shall be imposed upon either the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax or fee by the appropriate due date, but not both unless the commissioner determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional taxes and fees made by the assessing official, if the application was made in good faith, and the understatement of the total gross receipts, tax or fee was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax or fee. Except as otherwise provided, if any assessment of a tax or fee by the assessing official is not paid within thirty (30) days, a ten-percent late payment penalty shall be imposed. If the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer, the penalty shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the assessing official. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
(h)  In addition to the penalty imposed by this section for the late payment of a tax or fee, interest shall be charged at the rate of eight (8) percent of the delinquent tax or fee due from the due date until the date paid, without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax or fee by the commissioner is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded by the city, together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax or fee paid under this chapter from the date of payment or due date of the refunded taxes, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under § 58.1-3916 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid by the city on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than thirty (30) days from: (i) the day of the payment that created the refund; or (ii) the due date of the tax and fee, whichever is later. 
(i)  The following business activities shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter to obtain a business license: 
(1)  Exemptions as provided in the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended; 
(2)  Providing cable television services as enunciated in a cable television franchise granted by the city; 
(3)  Design, development or other creation of computer software for lease, sale or license. 
(4)  Providing services as a marriage commissioner appointed by the Newport News Circuit Court to celebrate the rites of marriage under §§ 20-23 and 20-25 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or authorized to solemnize a marriage under § 20-26 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, provided such marriage commissioner's total annual gross receipts do not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(5)  Local transportation services operating as nonprofit organizations that primarily serve disabled and senior citizens. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5089-98; Ord. No. 6701-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6701-10 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 23-6. - General requirement, violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business in the city for which a license tax or fee is imposed by this chapter without first, (i) making application for and obtaining such license, (ii) paying such taxes and fees as required by the provisions of this chapter, and (iii) obtaining any required decal or other evidence that the license has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-7. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax or fee imposed by this chapter is measured by total gross receipts, the total gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those total gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within the city. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the total gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business within the city from which such activities are initiated, directed or controlled, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The situs of total gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one (1) or more definite places of business as follows: 
(1)  The total gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(2)  The total gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax or fee measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to a license tax or fee in two (2) or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and total gross receipts subject to license tax or fee in each locality. 
(3)  The total gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The total gross receipts from the performance of services by a business shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one (1) definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business total gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule, and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an apportionment agreement, the total gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to the city in the event the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax or fee on the total gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)  Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which total gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the total gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. In the event the commissioner is notified or becomes aware that its method of attributing total gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one (1) or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes or fees on more than one hundred (100) percent of its total gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. If an agreement cannot be reached, either the assessor or taxpayer may seek an advisory opinion from the department of taxation pursuant to Section 58.1-3701; notice of the request shall be given to the other party. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 58.1-3993, when a taxpayer has demonstrated to a court that two (2) or more political subdivisions of Virginia have assessed taxes or fees on total gross receipts that may create a double assessment within the meaning of Section 58.1-3986, the court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as may be necessary to ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments even though it is not then known which assessment is correct and which is erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-8. - Limitations and extensions. 
(a)  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, both the commissioner of the revenue and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)  Notwithstanding § 58.1-3903 of the Code of Virginia, the commissioner of the revenue shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six (6) preceding license years. 
(c)  The period for collecting any license tax under this chapter shall not expire prior to the period specified in State Code § 58.1-3940, two (2) years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subdivision of the ordinance, two (2) years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to section 23-8.1(b) or (d) of this chapter, or two (2) years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to section 40-227 or a similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5816-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6253-06, § 1)  
Sec. 23-8.1. - Administrative appeals and rulings to commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of sections 23-8.1, 23-8.2 and 23-8.3: 
Amount in dispute when used with respect to taxes due or assessed, means the amount specifically identified in the administrative appeal or application for judicial review as disputed by the party filing such appeal or application. 
Appealable event means an increase in the assessment of the license tax payable by a taxpayer, the denial of a refund, or the assessment of a license tax where none previously was assessed, arising out of the commissioner of the revenue's (i) examination of records, financial statements, books of account, or other information for the purpose of determining the correctness of an assessment; (ii) determination regarding the rate or classification applicable to the licensable business; (iii) assessment of a license tax when no return has been filed by the taxpayer; or (iv) denial of an application for correction of erroneous assessment attendant to the filing of an amended application for license. 
Frivolous means a finding, based on specific facts, that the party asserting the appeal is unlikely to prevail upon the merits because the appeal is (i) not well grounded in fact; (ii) not warranted by existing law or a good faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law; (iii) interposed for an improper purpose, such as to harass, to cause unnecessary delay in the payment of tax or a refund, or to create needless cost from the litigation; or (iv) otherwise frivolous. 
Jeopardize by delay means a finding, based on specific facts, that a taxpayer desires to (i) depart quickly from the locality; (ii) remove his property therefrom; (iii) conceal himself or his property; or (iv) do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
Tax commissioner means the Chief Executive Officer of the Virginia Department of Taxation, or his delegate. 
(b)  Filing and contents of administrative appeal. Any person assessed with a license tax under this chapter as a result of an appealable event as defined in this section may file an administrative appeal of the assessment within one (1) year from the last day of the tax year for which such assessment is made, or within one (1) year from the date of the appealable event, whichever is later, with the commissioner of the revenue. The appeal must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, the tax periods covered by the challenged assessments, the amount in dispute, the remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The commissioner of the revenue may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, an audit or further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the appeal. The assessment placed at issue in the appeal shall be deemed prima facie correct. The commissioner of the revenue shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a written determination to the taxpayer setting forth the facts and arguments in support of his decision. 
(c)  Notice of right of appeal and procedures. Every assessment made by a commissioner of the revenue pursuant to an appealable event shall include or be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to file an administrative appeal and the specific procedures to be followed (the name and address to which the appeal should be directed), an explanation of the required content of the appeal, and the deadline for filing the appeal. 
(d)  Suspension of collection activity during appeal. Provided a timely and complete administrative appeal is filed, collection activity with respect to the amount in dispute shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the commissioner of the revenue, unless the treasurer or other official responsible for the collection of such tax (i) determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay as defined in this section; (ii) is advised by the commissioner of the revenue that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time; or (iii) is advised by the commissioner of the revenue that the appeal is frivolous as defined in this section. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 23-5(h), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. 
(e)  Procedure in event of nondecision. Any taxpayer whose administrative appeal to the commissioner of the revenue pursuant to the provisions of this section has been pending for more than one (1) year without the issuance of a final determination may, upon not less than thirty (30) days' written notice to the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official, elect to treat the appeal as denied and appeal the assessment to the tax commissioner in accordance with the provisions of section 23-8.2. The tax commissioner shall not consider an appeal filed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection if he finds that the absence of a final determination on the part of the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official was caused by the willful failure or refusal of the taxpayer to provide information requested and reasonably needed by the commissioner or other assessing official to make his determination. 
(Ord. No. 6253-06, § 1)  
Sec. 23-8.2. - Administrative appeal to the tax commissioner. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a license tax under this chapter as a result of a determination, upon an administrative appeal to the commissioner of the revenue pursuant to section 23-8.1, that is adverse to the position asserted by the taxpayer in such appeal may appeal such assessment to the tax commissioner within ninety (90) days of the date of the determination by the commissioner of the revenue. The appeal shall be in such form as the tax commissioner may prescribe and the taxpayer shall serve a copy of the appeal upon the commissioner of the revenue. The tax commissioner shall permit the commissioner of the revenue to participate in the proceedings, and shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within ninety (90) days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the commissioner of the revenue are notified that a longer period will be required. The appeal shall proceed in the same manner as an application pursuant to § 58.1-1821, of the Code of Virginia, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to § 58.1-1822 of the State Code. 
(b)  Suspension of collection activity during appeal. On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under subdivision (a) of this section, collection activity with respect to the amount in dispute shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the treasurer or other official responsible for the collection of such tax (i) determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay as defined in this section; (ii) is advised by the commissioner of the revenue, or the tax commissioner, that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time; or (iii) is advised by the commissioner of the revenue that the appeal is frivolous as defined in this section. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 23-5(h), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The requirement that collection activity be suspended shall cease unless an appeal pursuant to this section is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of notice of intent to file such appeal. 
(c)  Implementation of determination of tax commissioner. Promptly upon receipt of the final determination of the tax commissioner with respect to an appeal pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section, the commissioner of the revenue shall take those steps necessary to calculate the amount of tax owed by or refund due to the taxpayer consistent with the tax commissioner's determination and shall provide that information to the taxpayer and to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. 
(1)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of tax due, the commissioner of the revenue shall certify the amount to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a bill to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued and penalty, if any is authorized by this chapter, within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(2)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of refund due, the commissioner of the revenue shall certify the amount to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a payment to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued pursuant to this section, within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(3)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of tax due, or otherwise requires the commissioner of the revenue to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in an obligation to pay a tax that has not previously been paid in full, the commissioner of the revenue shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within sixty (60) days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The commissioner of the revenue shall certify the new assessment to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a bill to the taxpayer for the amount due, together with interest accrued and penalty, if any is authorized by this chapter, within thirty (30) days of the date of the new assessment. 
(4)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of refund due, or otherwise requires the commissioner of the revenue to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in an obligation on the part of the locality to make a refund of taxes previously paid, the commissioner of the revenue shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within sixty (60) days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The commissioner of the revenue shall certify the new assessment to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a refund to the taxpayer for the amount of tax due, together with interest accrued, within thirty (30) days of the date of the new assessment. 
(Ord. No. 6253-06, § 1)  
Sec. 23-8.3. - Judicial review of determination of tax commissioner. 
(a)  Judicial review. Following the issuance of a final determination of the tax commissioner pursuant to section 23-8.2, the taxpayer or commissioner of the revenue may apply to the circuit court for judicial review of the determination, or any part thereof, pursuant to section 40-227. In any such proceeding for judicial review of a determination of the tax commissioner, the burden shall be on the party challenging the determination of the tax commissioner, or any part thereof, to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous with respect to the part challenged. Neither the tax commissioner nor the Virginia Department of Taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(b)  Suspension of payment of disputed amount of tax due upon taxpayer's notice of intent to initiate judicial review. 
(1)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an application for judicial review, pursuant to section 40-227, of a determination of the tax commissioner pursuant to section 23-8.2, and upon payment of the amount of the tax that is not in dispute together with any penalty and interest then due with respect to such undisputed portion of the tax, the treasurer or other collection official shall further suspend collection activity while the court retains jurisdiction unless the court, upon appropriate motion after notice and an opportunity to be heard, determines that (i) the taxpayer's application for judicial review is frivolous, as defined in this section; (ii) collection would be jeopardized by delay, as defined in this section; or (iii) suspension of collection would cause substantial economic hardship to the city. For purposes of determining whether substantial economic hardship to the city would arise from a suspension of collection activity, the court shall consider the cumulative effect of then-pending appeals filed within the locality by different taxpayers that allege common claims or theories of relief. 
(2)  Upon a determination that the appeal is frivolous, that collection may be jeopardized by delay, or that suspension of collection would result in substantial economic hardship to the locality, the court may require the taxpayer to pay the amount in dispute or a portion thereof, or to provide surety for payment of the amount in dispute in a form acceptable to the court. 
(3)  No suspension of collection activity shall be required if the application for judicial review fails to identify with particularity the amount in dispute. 
(4)  The requirement that collection activity be suspended shall cease unless an application for judicial review pursuant to section 40-227 is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of the notice of intent to file such application. 
(5)  The suspension of collection activity authorized by this subdivision shall not be applicable to any appeal of a license tax under the chapter that is initiated by the direct filing of an action pursuant to section 40-227, without prior exhaustion of the appeals provided by sections 23-8.1 and 23-8.2. 
(c)  Suspension of payment of disputed amount of refund due upon city's notice of intent to initiate judicial review. 
(1)  Payment of any refund determined to be due pursuant to the determination of the tax commissioner of an appeal pursuant to section 23-8.2 shall be suspended if the locality assessing the tax serves upon the taxpayer, within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, a notice of intent to file an application for judicial review of the tax commissioner's determination pursuant to section 40-227 and pays the amount of the refund not in dispute, including tax and accrued interest. Payment of such refund shall remain suspended while the court retains jurisdiction unless the court, upon appropriate motion after notice and an opportunity to be heard, determines that the locality's application for judicial review is frivolous, as defined in this chapter. 
(2)  No suspension of refund activity shall be permitted if the locality's application for judicial review fails to identify with particularity the amount in dispute. 
(3)  The suspension of the obligation to make a refund shall cease unless an application for judicial review pursuant to section 40-227 is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of the notice of intent to file such application. 
(d)  Accrual of interest on unpaid amount of tax. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 23-5(h) of this chapter, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. 
(Ord. No. 6253-06, § 1)  
Sec. 23-8.4. - Rulings. 
Any taxpayer or authorized representative of a taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of a local license tax to a specific situation from the commissioner of the revenue. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all facts relevant to the situation placed at issue and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or the guidelines issued by the Department of Taxation upon which the ruling was based or (ii) the commissioner of the revenue notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Ord. No. 6253-06, § 1)  
Sec. 23-9. - Record keeping and examinations. 
(a)  Every person who is licensable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax or fee paid for any license year and to enable the assessor to ascertain the correct amount of tax or fee that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information, including, but not limited to, invoices and records of all purchases including from whom made, records of all sales, records of all commissions, total gross receipts, and contracts or orders accepted, from whom received and with whom made, and reports of such purchases, sales, commissions, receipts, contracts or orders accepted, shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt or purchase is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the city. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct an examination in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside the city, certified copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(b)  Any person who shall fail or refuse to keep or open for inspection the records required by this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-10. - Exclusions and deductions from total gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax and fee purposes shall include only those receipts derived from the exercise of a licensable privilege to engage in a business. 
(b)  The following items shall be excluded from total gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the Commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales or excise tax, or any federal or state excise tax on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of the business). 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the licensee to its customer. 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's total gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution for which no consideration is received, and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(9)  In computing license taxes and fees on an advertising agency business, the total gross receipts of the business shall exclude amounts paid by the licensee for any client or customer to the media for advertising. The advertising agency business will be permitted such exclusion, provided said amount is not converted to such agency's use in any way. 
(c)  The following shall be deducted from total gross receipts or total gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that is sold to a United States federal or state government agency provided that such property was purchased within two (2) years of the sale to said agency by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government agency. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government agency in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(2)  Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-11. - General penalties for failing to file a return. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to file a return as required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Willful failure to file a return as required by any provision of this chapter shall constitute (i) a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of the tax or fee assessed is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, or (ii) a Class 1 misdemeanor if the tax or fee assessed is more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or is indeterminable. All other violations of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor unless otherwise specified. 
(c)  Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-12. - General duties of commissioner. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner to require all parties prosecuting any business for which a license is required by this chapter to procure such license and pay the applicable tax or fee. Should there be any license tax or fee not paid when due, it shall be the commissioner's duty to either report all such delinquents to the treasurer for collection, or as a designated collector of taxes and fees, attempt collection of some or all of the delinquent taxes and fees utilizing the authority granted collectors of taxes and fees in this chapter and the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  The commissioner shall report monthly to the Newport News Director of Finance the aggregate amount of license taxes and fees assessed during the month and collected or placed in the hands of the treasurer for collection. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner to keep a record of all applications filed under this chapter for a period of three (3) years or until audited, whichever is longer. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 6008-04)  
Sec. 23-13. - Propounding interrogatories to applicant. 
In addition to all other lawful means of ascertaining the amount of total gross receipts or total gross purchases used in the calculation of any license tax or fee owed by any person, the commissioner or his agent may propound interrogatories to such person, which shall be answered under oath, and may also use such other evidence as the commissioner may procure. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-14. - False statements in application, affidavit or return. 
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the payment of a license tax or fee under this chapter to make any false statement to the commissioner or in any application, affidavit or return required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-15. - Estimates to determine tax for beginners, etc. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining the license tax or fee to be paid by any person beginning a new business whose license tax or fee is based on total gross receipts, total gross sales, total gross purchases, total gross commissions, total gross contracts or orders, the prospective licensee shall, in good faith, estimate the basis for measuring the license tax or fee between the date of issuance of the license and the 31st day of December of that license year. 
(b)  The license tax or fee of every person who was licensed or licensable by the city for only a part of the next preceding license year shall be computed for the then current license year on the basis of an estimate of the amount of total gross receipts, total gross sales or total gross purchases which the licensee will make throughout the then current license year. 
(c)  Every underestimate under this section shall be subject to correction by the commissioner, whose duty it shall be to assess such licensee with such additional taxes or fees as may be found to be due after the close of the license year on the basis of total gross receipts, total gross sales, total gross purchases, total gross commissions or total gross contracts or orders. In case of an overestimate, the commissioner shall order a refund in the amount of the overpaid tax or fee, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(d)  Except for those businesses provided for in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, the license tax or fee to be paid by any person whose license tax or fee is based on total gross receipts, total gross sales, total gross purchases, total gross commissions, total gross contracts or orders, shall be computed for the then current license year using the base year. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-16. - Assessment of tax and issuance of license generally. 
The commissioner shall assess each applicant for a license or other person of whom a license is required by this chapter with the license tax or fee required by this chapter, and, upon receipt of payment of the required tax or fee, shall issue a license, signed by the commissioner, to prosecute the business, employment, profession or thing to be done therein named, which license shall not be valid or effective unless and until the tax or fee required shall be paid to the treasurer or commissioner, as collectors of city taxes, fees and levies, and such payment shall be shown on the license. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-17. - Certificates prerequisite to issuance or validity. 
If a business is one for which a license can be granted only on the certificate of a court or other officer, then such license shall not be issued or valid or effective until such certificate shall have been obtained and provided to the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 6172-05)  
Sec. 23-18. - Assessment of additional tax. 
(a)  Whenever a field representative or any other officer of the city charged in any manner with the duty of assessing or collecting license taxes and fees shall ascertain that any person should be assessed with any additional license taxes or fees, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, it shall be such officer's duty to report the same, together with the amount thereof, to the commissioner, who shall thereupon assess such person with the additional tax or fee and shall transmit a copy thereof to the treasurer. 
(b)  In the event the additional license tax or fee assessed under this section is not paid within thirty (30) days after such assessment, the commissioner or treasurer shall proceed to collect the same in the same manner and with the same authority as all other taxes and fees are collected, together with penalty and interest as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-19. - Proration required when person, firm or corporation permanently ceases to engage in business, trade, profession or calling. 
In the event that a person or entity ceases to engage in a business within the city during a year for which a license tax has already been paid, the taxpayer shall be entitled upon application to a refund for that portion of the license tax already paid, prorated on a monthly basis so as to ensure that the licensed privilege is taxed only for that fraction of the year during which it is exercised within the city. The city shall remit refunds and shall offset against such refund any amount of past-due taxes or fees owed by the same taxpayer to the city. This refund shall not be applicable to those licenses based upon a minimum fee or minimum tax. In no event shall a refund be made if it would result in a payment to the city of an amount less than that which would have been paid if the tax or fee had been calculated at the lowest tax or fee applicable to that business activity. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-20. - Display of license. 
Every person required to pay a license tax or fee, or obtain any decal under the provisions of this chapter, shall keep the license or decal in a convenient place, and whenever required to do so, shall exhibit the same to any member of the police department, when such member is detailed or authorized to inspect such license, or to a field representative. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-21. - Examination and audit of licensee's records. 
(a)  Should a field representative or any other officer of the city charged in any manner with the duty of assessing or collecting license taxes and fees have reason to believe, in any case, that the amount of actual or probable purchases or sales, or actual or probable commissions, or the total gross or net receipts from any business, or any other matters that may be pertinent to the assessment of such license tax or fee, have been incorrectly reported or returned, such field representative or officer shall make a report thereof to the commissioner. Upon receipt of such report, or upon the commissioner's own motion, the commissioner is authorized and empowered to summon such person before him and require the production in the commissioner's office of any and all such person's records, books and papers likely to throw any light upon the matter under investigation. The commissioner is also authorized and empowered to make or cause to be made such other and further investigations, examinations and audits of the records, books and papers of such person as the commissioner shall deem proper, in order to accurately determine the proper return to be made by such person. 
(b)  If, after an investigation, examination or audit pursuant to this section, it shall appear that purchases, sales, commissions, receipts or other matters pertinent to the assessment have been incorrectly reported or returned, the commissioner shall assess such person with the proper city license tax or fee together with penalty and interest as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who shall fail to appear before the commissioner and produce such records, books and papers, when duly summoned, or who shall refuse to permit the commissioner to make or cause to be made such other and further investigation and audit of such books and papers, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-22. - Authority of commissioner to require information concerning subcontracts. 
The commissioner, in performing the duties of such office, shall have authority to require any person doing business in the city to furnish a list of the names and addresses of each subcontractor to whom any part of a contract is sublet, as well as the amount of each subcontract prosecuted in the city. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-23. - Reduction of license tax. 
Any business located in an Enterprise Zone may be designated a "qualified business", for purposes of this article, if it is certified by the Newport News Department of Development as meeting specific guidelines for eligibility for a reduction of the license tax or fee in accordance with the application submitted to and approved by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia for designation of that Virginia Enterprise Zone within which the business is located. 
A qualified business is eligible for a reduction of its license tax or fee. Reduction of the license tax or fee shall begin as of the date of certification, by the Newport News Department of Development, of a firm as a qualified business. The license tax and fee shall be reduced according to the following schedule: 
Time Period 	Percentage Reduction 
Year 1 	100% 
Year 2 	80% 
Year 3 through 10 	60% 
 
The amount of reduction shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in any single year. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 6597-09)  
Secs. 23-24—23-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE TAX AND FEE SCHEDULE 
 
Sec. 23-33. - Contracting and constructing license tax and fee requirement. 
(a)  Every contractor and person constructing for their own account for sale shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of fifteen cents ($0.15) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(b)  Every contractor applying for or renewing a business license shall furnish, prior to the issuance or renewal of such license, either: (i) satisfactory proof that he is duly licensed or certified under the terms of Chapter 11 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia; or (ii) a written statement, supported by an affidavit, that he is not subject to licensure or certification as a contractor or subcontractor pursuant to Chapter 11 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  If a contractor has properly paid a local license tax required by a county, city or town within the Commonwealth of Virginia, but outside of the City of Newport News, in which his principal office or any branch office or offices may be located, no further license fee or license tax shall be required by Newport News for conducting such business in Newport News. However, if the amount of business conducted by any such contractor in Newport News exceeds or is expected to exceed the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) in any license year, such contractor shall apply and pay for a Newport News business license for that portion of the business conducted in Newport News. 
(d)  Any contractor as defined in § 58.1-3714(D) of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, conducting business in Newport News for less than thirty (30) days without a definite place of business in any county, city or town in the Commonwealth of Virginia shall be subject to the license fee or tax imposed by this chapter if the amount of business such contractor conducts in Newport News exceeds or is expected to exceed the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for the license year. 
(e)  Any person who shall be engaged in the business of a contractor who (i) has not obtained or is not maintaining worker's compensation coverage for his employees and (ii) at the time of application for issuance or reissuance of a business license, is required to obtain or maintain such coverage pursuant to § 65.2-800 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall not be issued or reissued a business license under this chapter. 
(f)  Every contractor shall provide written certification at the time of any application for issuance or re-issuance of a business license that such contractor is in compliance with the provisions of § 65.2-800 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and shall remain in compliance with such provisions at all times during the license year. 
(g)  Any contractor who knowingly presents or causes to be presented to the commissioner of the revenue a false certificate pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5299-99; Ord. No. 5327-99; Ord. No. 6702-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6702-10 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 23-34. - Retail sales license tax and fee requirements. 
(a)  Every person engaged in retail sales shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) but less than or equal to fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00), and a license tax at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts in excess of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00). This section shall not be construed as applying to manufacturers who offer for sale, at the place of manufacture, goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by them. 
(b)  In lieu of the payment provisions otherwise required by this article, motor vehicle dealers may elect annually to report and pay their required annual business license tax in accordance with the provisions of this section. The method of reporting and paying the required annual business license tax by motor vehicle dealers provided for in this subsection shall be known as the "alternate method of payment," and shall apply only to the retail sale of motor vehicles by such dealers. 
(1)  Motor vehicle dealers which elect the alternate method of payment for a tax year shall not change the method of reporting and paying the business license tax during such tax year. 
(2)  Motor vehicle dealers which elect the alternate method of payment shall separately state the amount of the business license tax attributable to the sale of a motor vehicle, shall add the tax to the retail sales price of the motor vehicle and shall collect same at or before the time of the delivery of the vehicle to the purchaser. 
(3)  All business license taxes which are separately stated shall be reported and paid, unless otherwise provided in this section, by the dealer to the commissioner or treasurer no later than the 20th day of the first month of the calendar quarter following the calendar quarter in which such taxes were required to be collected. 
(4)  Dealers which elect the alternate method of payment shall be liable for the collection, reporting and payment of the tax to the city in accordance with this section whether separately stated or not, and whether the tax was actually collected from the purchaser or not. 
(5)  The failure of a motor vehicle dealer to report and pay such taxes as prescribed in this section shall be subject to the same interest and penalties as provided in section 23-5. 
(6)  The amount of tax that is paid to the city pursuant to this subsection shall not be considered as total gross receipts for determinations of business license tax or fee liability in the next succeeding year. 
(c)  Motor vehicle dealers which fail to elect to utilize the alternate method of payment shall not separately state the amount of the tax as authorized by this section, and shall pay their business license tax or fee as prescribed in section 23-5. Any dealer which collects business license taxes in violation of this subsection shall exercise due diligence to refund such tax to the purchaser, and such dealer shall produce evidence of such refund to the commissioner upon request of the commissioner. If the purchaser cannot be located by the dealer after due diligence, or if the dealer cannot produce evidence of such a refund, the amount of such tax or fee shall be paid to the city. 
(d)  A motor vehicle dealer who collects excess business license taxes shall exercise due diligence to refund such taxes in excess of one dollar ($1.00) to the purchaser within one hundred twenty (120) days of discovering such overpayment or being made aware of such overpayment, and such dealer shall produce evidence of such refund to the Newport News Commissioner of the Revenue upon his request. Any amounts for which the motor vehicle dealer cannot produce evidence of having refunded to purchasers or any amounts that are not refunded to purchasers shall be remitted to the Newport News Commissioner of the Revenue for deposit with the Newport News Treasurer to the city's general fund within twenty (20) days after the expiration of the aforementioned one hundred twenty-day period. During a three-year period after receipt of such amounts, the Newport News Commissioner of the Revenue and the Newport News Treasurer, as that term is defined in Section 58.1-3123 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall refund such amounts as appropriate to purchasers who produce documentation verifying such overpayment. At the expiration of this period, the Newport News Commissioner of the Revenue shall consider these funds as additional business license tax and no further refunds shall be payable. The Newport News Commissioner of the Revenue and Treasurer shall recover from the motor vehicle dealer their costs of mailing, printing, and other reasonably necessary administrative costs related to refunding such amounts to purchasers. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle dealer to collect an amount stated separately as gross receipts taxes (i) if such dealer knows the amount to be greater than the tax applicable to the sale or (ii) if the motor vehicle dealer has not theretofore elected to separately state such taxes in accordance with the procedure of electing the alternate method of payment of such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5090-98; Ord. No. 5328-99)  
Sec. 23-35. - Financial, real estate and professional services license tax and fee requirements. 
(a)  Every person or entity engaged in financial, real estate or professional services shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of fifty-eight cents ($0.58) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(b)  For purposes of this section, persons or entities engaged in financial services include security brokers and security dealers. 
(1)  "Security broker" means a "broker" as defined under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq.), or any successor law to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, who is registered with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. 
(2)  "Security dealer" means a "dealer" as defined under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. § 78a et seq.), or any successor law to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, who is registered with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. 
(c)  Gross receipts of a security broker or dealer for license tax purposes shall not include amounts received by the broker or dealer that arise from the sale or purchase of a security to the extent that such amounts are paid to an independent registered representative as a commission on any sale or purchase of a security. The broker or dealer claiming the exclusion shall identify on his license application each independent registered representative to whom the excluded receipts have been paid and, if applicable, the jurisdictions in the Commonwealth of Virginia in which the independent registered representative is subject to business license taxes. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, "independent registered representative" means an independent contractor registered with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 6703-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6703-10 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 23-36. - Repair, personal and business services, and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or excepted; license tax and fee requirements. 
Every person or entity engaged in repair, personal and business services, and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or excepted shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax at the rate of thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) but less than or equal to five million dollars ($5,000,000.00), and a license tax at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts in excess of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-37. - Tugboat operators license tax and fee requirements. 
Every person or entity engaged in the business of operating a tugboat(s) shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of twenty five cents ($0.25) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-38. - Bowling alleys license tax requirements. 
Every person engaged in the operation of a public bowling alley or other like game shall annually pay a license tax of thirty nine dollars ($39.00) on the first alley and, in addition thereto, thirteen dollars ($13.00) for each additional alley. Each such alley shall be assessed for such tax, whether used or not. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-39. - Savings institutions license tax requirements. 
Savings institutions having their main office located in the city shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-40. - Carnivals and circuses license tax requirements. 
(a)  Every person who operates, exhibits or performs a carnival or circus in the city shall pay a license tax of one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) for each performance of the carnival or circus. 
(b)  Every person who is found guilty of exhibiting or giving a performance or exhibition of a carnival or circus without the license required by this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-41. - Coin-operated machines or devices license tax requirements. 
(a)  Any person having, anywhere in the city, any weighing machines, automatic baggage or parcel-checking machines or receptacles, machines which provide service only, viewing machines, self-photographing machines or machines affording rides to children or adults, operated on a coin-in-the-slot principle shall annually pay a license tax of thirty-three cents ($0.33) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of total gross receipts, or thirty dollars ($30.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to telephones or to machines vending goods, wares and merchandise. 
(b)  No license tax shall be imposed on coin-operated machines that are used solely for the purpose of selling individual sanitary drinking cups, sanitary drinking cups and natural water, sanitary napkins or the like, or any vending machine under the ownership or supervision of any state commission or state agency. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as permitting any person to keep, maintain, exhibit or operate any coin-operated machine or other device the operation of which is prohibited by law; nor shall the commissioner issue any license for any such machine or device. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-42. - Coin-operated machines or devices—operators and merchants license tax requirements. 
(a)  Every person selling, leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated machine or device operated on a coin-in-the-slot principle shall be deemed to be a coin machine operator and shall annually pay a license tax of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year; except that coin machine operators furnishing or otherwise providing more than two (2) but less than ten (10) machines or devices shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year, and in addition thereof, thirty-three cents ($0.33) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of total gross receipts actually received by the operator as his share of the total gross receipts, or thirty dollars ($30.00), whichever is greater. 
(b)  The coin machine operator's license tax imposed by this section shall not apply to operators of weighing machines, automatic baggage or parcel-checking machines or receptacles, vending machines so constructed as to do nothing but vend merchandise or postage stamps or provide service only, viewing machines, self-photographing machines, devices or machines affording rides to children or adults, or devices or machines for the delivery of newspapers. 
(c)  Every coin machine operator or merchant placing vending machines in their place of business shall furnish to the commissioner a complete list of machines on location and the address of each location on or before the 1st day of March of each year. 
(d)  Each coin-operated machine operated under the provisions of this chapter shall have conspicuously located thereon, a decal, sticker or other adhesive label, no less than one (1) inch by two (2) inches in size, clearly denoting the operator's name and address. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-43. - Coal terminal operators license tax and fee requirements. 
Every person or entity engaged in the business of operating a coal terminal(s) shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of fourteen cents ($0.14) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-44. - Exterminators license tax and fee requirements. 
Every person or entity engaged in the business of exterminating termites, rats, insects or other vermin shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of fifteen cents ($0.15) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-45. - Direct sellers license tax requirements. 
A license tax on a direct seller shall be levied only if the total sales of such seller exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) in any one (1) calendar year. The rate of tax levied on a direct seller whose total sales exceed four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) in a calendar year shall be twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of total retail sales, and five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of total wholesale sales. This tax shall only be levied if such direct seller maintains his place of abode in the city. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-46. - Barber and beauty schools license tax and fee requirements. 
Every person engaged in the business of operating a barber or beauty school(s) shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-47. - Fortune tellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, phrenology or handwriting analysis license tax requirements. 
(a)  Every person or entity engaged in fortune telling, clairvoyancy or practicing of palmistry, phrenology or handwriting analysis, shall annually pay a license tax of seven hundred eighty dollars ($780.00) per year. 
(b)  No person may operate such a business or obtain a license under this section, unless the applicant is a resident of the city and the owner of real property located in the city or has resided in the city for at least twelve (12) months prior to making application for the license. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this section to any person who has had a criminal conviction involving a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven (7) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the tax imposed by this section shall not be prorated. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to persons pretending to tell fortunes or practicing palmistry in a regularly licensed theater, as part of any show or exhibition presented therein, or as a part of any play, exhibition, fair or show presented or offered for any benevolent, charitable or educational purpose. 
(f)  Any person who shall engage in the business of a fortune teller, clairvoyant or practitioner of palmistry without a license shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-48. - Heat, light, power or gas service license tax requirements. 
Every person engaged in the business of furnishing heat, light and power or gas for domestic, commercial and industrial consumption in the city shall annually pay a license tax of one-half of one (0.5) percent of the total gross receipts derived from the business within the city, excluding however, such service furnished federal, state and local public authorities, their offices or agencies, and sales for resale to other electric utilities. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-49. - Merchants, wholesale license tax requirements. 
(a)  Every person or entity engaged as a wholesaler or wholesale merchant shall annually pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) on the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of purchases and twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of purchases in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(b)  This subsection shall not be construed as applying to manufacturers who offer for sale, at the place of manufacture, goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by them. 
(c)  If, after the close of the year for which the license is issued, the wholesale merchant should elect not to renew it, but desires the privilege to sell whatever goods, wares and merchandise such merchant may have on hand at the time, it shall be lawful for such merchant to do so upon the payment of a license tax upon such goods, wares and merchandise to be regarded as purchases for the purpose of computing the license tax. No purchases may be made after the close of the preceding year by such merchant. 
(d)  Any person who maintains no place of business in the city, and who shall store goods, wares and merchandise in a public warehouse or public warehouses in the city, for ultimate distribution to wholesalers only, or to the federal or state government, or to any agency of either such government, shall not be deemed to be a wholesale merchant and, therefore, is not subject to a license tax as such. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-50. - Retail peddlers and itinerant merchants license tax requirements. 
(a)  Every retail peddler and itinerant merchant shall annually pay a license tax of three hundred twenty-five dollars ($325.00) per year. 
(b)  This subsection shall not apply to those who sell or offer for sale, in person or by their employees, ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, fish, oysters, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature, or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. Also, a dairyman who operates, upon the streets of this city, one (1) or more vehicles may sell and deliver, from such vehicle(s), milk, butter, cream and eggs, without procuring a peddler's license. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in the state code, every wholesale peddler and itinerant merchant shall pay a license tax in the same amount and manner as wholesale merchants. 
(d)  No license shall be required of peddlers of produce, fruits or fresh meats who are bona fide producers or growers of the produce, fruits or meats sold by them; and no license shall be required of peddlers of seafood who are bona fide catchers, producers or growers of seafood sold by them. 
(e)  The commissioner shall require such bona fide producer or grower of market produce, fruits or fresh meat to file with the commissioner a certificate in which shall be given the name and address of the applicant, the location of the land from which the produce, fruit, or meat is to be produced, whether the applicant is the owner thereof, or renter, and in the latter case, the name of the landlord or owner and the time from which the applicant's lease is to run; also, that the applicant intends to use the sign hereinafter mentioned personally, or by agent, for the sale of the applicant's own produce, fruit or meat only, and will not permit the same to be used by any third party, or for the sale of any produce, except the applicant's own. Upon receipt of such certificate, the commissioner shall furnish to such bona fide producer a decal, of a size and design to be selected by the commissioner and suitable to be displayed on a vehicle, on which shall be printed the license year and peddler number. 
(f)  Any decal issued under this section shall be affixed and displayed by the owner on the left-hand side of owner's vehicle, on the outside thereof, and in a conspicuous place, so that the same may be readily seen at all times by anyone authorized to inspect the same. An annual fee of one dollars ($1.00) shall be levied and paid for each decal issued. 
(g)  Any person making a false statement in the certificate required by subsection (e) above, or permitting the decal mentioned above to be used in the sale of any produce, fruit or meat, except when same is grown by such person on the land described in such certificate, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(h)  The commissioner shall issue to each licensed peddler a decal of a size and design to be selected by the commissioner and suitable to be displayed on the vehicle to be used by the peddler in the prosecution of such business. On each decal so issued, there shall be printed the word "peddler," the decal number and the license year for which the license is issued. 
(i)  Any person who promotes or sponsors a show and sale within the city shall obtain an itinerant merchant's license which shall permit the licensee to promote or sponsor shows and sales for the remainder of the calendar year during which the license is issued, provided that no single show and sale at the same location shall continue for a period exceeding seven (7) days. A license issued to a person under this subsection shall be in lieu of individual itinerant merchants' licenses otherwise required for each merchant participating in the show and sale. Each person who obtains such a license shall be required to report each show and sale promoted or sponsored to the commissioner prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-51. - Secondhand paper and junk dealers and canvassers license tax requirements. 
(a)  Every person who conducts or engages in the business of dealing in secondhand paper or junk materials shall annually pay a license tax of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00). No such license shall be issued for the purpose of dealing in junk materials unless and until there is presented to the commissioner a certificate from the Newport News City Council and from the Newport News Circuit Court permitting the operation of this business. 
(b)  Every person acting as a canvasser for the purpose of buying secondhand paper, junk or other things for any junk dealer, or for sale to a junk dealer, shall annually pay a license tax of sixty-five dollars ($65.00). 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any employee of such secondhand paper or junk dealer, acting as a canvasser, from the payment of a canvasser's license. In the case where a canvasser is a bona fide employee of a secondhand paper or junk dealer, such dealer or employer shall be held liable for the payment of the canvasser's license tax. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-52. - Short-term rental business license tax and fee requirement. 
Every person or entity engaged in the short-term rental business shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-53. - Ship and boat repair tax and fee requirements. 
Every person engaged in the business of ship or boat repair shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) but less than or equal to fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00), and a license tax computed at the rate of one one-thousandth of one cent ($0.001) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts in excess of fifty million dollars ($50,000,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-54. - Telegraph companies license tax requirements. 
Each telegraph company having a place of business in this city and delivering messages without additional charge to any point within the city limits, for the business done exclusively within this city and not including any business done to or from points without the state, and not including any business done for the government of the United States, its officers or agents, shall pay an annual license tax equal to one-half of one (0.5) percent of the total gross receipts of the business accruing to such company in the city. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Sec. 23-55. - Telephone companies license tax requirements. 
(a)  On and after January 1, 2008, each telephone company shall pay an annual license tax of one-half of one (0.5) percent of the total gross receipts of such company accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer in the City. 
(b)  "Telephone company" means a person holding a certificate of convenience and necessity granted by the State Corporation Commission authorizing telephone service; or a person authorized by the Federal Communications Commission to provide commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, where such service includes cellular mobile radio communications services or broadband personal communications services; or a person holding a certificate issued pursuant to section 214 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, authorizing a domestic telephone service and belonging to an affiliated group including a person holding a certificate of convenience and necessity granted by the state corporation commission authorizing telephone service. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1; Ord. No. 6456-08, § 1)  
Sec. 23-56. - Principal contractors receiving identifiable federal appropriations for research and development services; license tax and fee requirements. 
Every person designated as the principal or prime contractor receiving identifiable federal appropriations for research and development services as defined in Section 31.205-18(a) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation, or its successor, in the areas of (i) computer and electronic systems, (ii) computer software, (iii) applied sciences, (iv) economic and social sciences, and (v) electronic and physical sciences shall annually pay to the city a license fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) when total gross receipts are fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less, a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) when total gross receipts are greater than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) but less than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), or a license tax computed at the rate of three cents ($0.03) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) on total gross receipts when total gross receipts are greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
The license as provided under this section shall be based on federal funds received in payment of such contracts upon documentation provided by such person to the commissioner confirming the applicability of this section. 
(Ord. No. 4969-96, § 1)  
Chapter 24 - MASSAGE PARLORS AND HEALTH CLUBS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Qualifications for a certified massage therapist, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3029. 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Health club. Any establishment which offers service in the form of massage, baths, exercise or similar services, in combination to club members, or to the public for a fee. 
Massage. A method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping with the hand or any instrument. For the purposes of this chapter, the word "massage" shall not include those performed in hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or the offices or quarters of a physician, chiropractor or osteopath; nor shall it include a massage of the face, scalp or neck administered in a barbershop or beauty parlor operated under Chapter 9 of this Code; nor shall it include those performed by persons (i) who are then currently certified to perform massages by the American Massage Therapy Association, those (ii) who have successfully passed the National Certification Examination for Therapeutic Massage and Body Work, or (iii) who are certified by the Associated Bodyworkers and Massage Professionals organization. 
Massage parlor. An establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any business of giving Turkish, Russian, Swedish, vapor, sweat, electric, salt, magnetic or any other kind or character of massage, bath, alcohol rub, fomentation, manipulation, of the body or similar procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1600; Code 1961, § 21C-1; Ord. No. 3862-89; Ord. No. 4429-93; Ord. No. 4649-94)  
Sec. 24-2. - Service not to be rendered to persons of opposite sex. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, either as a public or private facility, any massage parlor, health club or similar type establishment, where any physical contact or massage with the recipient of the service provided by such establishment is provided by a person of the opposite sex. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any employee, individual, owner or operator of such establishment to give or administer a massage to a member of the opposite sex. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as for a Class 1 misdemeanor and, in addition, the commissioner of the revenue shall revoke the license of the establishment wherein the violation took place. 
(Ord. No. 1600; Code 1961, §§ 21C-2, 21C-3)  
Chapter 25 - MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2936-82, § 1, changed the title of Ch. 25 from "Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks" to "Mobile Home Parks." 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 13; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; manufactured housing, Code of Virginia, § 36-85.2 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and terms shall be interpreted and defined as follows: 
Administrator. The director of engineering or his authorized representative. 
Approve. The word "approve" shall be considered to be followed by the words "or disapprove." 
Density. A factor representing the average number of mobile home units per acre of land within the development. Public streets or other areas not usable as part of the mobile home park property are excluded from such acreage in making this determination. 
Distances and area. Distances and area refer to measurement in a horizontal plane. 
Lot. The word "lot" includes the word "parcel." 
Mobile home park. A tract of land or a combination of tracts of land under single ownership or management which is designed, constructed, equipped, operated and maintained for the placement of mobile homes. 
Mobile home site. A parcel of land within a mobile home park designed and equipped for the placement of a single mobile home. 
Owner. The owner of any property intended to be developed as a mobile home park under this chapter or the owner of any property used as a mobile home park which is subject to this chapter. 
Right-of-way. An area, public or private, over which the right of passage exists. 
Street—private. A means of internal vehicular circulation within a mobile home park. 
Street—public. The principal means of vehicular access to and circulation within a mobile home park when designed and constructed pursuant to appropriate city standards, and accepted by the city as part of the public street system. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. II, §§ 1—11; Ord. No. 2937-82; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 25-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, comfort, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city by establishing minimum standards and facilities for mobile home parks and procedures for the review and approval of plans for the development of such parks prior to construction and to provide for the supervision and inspection of such parks prior to occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. I, § 1)  
Sec. 25-3. - Chapter not intended to interfere with state board of health. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with the responsibility of the state board of health to administer regulations, as prescribed by title 35, chapter 6, article 2, of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. III, § 2)  
Sec. 25-4. - Administrator of chapter. 
The director of engineering, under the direction of the city manager, shall be the administrator of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. III, § 1; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1) 
Cross reference— General powers of director of engineering, § 2-672.  
Sec. 25-5. - Conflict with other regulations. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions or higher standards than are required by any other statute, local ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter's regulations shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, local ordinance or regulation impose a greater restriction or higher standard than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such other statute, local ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. VIII, § 3)  
Sec. 25-6. - Notice of violation of chapter. 
(a)  Whenever the administrator finds that any provision of this chapter has been violated, the administrator shall serve notice of such violation on the owner or agent of the mobile home park found in violation. Such notice shall be in writing and shall include the reasons for its issuance and direct the owner or agent to comply with the terms of this chapter. The administrator shall provide a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, to allow compliance with the provision violated. This time may be extended for an additional sixty (60) days by the administrator, upon written request of the owner or agent. Such notice shall be deemed properly served when a copy thereof has been sent by certified mail to the owner or agent at such person's last-known address. A copy of such notice shall be sent to the director of public health. 
(b)  The failure, neglect or refusal of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter within the time specified in the notice provided for in this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. VII, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 25-7. - Street identification signs; naming; maintenance. 
(a)  Street identification signs will be installed and maintained at each intersection within each mobile home park at the expense of the owner. Such signs shall be provided by the city and the owner shall be charged the city's cost for producing the signs. 
(b)  Naming of streets within a mobile home park shall be done consistent with the provisions of section 38-215 and section 38-216 of this Code. 
(c)  Street name signs shall be maintained to insure that they are easily readable. Unless otherwise provided, maintenance of such signs shall be the responsibility of the owner of the mobile home park. If a private street name sign is placed at an intersection with a public street, it shall be maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4108-90)  
Sec. 25-8. - Street numbers for mobile homes. 
(a)  The city manager or the manager's authorized representative shall ascertain and determine the proper number for each mobile home lot within each mobile home park in the city and shall inform the owner, the owner's agent or the occupant of any mobile home on such lot of such number. 
(b)  The person receiving the notice described in section (a) above shall cause the number so designated by the city manager to be securely inscribed and fixed conspicuously in front of the mobile home. Such number shall be in plain arabic figures, and not less than two (2) inches in height, and shall be visible from the street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 4108-90)  
Secs. 25-9—25-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2936-82 changed the title of Art. II from "Mobile Homes Parks" to "Development Requirements." 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-19. - To be developed as planned residential development. 
All mobile home parks constructed, altered or changed after the effective date of Ordinance No. 1360, from which this chapter is derived, shall be constructed, altered or changed in accordance with an approved plan of development as a planned residential development pursuant to applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. IV, § 5) 
Cross reference— Planned residential development regulations of zoning ordinance, App. A, Art. XX.  
Sec. 25-20. - Applicability of subdivision regulations to development. 
The development of a tract of land as a mobile home park shall be subject to all regulations of the subdivision ordinance pertaining to development plans, minimum improvements, required reviews and approvals and the platting and dedication of public streets, unless otherwise modified by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1360, IV, § 6) 
Cross reference— Subdivision ordinance, App. B.  
Secs. 25-21, 25-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 25-21, requiring a permit for installation of a mobile home, and § 25-22, requiring the owner or operator of a mobile home park to keep a record of mobile homes installed or removed, both derived from Ord. No. 1360, Art. IV, § 2, were repealed by § 4 of Ord. No. 2936-82.  
Sec. 25-23. - Agreement and bond in lieu of completion of required improvements. 
In lieu of actual completion of the improvements required by this article, the owner of a mobile home park may enter into an agreement with the city and shall furnish to the city a certified check or bond, with surety satisfactory to the city, in an amount equal to cost of completion of such improvements. The form of agreement and type of bond shall be approved by the city attorney. The amount of the bond, and designated length of time of completion of the required improvements, shall be fixed by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. IV, § 3)  
Secs. 25-24—25-28. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SITE DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 25-29. - Purpose of division. 
It is the purpose and intent of this division to establish site design and construction standards for mobile home parks, insuring that the arrangement of mobile homes provides adequate light, air, convenience of access, safety, essential utilities and recreational facilities and other open space. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 1)  
Sec. 25-30. - Drainage. 
Each mobile home park shall be drained in conformity with regulations of the subdivision ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 11) 
Cross reference— Subdivision ordinance, App. B.  
Sec. 25-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 25-31, requiring foundations and use of jacks and stabilizers on mobile homes, derived from Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 16, was repealed by § 5 of Ord. No. 2936-82.  
Sec. 25-32. - Minimum spacing between units. 
(a)  Mobile home sites within a mobile home park shall be so arranged as to provide not less than the following spacing between mobile home units: 
Public street right-of-way and mobile home unit .....25 feet 
Side-to-side .....25 feet 
End-to-end .....20 feet 
Side-to-end .....20 feet 
Set back from private streets (curb) .....15 feet 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to sites legally existing on June 29, 1970. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 2; Art. VI, § 1)  
Sec. 25-33. - Required open space. 
The development of any mobile home park shall provide for open space as prescribed for planned residential development in the zoning ordinance, provided that a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of open space per mobile home site, exclusive of the required open space around the units, shall be developed in clusters located uniformly throughout the park having areas of not less than one-fourth (¼) acre. Access to such open space shall generally be arranged so as to be accessible from the maximum number of mobile home units. 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, Ch. 45.  
Sec. 25-34. - Streets. 
(a)  Streets designated by the administrator as essential to the continuity of the public street and utility system shall be constructed as public streets in mobile home parks. 
(b)  Streets deemed by the administrator as not essential as public streets shall be constructed as private streets in mobile home parks. 
(c)  All streets within any mobile home park shall be constructed to city standards, provided that streets designated as private streets may be constructed to a width of not less than thirty (30) feet, as measured between curb faces, and plant mix surfaces may be omitted and concrete curbs may be rounded. 
(d)  The city's requirements for curbs and gutters and for minimum street widths shall not apply to streets existing in a mobile home park existing on June 29, 1970. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 4; Art. VI, § 3) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 38.  
Sec. 25-35. - Street lights. 
Every street shall be lighted with street lights providing a uniform illumination level in conformity with the subdivision ordinance. An agreement shall be executed by the owner and the supplying utility company, in a form approved by the city, to insure the maintenance of such lighting along all private streets. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 7) 
Cross reference— Subdivision ordinance, App. B  
Sec. 25-36. - Off-street parking; curb cuts. 
(a)  The number of off-street parking spaces in a mobile home park shall be in conformity with parking requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Off-street parking shall be provided in a mobile home park as group parking, in such a manner as to eliminate required backing of vehicles onto any public street. Curb cuts for driveways at individual mobile home sites shall not be permitted on public streets and, except in special cases where a mobile home site is not adequately served from a group parking area, such curb cuts shall not be permitted on private streets. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a mobile home park legally existing and operating on June 29, 1970. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 5; Art. VI, § 1)  
Sec. 25-37. - Mobile home accessory building or structure. 
For the purpose of this chapter, a mobile home accessory building or structure is considered a structure which is an addition to or supplements the facilities provided a mobile home. This includes, but is not limited to, awnings, cabanas, carports, storage structures, porches, or decks. Building permits must be obtained prior to the construction or installation of such structures. The application for such building permit shall be signed by both the owner or operator of the mobile home park and the person wishing to construct or install a mobile home accessory building or structure. 
(1)  Porches or decks may be provided as an accessory to a mobile home unit. Such porches or decks shall be constructed in accordance with the building regulations and shall include handrails and/or guardrails as required therein. No porch or deck shall be constructed such that any part of that porch or deck shall be closer than ten (10) feet to another mobile home, nor to a building or structure accessory to another mobile home. 
(2)  Accessory buildings may be provided as an accessory to a mobile home unit; however, they shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to an adjacent mobile home, or to a building or structure accessory to another mobile home. Storage structures shall not be located closer than three (3) feet to the mobile home in which it is accessory. 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to sites legally existing on January 1, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 3138-84) 
Editor's note— Section 25-37, requiring electrical installations within a mobile home park to be subject to the city's electrical code, derived from Ord. No. 1360, Art. VI, § 12, was repealed by § 5 of Ord. No. 2936-82. Subsequently, Ord. No. 3184-84 added a new § 25-37.  
Sec. 25-38. - Underground wiring required. 
All wiring designed to provide electrical or telephone service or connections to a master television antenna system within a mobile home park shall be placed underground. This section shall not apply to mobile home parks legally existing and operating on June 29, 1970. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 9; Art. VI, § 1)  
Secs. 25-39, 25-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 25-39, requiring mobile home parks utilizing a gas distribution system to conform to the city's building code, derived from Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 13, and § 25-40, requiring plumbing in mobile home parks to conform to the city's plumbing code, derived from Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 15, were repealed by § 5 of Ord. No. 2936-82.  
Sec. 25-41. - Water and sewer systems. 
(a)  Water service and supply systems in mobile home parks shall be installed subject to all regulations and approval of the waterworks department. 
(b)  Each mobile home site in a mobile home park shall be served by an approved sewer system installed in conformity with the existing sewer policy adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Water and sewer systems shall be installed by the mobile home park operator in all existing mobile home parks existing on June 29, 1970, at such time as public facilities become available to the site. The existence of a force sanitary sewer main or a gravity main, although at such elevation or location as to require a lift or pumping station for service, shall be deemed "available." 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 10; Art. VI, § 3; Ord. No. 7204-15) 
Cross reference— Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; water supply, Ch. 42.  
Sec. 25-42. - Fire protection generally. 
Each mobile home park shall be provided with fire protection in accordance with the subdivision ordinance and established city policy. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 6) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16; subdivision ordinance, App. B.  
Sec. 25-43. - Storage of fuel. 
(a)  Storage of fuel used for cooking or heating in individual quantities shall not be permitted within a mobile home park, except in containers approved by the fire marshal. Containers of liquefied petroleum gas and their installation stored in individual quantities shall meet all requirements of the city's building code and fire prevention code. No fuel used for cooking or heating shall be stored within a mobile home nor within five (5) feet of a door thereof. 
(b)  Central storage facilities of fuel distribution systems within a mobile home park shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the building code, fire prevention code and zoning ordinance. Central fuel storage areas located above ground shall be fenced and screened. Such screening shall be in the form of a view-obscuring fence or suitable plant material arranged so as to form an attractive appearance in keeping with a residential character. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 14) 
Cross reference— Uniform Statewide Building Code, § 13-21 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 16-14 et seq.; zoning ordinance, Ch. 45.  
Sec. 25-44. - Refuse containers. 
Each mobile home park shall be provided with refuse containers in accord with the provisions of Article III, Chapter 19, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1360, Art. V, § 8)  
Chapter 26 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Department of vehicle and equipment services, § 2-659 et seq.; department of engineering, § 2-670 et seq.; use of loudspeakers on vehicles, § 3-12; false advertising by motor vehicle dealers, § 3-31; automobile graveyards, Ch. 8; bicycles, motorized scooters, or electric power-assisted bicycles and mopeds, Ch. 10; application of traffic regulations to bicycle and moped riders, § 10-17; use of public piers or docks by motor vehicles, § 11-17; protection of food being transported, § 17-7; regulations governing vehicles used by ice cream vendors, § 17-101 et seq.; throwing litter from vehicles, § 19-28; use of vehicle to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, § 28-20; injuring, tampering with, etc., vehicles, § 28-28; traffic regulations in parks, § 29-28 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 38; visibility of drive-in theater screens to motorists, § 38-12; vehicles for hire, Ch. 41; zoning ordinance, Ch. 45. 
State Law reference— General authority of city to regulate traffic, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-833—46.2-836, 46.2-1219, 46.2-1240 et seq., 46.2-1300—46.2-1314. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Territorial application of chapter. 
This chapter applies to every street, avenue, highway, alley, sidewalk, driveway, park area and every other way within the corporate limits of the city, the use of which the city has jurisdiction and authority to regulate. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-5)  
Sec. 26-2. - Compliance with chapter; general penalty for violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, §§ 23-3, 23-26; Ord. No. 4403-92; Ord. No. 6722-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions applicable to violations of state traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113; city prohibited from imposing penalty for traffic violation which is greater than penalty imposed by state for similar offense, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300.  
Sec. 26-3. - Arrest procedure for violations of chapter—Generally. 
(a)  Whenever any person is arrested, including an arrest upon a warrant, for a violation of any provision of this chapter, except section 26-72, the arresting officer shall, except as otherwise provided in section 26-5, take the name and address of such person and the license number of such person's motor vehicle and issue a summons or otherwise notify such person in writing to appear, at a time and place to be specified in such summons or notice, such time to be at least five (5) days after such arrest, unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing, and such person shall, if he or she so desires, have a right to an immediate hearing or a hearing within twenty-four (24) hours, at a convenient hour and before the court having jurisdiction. Such officer shall thereupon and upon the giving by such person of his written promise to appear at such time and place forthwith release him from custody. 
(b)  Any person refusing to give such written promise to appear shall be taken immediately by the arresting or other police officer before the nearest or most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail having jurisdiction under this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who willfully violates a written promise to appear, given in accordance with this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of, and in addition to, the charge upon which such person was originally arrested. 
(d)  Any officer violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office and subject to removal therefrom upon complaint filed by any person in a court of competent jurisdiction. This section shall not be construed to limit the removal of a police officer for other misconduct in office. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-37) 
Cross reference— Issuance of summons under above section for violation of prohibition against throwing litter from vehicles, § 19-28. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936.  
Sec. 26-4. - Same—Issuance of warrant prior to return date of summons or notice. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 26-3, the power of general approval having been granted for the use of this section by the traffic court of the city, the arresting officer may appear before a justice of the peace or other issuing authority for the city and make an oath as to the offense and request the issuance of a warrant at any time prior to the return date of the summons or notice issued under section 26-3. A warrant for the violation shall then be issued by the justice of the peace or other issuing authority and forwarded forthwith to the court in which such offense is to be tried. 
(Ord. No. 859, § 1; Ord. No. 1616, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-38) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936.  
Sec. 26-5. - Same—When arrested person to be taken before judicial officer. 
If any person arrested for a violation of this chapter is believed by the arresting officer to be likely to disregard a summons issued under section 26-3, the arresting officer shall take such person forthwith before the nearest or most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail, in lieu of issuing the summons required by section 26-3, and such judicial officer or other person shall determine whether or not probable cause exists that such person is likely to disregard a summons, and may issue either a summons or warrant, as is determined proper. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-38) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940.  
Sec. 26-6. - Same—Traffic infractions treated as misdemeanors for arrest purposes. 
For purposes of arrest, traffic infractions shall be treated as misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or state law, the authority and duties of arresting officers shall be the same for traffic infractions as for misdemeanors. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-937.  
Sec. 26-7. - Traffic school for violators. 
(a)  There is hereby established the city driving improvement school, to be supervised and conducted by the general district court, traffic and criminal divisions, and the juvenile and domestic relations court, being courts charged with the duty of hearing traffic cases. 
(b)  A judge of any court in the city may, upon a finding of guilty in any traffic case, require the attendance of an offender at such school, as provided by Section 46.2-1314 of the Code of Virginia. No person who is a nonresident of the city shall be required to attend such school. The full-time judges of the general district courts in the city shall exercise supervision and control of such school, the days and hours when it shall be conducted and the personnel who are to be instructors thereof. Such school shall offer a minimum of four (4) hours and a maximum of twelve (12) hours of instruction and shall offer not less than two (2) nor more than six (6) sessions, which are to be held on weekdays and Saturdays and which shall conclude by 10:00 p.m. Attendance at such school may be in lieu of or in addition to any penalty prescribed by law, and failure to comply with an order of the court to attend such school shall be punishable as contempt of such court. 
(c)  The supervisor may establish such tuition fee for such school as is deemed advisable, not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) for the complete course of instruction. Such sum shall be received by the clerks of the respective courts and shall be disbursed on the order of the judge of the court, to the end that such school shall be self-supporting. Any funds remaining as of the end of the fiscal year in excess of the amount required to sustain operation of the school shall be disbursed, on order of a judge of the court, to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1857, § 1; Ord. No. 1970, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-36.1; Ord. No. 3958-89, § 1)  
Sec. 26-8. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Sections 46.2-1313 and 1-220 of the Code of Virginia, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. The incorporation by reference contained in this section shall include any future amendments to laws or regulations so referenced. Reference to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted and shall be deemed to refer to the street, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted and made a part of this as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  All definitions of words and phrases contained in the state law hereby adopted shall apply to such words and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 3252; Ord. No. 3760-88; Ord. No. 3958-89, § 1; Ord. No. 4083-90; Ord. No. 4194-91; Ord. No. 4360-92; Ord. No. 4491-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4507-93; Ord. No. 6386-07, § 1)  
Sec. 26-9. - General authority of traffic engineer. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to classify, designate and mark city streets and to provide a uniform system of marking and signing streets under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  The traffic engineer, except as otherwise directed by this chapter, and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the city council, shall have the right and authority and is hereby authorized to regulate the operation of vehicles within the corporate limits of the city, by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating quiet zones, residence and business districts, through streets and railway grade crossings. The traffic engineer may erect or place such other signs or markers as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter to control traffic. 
(c)  The traffic engineer is further empowered and authorized to mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating the flow of traffic, when in the traffic engineer's judgment, such action is necessary. 
(d)  The existence of signs or markers authorized by this section or any other section of this chapter, at any place within the corporate limits of the city, shall be prima facie evidence that such signs or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the traffic engineer and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the directions of such signs or markers. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 975, § 1; Ord. No. 1684, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-39) 
Cross reference— Division of traffic engineering of department of engineering responsible for traffic operations, § 2-671; director of engineering to serve as head of department of engineering, § 2-672.  
Sec. 26-9.1. - Establishment of a photo-monitoring system to enforce traffic light signals. 
(a)  There is hereby established a traffic signal enforcement program as authorized by the provisions of Section 15.2-968.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. The approved system shall be installed, operated and maintained by city forces and/or private vendors at the discretion of and subject to the overall supervision of the city manager. All equipment and technology used to establish and operate this program shall be reliable and of the highest quality. The traffic signal enforcement program shall be established and operated at all times in conformity with the aforesaid Section 15.2-968.1. 
(b)  Failure to comply with a traffic signal, as shown by any photographs, microphotographs, videotape or other recorded image as produced by the approved traffic light signal monitoring system is a violation of this section. The monetary penalty for failure to comply with a traffic light signal shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(c)  Conspicuous signs shall be placed on streets leading to intersections where the traffic light signal enforcement program is deployed. Such signs shall disclose the presence of the traffic light signal violation monitoring system at such intersections. The signs shall be placed not less than three hundred (300) feet nor more than five hundred (500) feet from the intersection. 
(d)  Proceedings to enforce this section shall conform to the requirements of the aforesaid Section 15.2-968.1 or to such other procedures as may be authorized by law. Appropriate forms, as contemplated by the aforesaid Section 15.2-968.1, shall be utilized and shall be subject to review and approval by the chief of police and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 6422-07)  
Sec. 26-9.2. - Use of video-monitoring systems to enforce law against passing stopped school buses. 
(a)  The school board for the City of Newport News is hereby authorized to install and operate a video-monitoring system, as defined by Virginia Code § 46.2-844, in or on the school buses operated by the school board or to contract with a private vendor to do so on behalf of the school board for the purpose of recording violations of subsection A of Virginia Code § 46.2-844. Virginia Code § 46.2-844 has been incorporated by reference into the Newport News City Code pursuant to section 26-8. 
(b)  Any civil penalty levied for a violation of subsection A of Virginia Code § 46.2-844, as incorporated by reference into the Newport News City Code by section 26-8, shall be payable to the city treasury. The city treasurer shall remit to the school board all civil penalty amounts received in respect to such violations that remain, if any, after crediting the city's general fund with an amount equal to the costs incurred by the city in administering the enforcement of the video-monitoring system. 
(Ord. No. 7603-20)  
Sec. 26-10. - Riding on portion of vehicles not intended for passengers. 
No person shall ride on any portion of any vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise or other loads. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-25)  
Sec. 26-11. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-26) 
Cross reference— Boarding or alighting from moving trains, § 28-33.  
Sec. 26-12. - Authority of city manager to alter speed limits. 
Pursuant to the authority of § 46.2-1300, Code of Virginia, the city manager is authorized to increase or decrease the speed limit within the city, provided such increase or decrease in speed shall be based upon an engineering and traffic investigation by the traffic engineer and provided that such speed zone is clearly indicated by markers or signs. 
(Ord. No. 7029-14, § 1)  
Sec. 26-13. - Driver to give immediate notice of certain accidents. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury to or death of any person, or some person acting for him, shall immediately give notice of the accident to a law enforcement officer as required by Code of Virginia, Section 46.2-371. A willful failure to make the report required herein shall constitute a violation of the section. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 858, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-11; Ord. No. 3958-89, § 1; Ord. No. 4092-90) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381.  
Sec. 26-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4093-90, adopted Aug. 28, 1990, repealed § 26-14, which pertained to accident reports by passengers and derived from Ord. No. 143 and Code 1961, § 23-13.  
Sec. 26-15. - Report by law enforcement officer investigating an accident. 
Every law enforcement officer who, in the course of duty, investigates a motor vehicle accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter and elsewhere, by interviewing participants or witnesses, shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after completing the investigation, forward a written report of the accident to the police department as required by Code of Virginia, Section 46.2-373. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-12; Ord. No. 3958-89, § 1; Ord No. 4092-90; Ord. No. 5775-02)  
Sec. 26-16. - Authority of police to move vehicle involved in accident that is left unattended, illegally parked or immobile; authority of authorized conservators to remove vehicles from public lots. 
(a)  Whenever a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, involved in an accident is found upon the highways or streets within the city and is so located as to impede the orderly flow of traffic, the police may, remove such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer from the highway or street to some point in the vicinity of such accident where such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer will not impede the flow of traffic. 
(b)  The police may remove for safe keeping any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, or parts thereof to a storage area if: 
(1)  It is left unattended on a public highway or street or other public property and constitutes a safety hazard; 
(2)  It is illegally parked; 
(3)  It is immobilized on a public roadway by weather conditions or other emergency situations; 
(4)  It is left unattended for more than ten (10) days either on public property or on private property without the permission of the property owner, lessee or occupant. 
(c)  Removal of motor vehicles that are illegally parked or left unattended for more than ten (10) days on a public parking lot may be carried out by a conservator of the peace who is authorized by the City of Newport News to initiate such removal. 
(Ord. No. 2261, § 2; Code 1961, § 23-269; Ord. No. 4015-90; Ord. No. 4026-90; Ord. No. 6639-09, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1212.  
Sec. 26-16.1. - Removal of motor vehicles obstructing movement; storage; payment of costs. 
Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer interferes with the free ingress, egress, or movement on any premises, driveway, or parking area, without the permission of the owner of that property, any law enforcement officer may remove it or have it removed to a storage area for safekeeping and shall report the removal to the department of motor vehicles of the commonwealth and to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or other vehicle as promptly as possible. Before obtaining the possession of his property, the owner shall pay to the parties entitled thereto all costs incidental to its removal or storage. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90)  
Sec. 26-16.2. - Advisory board. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 46.2-1233.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, an advisory board composed of representatives of law enforcement agencies, towing and recovery operators and the general public is hereby created to review towing regulations and advise city council with regard to appropriate provisions of any ordinance pertaining to towing and recovery of vehicles. The advisory board shall be composed of the police chief, or his designated representative; the fire chief, or his designated representative; and the director of codes compliance, or his designated representative; who shall be ex-officio members with full voting powers. In addition, council shall appoint three (3) representatives from the towing and recovery industry and one (1) citizen representative. Two (2) of the initial towing and recovery representatives shall be appointed for a one (1) year term commencing July 1, 1995, and ending June 30, 1996; the citizen representative and one (1) towing and recovery industry representative shall be appointed for a two-year term commencing July 1, 1995, and ending June 30, 1997. Thereafter, all towing and recovery industry and citizen representatives shall be appointed for two-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 4741-95, § 1)  
Sec. 26-17. - Assessment of costs against owner of vehicle towed or stored by police department or at department's request. 
(a)  The city shall be authorized to assess certain towing or storage and administrative costs against the owner of any vehicle which has been towed or stored by, or at the request of, the police department, except when the department's request is made in response to a person's request for towing services from a specific towing firm. These costs shall be paid before the vehicle is released to the owner. Such costs shall be assessed in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Towing. The towing charge shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for light vehicles weighing up to eight thousand eight hundred (8,800) pounds gross vehicle weight. The towing charge shall not exceed one hundred forty-five dollars ($145.00) for towing any mid-size vehicle having a gross vehicle weight greater than eight thousand eight hundred (8,800) pounds and not more than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross vehicle weight; and the towing charge shall not exceed three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) for towing any vehicle having a gross vehicle weight above eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds. Tractor-trailer combinations may be towed separately. If towed separately, a separate charge may be applied to each component separately towed. 
Dollies may be used to tow a vehicle where recommended by the current annual Towing and Service Manual published by the American Automobile Association. The charge for use of a dolly shall not exceed forty-five dollars ($45.00) per tow. 
Gojacks may be used to lift and move a locked, blocked or disabled vehicle several feet into hook-up alignment with a tow truck. The charge for use of gojacks shall not exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00) per tow. 
(2)  Storage. There shall be no storage charge if the vehicle is reclaimed within the first twenty-four-hour period after a tow. Storage charges shall be assessed at a rate not to exceed fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per storage day for trucks having a gross vehicle weight above eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds, and a rate not to exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) per storage day for all other vehicles. For purposes of this subsection, each twenty-four-hour period shall constitute one (1) storage day. In addition, each towing firm shall have adequate, accessible on-site parking and hook-up space available at all times for use by any owner, custodian or other person who arrives to retrieve a vehicle. 
(3)  Administrative charge. The administrative charge shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and shall be assessed whenever the city must arrange for the towing of a motor vehicle other than at the request of the owner, or his agent. When the vehicle is stored on the city lot, the charge shall be paid to the city. When the vehicle is stored with a commercial wrecker service, the charge shall be paid to the wrecker service, whereupon this administrative cost will be forwarded to the city by the wrecker service. 
(4)  Other costs. Reasonable charges for recovery (winching, uprighting, etc.), clean-up of an accident site, weather protection of stored vehicles in the event a vehicle is open to the elements, and notifications required by state law may be recovered. Such charges shall not exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for the notifications required by state law; twenty dollars ($20.00) for the use of tarpaulin or tarp; fifty dollars ($50.00) for the use of vehicle wrap; and fifty dollars ($50.00) for clean-up; no notification to the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles or to lien holders shall be initiated before the third consecutive day of storage. No charges other than those specifically authorized by this section shall be permitted. 
(5)  Pre-tow release. If the owner or custodian of any vehicle unlawfully parked returns after a tow truck has arrived and is engaged in hooking up or has attached the subject vehicle to the tow vehicle, or is attached to the subject vehicle, he may reclaim the vehicle upon payment of a service fee not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for light vehicles weighing up to ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight; eighty-five dollars ($85.00) for any mid-size vehicle having a gross vehicle weight greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds and not more than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross vehicle weight; and one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for any vehicle having a gross vehicle weight above eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds, plus payment of the administrative charge imposed by subsection (a)(3). No fee in excess of the applicable amount listed above, plus the administrative charge, shall be charged if the vehicle has not been moved from the lot or block where it was unlawfully parked. Payment of the fee provided by this subsection shall not relieve any vehicle owner from paying the fine imposed for having unlawfully parked said vehicle. 
(b)  The police department shall make a reasonable effort to notify and advise any vehicle owner of the costs provided for in this section when such person's vehicle has been towed at the request of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2216; Code 1961, § 23-260; Ord. No. 2619-80; Ord. No. 3580-87, § 1; Ord. No. 4017-90; Ord. No. 4465-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4895-96; Ord. No. 4915-96; Ord. No. 5771-02; Ord. No. 6114-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6226-06; Ord. No. 6919-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7145-15; Ord. No. 7611-20, § 1)  
Sec. 26-17.1. - Tow truck service operations—Definitions. 
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following terms as used in sections 26-17 through 26-17.8 shall have the meaning hereinafter respectively ascribed to them: 
Authorizing a tow means the authorizing of a tow by an owner. 
Day or storage day means a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours. 
Dolly or tow dolly means an axle-like device used to support the front or rear wheels of a passenger vehicle, pick-up or panel truck, for towing purposes. Such device when used on the public streets, shall be equipped with a safety chain or safety straps to restrain the device and vehicle being towed, should the connection fail. 
Gojack means a combination jack/dolly which enables a tow operator to lift and move a locked, blocked or disabled vehicle several feet into hook-up alignment with a tow truck. 
Operator means any person operating a towing firm or tow truck or providing towing and recovery services. 
Owner means an owner or lessee, or agent thereof, of private property conducting a business thereon and offering parking to patrons and who uses a towing firm to enforce parking restrictions. 
Person means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation and its legal successors. 
Recovery means the up-righting of any vehicle coming to rest off four (4) wheels, in a ditch, in a body of water, wedged underneath another vehicle or embedded into a structure. 
Tow means the actual hooking up and attachment of the vehicle to be towed to the towing vehicle and subsequent relocation of vehicle being towed. 
Tow truck means a motor vehicle for hire (i) designed to lift, pull or carry another vehicle by means of a hoist or other mechanical apparatus and (ii) having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of at least ten thousand (10,000) pounds. Tow truck also includes vehicles designed with a ramp on wheels and a hydraulic lift with a capacity to haul or tow another vehicle, commonly referred to as "rollbacks". 
Tow yard or tow lot means a location where operable or inoperative vehicles are towed or stored. 
Towing firm or towing and recovery operator means a person engaged in the business of (i) removing disabled vehicles, parts of vehicles, their cargoes, and other objects to facilities for repair or safekeeping and (ii) restoring to the highway or other location, where they either can be operated or removed to other locations for repair or safekeeping, vehicles that have come to rest in places where they cannot be operated. 
Towing and recovery services means the business of (i) removing disabled vehicles, parts of vehicles, their cargoes, and other objects to facilities for repair or safekeeping and (ii) restoring to the highway or other location, where they either can be operated or removed to other locations for repair or safekeeping, vehicles that have come to rest in places where they cannot be operated. 
Trespassing vehicle means a vehicle occupying a lot, area or space without permission of the owner of the lot, area or space. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90; Ord. No. 4895-96; Ord. No. 5771-02; Ord. No. 6287-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6639-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6927-12, § 1, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 7145-15)  
Sec. 26-17.1.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6927-12, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2012, effective Jan. 1, 2013, repealed § 26-17.1.1, which pertained to licenses required and derived from Ord. No. 6639-09, § 1.  
Sec. 26-17.1.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6927-12, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2012, effective Jan. 1, 2013, repealed § 26-17.1.2, which pertained to license to be displayed and derived from Ord. No. 6639-09, § 1.  
Sec. 26-17.1.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6927-12, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2012, effective Jan. 1, 2013, repealed § 26-17.1.3, which pertained to standards of practice and derived from Ord. No. 6639-09, § 1.  
Sec. 26-17.1.4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6927-12, § 2, adopted Dec. 11, 2012, effective Jan. 1, 2013, repealed § 26-17.1.4, which pertained to requirements for drivers and derived from Ord. No. 6639-09, § 1.  
Sec. 26-17.2. - Tow truck service operations—Enforcement of private parking by towing. 
Each owner shall post at each entrance to the patron parking area clearly legible signs containing either of the following alternatives for wording: 
ALTERNATIVE ONE 
PRIVATE PARKING 
(NAME OF ESTABLISHMENT) 
PATRONS ONLY 
TOWING ENFORCED BY 
(Name of Towing Firm or 
Person, etc., Coordinating 
Towing by Various Firms) 
Towing Fee—$___ 
Storage Charge—$___ per day 
Call (Telephone Number) for Location and 
Information Concerning Return of Vehicle 
ALTERNATIVE TWO 
PRIVATE PARKING 
(NAME OF ESTABLISHMENT) 
PATRONS ONLY 
TOWING ENFORCED BY 
(NAME OF ESTABLISHMENT) 
Towing Fee—$___ 
Storage Charge—$___ per day 
Call Police Department at 
(Telephone Number Provided by Chief of Police) 
For Location and Information 
Concerning Return of Vehicle 
The signs shall also be at least twenty-four (24) inches by eighteen (18) inches, but shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. Lettering for the top four (4) lines shall be at least two (2) inches in height and for all other lines at least one (1) inch in height. 
Signs which convey the required information, but do not utilize the precise language or format shown in either of the above alternatives, shall be deemed in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90; Ord. No. 4895-96; Ord. No. 5913-03; Ord. No. 6548-08)  
Sec. 26-17.3. - Same—Consent and signs. 
(a)  Before a towing firm may remove an unauthorized vehicle from the private property of an owner, as defined in section 26-17.1, said firm must first obtain written consent from the owner to remove the vehicle in question, unless the firm has a written agreement to remove all unauthorized vehicles from said property. 
(b)  When any owner enters into a written agreement with a towing firm to remove unauthorized vehicles before a tow is made, the owner shall post a sign which shall conform to the requirements of section 26-17.2. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90)  
Sec. 26-17.4. - Same—Removal and storage of towed vehicles. 
(a)  No tow truck service or operator shall charge a basic fee in excess of that set forth in this section. The towing charge shall not exceed one-hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) for light vehicles weighing up to ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight. The towing charge shall not exceed one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) for towing any mid-size vehicle having a gross vehicle weight greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds and not more than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross vehicle weight; and the towing charge shall not exceed three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) for towing any vehicle having a gross vehicle weight above eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds. Tractor-trailer combinations may be towed separately. If towed separately, a separate charge may be applied to each. In addition, charges may be recovered for the notifications required by state law; however, such charges shall not exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00), or be initiated before the fourth consecutive day of storage. 
(b)  There shall be no storage charge if the vehicle is reclaimed within the first twenty-four-hour period after the tow. Storage charges shall be assessed at a rate not to exceed fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per storage day for trucks having a gross vehicle weight greater than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds; the storage rate shall not exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) per storage day for all other vehicles. Each twenty-four-hour period shall constitute one (1) storage day. 
(c)  Each and every towing firm that tows motor vehicles from private property at a time other than the normal operating hours of the towing firm shall: (1) have an employee or agent at the telephone number provided in accordance with the first sign alternative in section 26-17.2 and/or at the storage facility so as to facilitate the return of said motor vehicle to the patron within one (1) hour of notification; or (2) have an employee or agent at the telephone number provided to the police department in accordance with section 26-17.5 so as to facilitate the return of said motor vehicle to the patron within one (1) hour of notification. In addition, each towing firm shall have adequate, accessible on site parking and hook-up space available at all times for use by any owner, custodian or other person who arrives to retrieve a vehicle. 
(d)  A monetary, itemized receipt for each and every tow must be given to those persons whose vehicles have been towed by the towing service upon release of the vehicle. The information on the receipt must be clearly legible and include the time, date and place of the tow and the name of the towing service, with mailing address. The receipt must also list the amount of money paid for the release of the vehicle, any charges incurred in the tow and the reason for the charges. A copy of the receipt must be retained by the towing service. No charge shall be made for the use of tow dollies or gojacks. No charges other than those specifically authorized by this section shall be permitted. 
(e)  If the owner or custodian of any vehicle not authorized to be parked on private property returns after a tow truck has arrived and is engaged in hooking up or attaching the subject vehicle to the tow vehicle, or is attached to the subject vehicle, he may reclaim the vehicle upon payment of a service fee not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for light vehicles weighing up to ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight; eighty-five dollars ($85.00) for any mid-size vehicle having a gross vehicle weight greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds and not more than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross vehicle weight; and one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for any vehicle having a gross vehicle weight above eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds. No fee in excess of the applicable amount listed above shall be charged where the vehicle has not been removed from the lot or private property upon which it was unlawfully parked. 
If the owner or custodian of any vehicle not authorized to be parked on private property returns after a tow truck has arrived, but before the vehicle has been attached, hooked up or towed, he may reclaim the vehicle without payment of a service fee. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90; Ord. No. 4895-96; Ord. No. 5771-02; Ord. No. 5998-04; Ord. No. 6114-05, § 1; Ord. No. 7145-15; Ord. No. 7611-20, § 1)  
Sec. 26-17.5. - Same—Police to be notified. 
Prior to, or simultaneously with, the removal of any vehicle by a towing firm, it shall be the duty of the towing firm to notify the police department, by telephone, telefacsimile, or by other electronic means, of the following: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the towing firm and the name(s) of the person or persons making the tow; 
(2)  State license plate number of the vehicle towed and vehicle identification number of the vehicle towed; 
(3)  Color, make and model of the vehicle towed; 
(4)  Date and time of towing; 
(5)  Address of place from which vehicle was towed; 
(6)  Name of person with whom this towing agreement was made; and 
(7)  Address of place where vehicle is stored and telephone number of an employee or agent who can assist in recovering patron's vehicle. 
Upon release or return of a vehicle to its owner, it shall be the duty of the towing firm or tow truck operator to notify the police department, by telephone, telefacsimile, or by other electronic means, of the following within the next business day: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the towing firm and the name(s) of the person or persons that made the tow; 
(2)  State license plate number of the vehicle towed and vehicle identification number of the vehicle towed; 
(3)  Color, make and model of the vehicle towed; 
(4)  Date and time of the tow; 
(5)  Address of place from which vehicle was towed; 
(6)  Name of person with whom this towing agreement was made; and 
(7)  Address of place where vehicle was stored and telephone number of an employee or agent who assisted in releasing or returning patron's vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90; Ord. No. 4895-96; Ord. No. 7611-20, § 1)  
Sec. 26-17.6. - Same—Operator's log. 
Towing firm operators shall keep a log of all vehicles towed. The log shall include the information required by subsections (1) through (7) of section 26-17.5. 
Such log shall be available for inspection by the city police department during normal business hours of the tow truck operators. The log shall be retained by the towing firm for a minimum of six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90; Ord. No. 5771-02)  
Sec. 26-17.7. - Same—Illegal towing. 
Except when a towing firm is acting as an agent in the lawful and legal repossession of a vehicle as prescribed by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or to authorize a tow of a vehicle from any privately-owned property as specified in section 26-17.1 unless such property contains the proper signage in accordance with the requirements of section 26-17.2. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90)  
Sec. 26-17.8. - Same—Display of fees; excess charges not collectible. 
All businesses engaged in the towing of vehicles without the consent of their owners shall prominently display at their main place of business a comprehensive list of all their fees for towing, recovery and storage services, or the basis of such charges. The owners of any place where vehicles towed without the consent of their owners are stored shall also prominently display a comprehensive list of their fees for towing, recovery or storage, as applicable, or the basis of such charges. Charges in excess of those posted shall not be collectible from any motor vehicle owner whose vehicle is towed, recovered or stored without the said vehicle owner's consent. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90)  
Sec. 26-17.9. - Same—Provisions not to effect abandoned vehicle article of this chapter. 
The provisions of sections 26-16.1 through 26-17.10 shall not be interpreted to affect Article VII, Abandoned Vehicles, sections 26-196 through 26-201 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90)  
Sec. 26-17.10. - Violations in general. 
Any person violating any provision of sections 26-17.2 through 26-17.8 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4017-90)  
Sec. 26-18. - Notice of repossession of vehicle. 
(a)  Where any person intends to repossess a motor vehicle in the city, notice shall be given to the police department by such person prior to the repossession of the motor vehicle. The notice need not be in writing, but shall specify the particular vehicle and the location from which it is to be repossessed, the location at which it is to be stored, the person repossessing the vehicle and the person on whose behalf the vehicle is being repossessed. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2249; Code 1961, § 23-261; Ord. No. 4915-96)  
Sec. 26-19. - Buying, selling, etc., vehicles or parts from which identification numbers or marks have been removed; notice to police. 
No person shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have in his or her possession any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which the manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed, for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the identity of such vehicle, part or accessory. Every person to whom is offered for sale any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed the manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification mark shall immediately notify the chief of police of such offer. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 6; Code 1961, § 6-6) 
State Law reference— Removing vehicle identification numbers or possession of vehicle with the numbers removed, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1074, 46.2-1075.  
Sec. 26-20. - Defacing, damaging, etc., traffic signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, knock down or remove any sign legally posted, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-41) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-832.  
Sec. 26-21. - Visual obstructions to traffic. 
(a)  No visual obstruction shall be permitted or allowed at the intersection of any streets, or point of ingress or egress to or from any street, in such a manner as to obstruct or limit free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which makes use of any word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to mislead, interfere with or create an unsafe traffic condition. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer or such engineer's authorized representative to make such studies and determinations as necessary to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1819, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-40.1)  
Sec. 26-22. - Designation of private roads and streets as highways for law enforcement purposes. 
(a)  The private roads and streets in the residential development(s) set forth in subsection (b) are hereby designated, for law enforcement purposes only, as highways as defined by section 46.2-100, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) are applicable to the following residential development(s): 
(1)  Warwick Mobile Home Estates, Ltd. 
12095 Jefferson Avenue 
Newport News, Virginia 23606 
(2)  Villages of Kiln Creek 
600 Brick Kiln Boulevard 
Newport News, Virginia 23602 
(3)  Americana Park East 
406 Merry Oaks Drive 
Newport News, Virginia 23608 
(4)  Carleton Falls 
c/o Community Group, Inc. 
825 Diligence Drive, Suite 110 
Newport News, Virginia 23606 
(c)  For any additional designation of private streets and roads as highways enacted by council after July 1, 2007, such designation will apply to only residential developments containing one hundred (100) or more lots or residential dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 3664-87; Ord No. 4080-90; Ord. No. 4982-97; Ord. No. 5478-00; Ord. No. 6023-04, § 1; Ord. No. 6427-07, § 1)  
Secs. 26-23—26-31. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7523-19, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2019, repealed Art. II, §§ 26-32—26-37, which pertained to transportation safety commission and derived from Ord. No. 1166, §§ 2—4; Code 1961, §§ 23-257—23-259; Ord. No. 2500-78; Ord. No. 2702-80; Ord. No. 3027-83; Ord. No. 3260-84; Ord. No. 5067-97; Ord. No. 5406-00, § 1; and Ord. No. 6716-10, § 1. 
 
Secs. 26-32—26-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE LICENSE FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6295-06, § 1, adopted September 26, 2006, effective January 1, 2007, amended Art. III, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. III was entitled, "Vehicle License." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Power of city license vehicles, § 2.02A. 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Local vehicle license, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-48. - Purpose of article. 
In order to provide necessary funds for the usual daily operation of various departments of the city government and to provide funds necessary for debt retirement and other necessary expenditures incurred in the rendering of the various services to the citizens of the city, the city council hereby adopts and ordains the provisions of this article to impose a vehicle license fee. 
(Ord. No. 6295-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-49. - Levy of license fee; situs. 
(a)  For each and every year, there is hereby levied and shall be collected from every person owning a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as identified in subsection (c) herein, which is normally garaged, stored or parked within the city limits for any portion of the year between January 1 and June 30, until otherwise changed, the annual license fees on motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers as identified in subsection (c) herein and as hereinafter set forth in this article. 
(b)  The license fee imposed by this article shall be levied against the owner of each motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as identified in subsection (c) herein, the motive power of which is other than animal power, who resides within or boards within or garages within the city such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer as identified in subsection (c) herein, and the owner of each such vehicle used in the operation of any business conducted within the city. 
(c)  The amount of such annual license fee shall be as follows: 
  ..... Fees 
(1)  Private passenger cars and leased cars—Gross weight of 4,000 pounds or under .....$26.00 
(2)  Private passenger cars and leased cars—Gross weight over 4,000 pounds .....31.00 
(3)  Motorcycles and motor scooters .....24.00 
(4)  Trucks—Gross weight of 4,000 pounds or under .....26.00 
(5)  Trucks—Gross weight of 4,001 pounds to 10,000 pounds .....31.00 
(6)  Trucks—Gross weight of 10,001 pounds and over, and tractors .....31.00 
Plus, per 100 pounds of weight, or major fraction thereof, in excess of 10,000 pounds .....0.20 
(7)  Trailers: 
a.  All trailers 1,500 pounds or under .....7.50 
b.  All trailers (except boat trailers) 1,501 to 4,000 pounds .....18.00 
c.  All trailers (except boat trailers) 4,001 pounds and over .....23.00 
d.  All boat trailers .....7.50 
(8)  Buses: 
a.  Buses and motor vehicle carriers of passengers and property, per 100 pounds .....0.55 
b.  Private buses and motor vehicle carriers of passengers not used for hire, per 100 pounds .....0.25 
(Ord. No. 6295-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6302-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-50. - Exemptions and special rates. 
(a)  No person shall be required to pay a vehicle license fee under this article who is identified within the following categories or exempt under decisions of the United States Supreme Court: 
(1)  Vehicles owned or leased by active members or active auxiliary members of volunteer fire departments; 
(2)  Vehicles owned by surviving spouses of persons qualified to receive special license plates under § 46.2-739; 
(3)  Vehicles owned by persons qualified to receive special license plates under § 46.2-739; 
(4)  Vehicles for persons qualified to receive POW special license plates under § 46.2-746; 
(5)  Vehicles owned by any person in active military service who is in the city solely by reason of military orders and who has a legal residence in a state other than Virginia. 
(b)  Special rates for certain classifications. Members of the state National Guard shall be entitled to pay the license fee for their motor vehicles at one-half (½) the prevailing rate, upon presentation to the city treasurer of a current state registration card which indicates that the state issued for the motor vehicle a National Guard license plate for that year. This section shall only apply to private passenger cars, regardless of weight, and trucks with a gross weight of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less. 
(c)  Exemptions shall be authorized by the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 6295-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-51. - Payment of license fee required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as identified in section 26-49(c) of the City Code after the due date indicated on the personal property tax bill of any license year established in this article without having paid the requisite license fee. 
(Ord. No. 6295-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6302-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-52. - Invoice for license fee. 
(a)  After a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as identified in section 26-49(c) of the City Code has been assessed for personal property tax purposes by the commissioner of the revenue, or registered with and assessed by the commissioner of the revenue for personal property tax purposes, the city treasurer shall mail to the taxpayer a bill for the license fee for the current and each subsequent year. The license fee shall be listed as a separate item on each year's annual personal property tax bill and shall be due on or before June 5 or as indicated on the tax bill. 
(b)  Upon payment of the license fee prescribed by this article and compliance with all other applicable provisions of this article, the city treasurer shall mark the records to indicate that the license fee has been paid for the taxpayer's vehicle for which the license fee was charged. 
(Ord. No. 6295-06, § 1)  
Sec. 26-52.1. - License fee credit when new motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer purchased. 
(a)  When the owner or co-owner of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer for which a vehicle license fee has been assessed purchases or obtains a new motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer between January 1 and June 30 of the same assessment year, a credit may be processed toward the payment of a vehicle license fee under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The registration of the previously owned vehicle and the new vehicle shall be in the name(s) of the same owner or co-owner; and 
(2)  The owner or co-owner makes a written request to the city treasurer for such credit or makes such request in person; and 
(3)  The owner or co-owner pays an administrative fee of one dollar; and 
(4)  The owner or co-owner provides documentation to the commissioner of the revenue (i) confirming the sale or disposal of the old vehicle, trailer or semitrailer sufficient to end personal property tax liability and (ii) files a personal property return for the newly obtained motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. 
(5)  The credit shall not exceed the amount of the vehicle license fee paid on the previously owned vehicle. 
(b)  The city treasurer may administer the credit procedure by applying the license fee payment to the old vehicle account and thereafter assessing a one dollar ($1.00) administrative fee to the new vehicle account as if it were the license fee due for that period. 
(Ord. No. 6387-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6421-07, § 1)  
Sec. 26-53. - Agreement with Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall enter into a formal agreement with the Commissioner of the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) whereby DMV will refuse to issue or renew any state license registration of any applicant who owes to the city any vehicle licenses fees, tangible personal property taxes, or parking citations issued to residents of the city. Before being issued any state vehicle registration or renewal of such license or registration by DMV, the applicant shall first satisfy DMV that all such local vehicle license fees, tangible personal property taxes and parking citations have been paid in full. 
(b)  DMV shall charge a reasonable fee to cover costs of such enforcement action, and the city treasurer shall add the cost of this DMV fee to the delinquent tax bill or the amount of the parking citation. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall notify DMV in the manner provided for in the agreement with DMV and supply to DMV information necessary to identify the debtor whose registration or renewal is to be denied. 
(d)  In case of parking violations, DMV shall only refuse to issue or renew the vehicle registration of any applicant for the vehicle that incurred the parking violations. 
(Ord. No. 6295-06, § 1)  
Secs. 26-54—26-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-70. - Stop and yield intersections. 
The traffic engineer shall designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way, and cause such intersections to be marked by the appropriate signs or signals. The duty of drivers approaching such signs shall be as prescribed in the state law adopted by section 26-8. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-29) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301.  
Sec. 26-71. - One-way streets. 
(a)  The city council may designate any highway or any separate roadway or street under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall cause to be erected appropriate signs, and traffic thereon shall move only in the direction designated. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance designating any street, highway or roadway for one-way traffic and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-67)  
Sec. 26-72. - Driving while under influence of alcohol or drugs; adoption of state law. 
Article 2 (Section 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2, Code of Virginia, as amended and as they shall be amended in the future, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitute a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the city, is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set out at length herein. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any section of the Code of Virginia as adopted in this section. 
(Ord. No. 3252-84; Ord. No. 3760-88; Ord. No. 3958-89, § 1; Ord. No. 4083-90; Ord. No. 4194-91; Ord. No. 4360-92; Ord. No. 4491-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4507-93; Ord. No. 6397-07, § 1) 
Cross reference— Operation of bicycle while under influence of alcohol or drugs, § 10-24; public drunkenness, § 28-12. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt state law on the subject, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313.  
Sec. 26-73. - Driving in or through funeral processions. 
The driver of every motor vehicle taking part in and forming a part of a funeral procession using the streets of the city shall, while so engaged, continuously burn the headlights on such vehicles as a warning to drivers of other vehicles that a funeral procession is in progress. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to enter such procession, except behind the last vehicle already a part of such procession, nor shall the driver of any vehicle, other than a public safety vehicle of the city or an ambulance, and then only in an emergency, pass through or interrupt a funeral procession already formed and moving. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-28) 
State Law reference— Right-of-way of funeral processions under police escort, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828.  
Sec. 26-74. - Driving over closed or barricaded streets. 
No person shall drive any vehicle over or across any street, across or around which there is a barrier, or at, over or near which there is a person or a sign warning persons not to drive over or across, or at a sign indicating that the street is closed. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-23)  
Sec. 26-75. - Driving on sidewalks or curbs. 
No person shall drive or propel on, along or across any sidewalk or curb in the city, any motor vehicle; provided however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent anyone from driving across such sidewalk or curb for the purpose of entering a parking lot, an alley or such person's premises, where proper provisions have been made for passing on such sidewalk without damage thereto. Any person guilty of violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 1159, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-24) 
State Law reference— Driving on sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-903.  
Sec. 26-76. - Operation of vehicles on public or private property not open to public for vehicular use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated any motor vehicle, motorcycle, mini-bike, go-kart, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter or other form of transportation propelled by an internal combustion engine upon the private property of another or upon public property, other than school property, which is not held open to the public for vehicular use. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle, motorcycle, mini-bike, go-kart, trail bike, dune buggy or motor scooter upon the grounds or parking lot of any school property owned by the city or the school board of the city. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The operation of any vehicle by persons driving upon such property with the consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property, or to the owner of such property or the owner's family, employees, agents or lessees; 
(2)  The operation of emergency and governmental vehicles upon such property; 
(3)  The operation of any licensed vehicle upon such school property open to vehicular use by teachers, students or members of the school staff for the purpose of attending school sessions or other related school functions or by persons who have legitimate business at such school; 
(4)  The operation of any licensed vehicle authorized by the principal of a particular school on the property of such school. 
(Ord. No. 1488, § 1; Ord. No. 1639, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-25.3)  
Sec. 26-77. - Operation of trucks or carriers prohibited on certain streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle, other than a private passenger automobile or panel or pickup truck, three-quarters of a ton or under, on any street or avenue in the city designated as "no through trucks," except for the purpose of receiving loads or making deliveries. This subsection shall be in effect only when signs are erected giving notice of such designation. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Designating streets upon which the use of motor trucks is prohibited, except for receiving loads or making deliveries; 
(2)  Restricting the use of motor trucks passing through the city to streets designated therein; or 
(3)  Prohibiting the use of designated streets by private carriers for hire, as well as common carriers, except for the purpose of receiving passengers or goods or making deliveries; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 468; Ord. No. 1684, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 23-34, 23-35) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prohibit use of trucks and buses on certain streets, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1304.  
Sec. 26-78. - Operation of handcarts and wagons. 
(a)  The overall width of all carts and wagons operated by hand shall not be more than thirty-six (36) inches and the overall length of such carts and wagons, including the tongue or handle of same, shall not exceed seven (7) feet. The overall dimensions of such carts and wagons, including loads, shall in no case exceed the following: Width, thirty-six (36) inches; length, eight (8) feet, exclusive of tongue or handle; height, four (4), feet, eight (8) inches. 
(b)  All such carts and wagons shall at all times keep as close to the right-hand curb of the street as possible and shall, if upon the streets between sunset and sunrise, carry a light visible for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet in the rear of same. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-217)  
Sec. 26-79. - Dogs riding in motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person operating any motor vehicles on any public street or highway to allow a dog to ride in the motor vehicle or in any portion thereof that is open in such a manner as to permit such dog to jump out of the vehicle or to be thrown therefrom by acceleration of, stopping of, or accident involving such vehicle, including, but not limited to, the open bed of a truck, the interior of a convertible vehicle with the top down or removed, the rear storage portion of a station wagon with the tailgate open, or with the trunk or hatchback open. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) above shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who owns or has control of any dog and who allows such dog to ride in the prohibited portion of any motor vehicle if such dog is confined to a cage of adequate construction and design to prevent its escape therefrom; and 
(2)  Any portion of a motor vehicle which is fully enclosed except for open windows. 
(Ord. No. 4142-91) 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 26-80. - Obstructing intersection or marked crosswalks. 
No operator of a vehicle shall enter into an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk, in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding, to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal or device indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 7309-16)  
Secs. 26-81—26-88. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PERMIT FOR OPERATION OF OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES OR MOVING HOUSES 
 
Sec. 26-89. - General authority to issue. 
The director of engineering or his designee may issue permits, conditioned as deemed necessary or advisable, permitting the operation of vehicles, or combinations thereof, the width, height, length or weight of which exceed that permitted by the state law adopted by section 26-8, if such operation will not damage any infrastructure, render the streets dangerous or otherwise unduly impair the free flow of traffic thereon. The issuance of permits shall be in accordance with the city's moving and hauling policy, as promulgated and amended by the director of engineering, which is incorporated herein by reference. Permits issued in accordance with this section shall be designated as single trip, general blanket permit, single trip super load or super load blanket permit, as defined in the city's moving and hauling policy. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, §§ 23-205—23-207, 23-218; Ord. No. 6364-08, § 1; Ord. No. 7300-16) 
State Law reference— Maximum size and weight of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1101 et seq.; authority of city to issue permits for oversize and overweight vehicles, § 46.2-1139.  
Sec. 26-90. - Blanket permits. 
General blanket and restricted blanket permits may be issued under section 26-89 to any individual, business entity, government agency or a utility company for a specific vehicle owned or operated by it, subject to the requirements of section 26-93 and the city's moving and hauling policy. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-222; Ord. No. 6364-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-91. - Effect of issuance of state permit for operation over primary routes. 
A person shall be deemed to have obtained a permit from the director of engineering for the operation of an overweight, overwidth, overlength, overheight or unlicensed vehicle if such person is operating such vehicle pursuant to a permit issued by an appropriate agency or entity of the Commonwealth of Virginia over primary routes through the city. A permit shall be required and may be issued for the movement of overweight, overwidth, overlength, overheight or unlicensed vehicles over all other streets in the city, whether or not the permittee has a permit from the state highway and transportation commission. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-224; Ord. No. 3025-83; Ord. No. 6364-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-92. - Permit required for transport of super loads. 
No person shall move on, transport over, carry along or convey upon any street of the city any super load, as that term is defined by the city's moving and hauling policy, or anything so heavy as to require the use of structural deck plating, skids or rollers for the transporting thereof, unless such person shall have secured a permit to do so from the director of engineering or his designee, and has complied with section 26-93 and the city's moving and hauling policy. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-209; Ord. No. 6364-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-93. - Applicant's bond or insurance. 
Before issuing any permit pursuant to this article, the director of engineering or his designee shall require the applicant to file evidence of insurance or a bond, in the form of a cash bond, corporate surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit, adequate to protect the city from any liability or damage to streets which may arise from the permitted operation and which in no instance shall be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-221; Ord. No. 6364-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-94. - Permit fees and charges. 
A permit fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be paid to the city before any single move permit (excluding super loads) shall be issued under this article; provided, however, that: 
(1)  The fee for each general blanket permit shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first vehicle owned, leased or controlled by a person or business entity and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional vehicle owned, leased or controlled by such person or entity; or 
(2)  The fee per vehicle for each super load blanket permit issued under section 26-90 shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
A permit fee of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid to the city before any super load permit for a single move, shall be issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-223; Ord. No. 3892-89; Ord. No. 6364-08, § 1; Ord. No. 7300-16)  
Sec. 26-95. - Agreement to comply with permit and the city's moving and hauling policy and to repair damages caused by oversized or overweight vehicles. 
(a)  Acceptance of a permit by the applicant requires that he/she certify that the vehicle load can and will be moved in strict compliance with the terms set forth in the permit and in the city's moving and hauling policy, that the operator of the vehicle is properly licensed to operate the vehicle on public highways and that all information submitted to secure the permit is accurate. No person, owner, representative, agent or employee of the permittee shall knowingly allow anyone to violate the regulations or restrictions set forth in the permit and the city's moving and hauling policy. 
(b)  By the acceptance of a permit under this article for the operation of an oversized or overweight vehicle, or by the operation of such a vehicle when no permit from the city is required by virtue of the provisions of section 26-91, a person agrees to restore or repair any damage caused by the vehicle to any street or appurtenances thereto. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-218; Ord. No. 6364-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-96. - Conditions of permit for overlength vehicles. 
Unless otherwise specified in the permit, every permit issued under this article for the operation of an overlength vehicle shall be deemed to include the following: 
(1)  The permittee agrees to give adequate warning to the traveling public of the overlength vehicle and further agrees that the maximum overhang shall not exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) of the overall length of the load. 
(2)  The permittee shall not permit the overlength load or any part thereof to drag upon the roadway, regardless of whether overhang has been permitted. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord No. 686; Code 1961, § 23-207; Ord. No. 6364-08, § 1)  
Secs. 26-97—26-106. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking requirements of zoning ordinance, App. A, Art. XXV; parking of trucks, busses or commercial vehicles on lots in residential districts, App. A, § 2501H. 
State Law reference— Authority for local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-107. - General authority of traffic engineer relative to parking. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to regulate the parking of vehicles within the city by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating prohibited or limited parking, loading zones, the place and manner of parking and city parking areas and facilities. No person shall park a vehicle in violation of the directions of such signs or markers. 
(Ord. No. 975, § 1; Ord. No. 1684, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-39) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220.  
Sec. 26-108. - Stopping or parking prohibited in specified places. 
No person shall stop or park a vehicle upon any crosswalk, or between a safety zone and curb, or within fifteen (15) feet of the ends of any obstruction opposite the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-107)  
Sec. 26-108.1. - Parking in spaces reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park a vehicle in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk or that create a concern for their safety while walking as defined in Section 46.2-1240 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, unless such vehicle is displaying (i) disabled parking license plates, (ii) an organizational removable windshield placard, (iii) a permanent removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield placard issued under Section 46.2-1241 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or (iv) DV disabled parking license plates issued under subsection B of Section 46.2-739 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person who is not a disabled veteran, or has not been determined by a licensed physician to be disabled because of a limited or impaired ability to walk or a concern for his or her safety while walking, to stop or park a vehicle in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk or create a concern for their safety while walking, except when transporting a person with such a disability in the vehicle that is so stopped or parked. 
(c)  This section shall apply on public property and on privately owned parking areas open to the public. 
(d)  Use of such special parking plates or placards by persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk or that create a concern for their safety while walking shall be limited to passenger vehicles and pickup trucks during times when the person with such a disability is being transported in the vehicle. 
(e)  In the case of privately owned parking areas, a summons for violation of this section may be issued by a police officer, a volunteer serving the City of Newport News pursuant to Section 46.2-1244 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended and other uniformed personnel employed by the City of Newport News, Virginia, to enforce parking regulations without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner thereof. 
(f)  Parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk or that create a concern for their safety while walking shall be identified in accordance with the provisions of Section 36-99.11 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. However, no violation of this ordinance, which has been adopted pursuant to Section 46.2-1242 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be dismissed for a property owner's failure to comply strictly with the requirements for disabled parking signs set forth in Section 36-99.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, provided the space is clearly distinguishable as a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk. 
(g)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). No portion of said fine below one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) may be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 2612-80; Ord. No. 3321-85; Ord. No. 3744-88; Ord. No. 4255-91; Ord. No. 4768-95; Ord. No. 5079-97; Ord. No. 5179-98; Ord. No. 5146-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5577-01; Ord. No. 6002-04)  
Sec. 26-109. - Manner of stopping. 
(a)  Unless in an emergency or where otherwise indicated by signs or markers, or to allow another vehicle or pedestrians to cross in front, no vehicle shall be stopped in any street except close to and parallel with the curb of the street. 
(b)  Except as hereinafter provided, no vehicle shall be stopped except close to the right-hand curb and parallel with the curb of the street. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be stopped with its left side to the curb except upon two-lane streets in single-family, multiple-family and town house dwelling districts and upon all one-way streets. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to vehicles owned or operated by merchants while actually receiving and delivering merchandise, nor to vehicles stopped in loading zones in compliance with section 26-124. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 2254; Code 1961, § 23-108)  
Sec. 26-110. - Stopping for purpose of advertising or sale. 
Stopping a vehicle at any time upon any street for the purpose of advertising any article of any kind, or displaying thereon advertisements of any articles, or for advertisements or sale of the vehicle itself, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-109) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3.  
Sec. 26-111. - Repairing vehicles in streets. 
No machine shop, automobile dealer, automobile service station or other establishment for the repair or adjustment of vehicles shall use the public streets, sidewalks or alleys for repairing vehicles. In case of necessity, vehicles may be stopped in public streets or alleys for the replacement of tires or minor adjustments only, but shall not then be stopped in such manner as to impede traffic. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-110)  
Sec. 26-112. - Leaving unattended child in locked vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any child, under the age of ten (10) years, unless attended by a person over ten (10) years of age, in a parked or stopped motor vehicle on the streets or alleys of the city, if the doors of such motor vehicle are locked and the windows closed, so that the doors cannot be opened from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-111)  
Sec. 26-113. - Backing to curb. 
No vehicle shall be backed to the curb, except during the time actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-112)  
Sec. 26-114. - Parallel parking. 
Except upon streets designated and marked for angle parking, or where backing to the curb is permitted, motor vehicles shall not be parked less than three (3) feet apart, nor with the near wheels further than twelve (12) inches from the curb. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-113)  
Sec. 26-115. - Angle parking. 
(a)  For the convenience of the public, the traffic engineer is hereby vested with authority to designate and distinctly mark off certain blocks or portions thereof in the streets of the city within vehicles maybe stopped at such angles to the curbline as may be designated by such markings, and thereafter vehicles, at such points, may be lawfully parked within and as indicated by such marks and not otherwise. 
(b)  Angle parking, where heretofore permitted by the cities of Newport News and Warwick, shall be permitted until such times as changed by the traffic engineer or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-116)  
Sec. 26-116. - Parking within designated spaces. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on the streets or avenues of the city where lines or markings are painted or buttons or any other markings are placed, except within the spaces indicated for such parking. Every vehicle parked alongside of or next to any curbing shall be parked within the lines or markings or buttons as established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such lines or markings or buttons or to park such vehicle in such a position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings or buttons. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-115)  
Sec. 26-117. - Double parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for vehicles to be stopped two (2) or more abreast parallel with the curb, except in funeral processions; provided, that the double parking of trucks for loading and unloading of merchandise at a point immediately opposite the place of receipt or delivery, but not within twenty-five (25) feet of the nearest building line of an intersecting street or another double parked truck, shall be permitted for a period of time necessary for such loading and unloading, provided no parking space within fifty (50) feet of the point of delivery or loading is available. Such double parking, however, is subject to the right of any police officer to cause such truck to be moved when necessary to relieve or prevent congestion of traffic. 
(b)  Such double parking as is permitted in subsection (a) is subject to the prohibitions and restrictions heretofore adopted by the former cities of Newport News and Warwick which prohibitions are hereby expressly continued in effect until such time as they may be changed by the traffic engineer or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 1626, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 23-103, 23-117)  
Sec. 26-118. - Parking on one-way street. 
On all one-way streets in the city, parking shall be in the direction of moving traffic, except on such streets where parking on both sides is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-114)  
Sec. 26-119. - Parking on sidewalks. 
Except as provided by ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to place or park any motor vehicle or trailer upon any sidewalk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-118)  
Sec. 26-120. - Lights on parked or stopped vehicles. 
Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a street or highway, whether attended or unattended, during the period from one-half (½) hour after sunset to one-half (½) hour before sunrise, there shall be displayed upon such vehicle one (1) or more lamps projecting a white or amber light visible, in clear weather, from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle and projecting a red light visible under like conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the rear; provided, however, that no lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when parked in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A violation of this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 26-2. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1037.  
Sec. 26-121. - Two-hour parking limit for certain vehicles. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of one (1) ton upon any street or avenue in the city for a longer period of time than two (2) hours, except (i) in front or to the side of a building used primarily as a place of business by the owner of such vehicle, or (ii) in front or to the side of a structure to which or from which active loading operations are being conducted; provided, however, that where a lesser parking period is prescribed and designated on any street or avenue, then the parking of all vehicles shall be limited to the lesser parking period so designated. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1; Ord. No. 2225; Code 1961, § 23-120; Ord. No. 3222-84; Ord. No. 5300-99; Ord. No. 5339-99)  
Sec. 26-122. - Exemptions from parking time limits. 
Vehicles of regularly licensed practicing physicians, public health nurses and public health department tuberculosis outreach workers, while such physicians, public health nurses and public health department tuberculosis outreach workers are in the discharge of their professional duties, and which vehicles bear an insignia or sign prescribed by the chief of police, may be parked in limited parking zones or areas for a period of time not to exceed three (3) hours at any one (1) time. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-127; Ord. No. 4742-95; Ord. No. 4907-96)  
Sec. 26-123. - Removing, altering, etc., marks placed on tire of parked vehicle by any police officer, parking enforcement officer, or conservator of the peace. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cover up or in any manner remove, alter or tamper with any chalk mark or other mark, which has been placed by a police officer, parking enforcement officer, or conservator of the peace on the tire of a vehicle in order to measure the length of time such vehicle has been parked in a particular parking place, while such vehicle is parked on the public streets of this city. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1204, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-119.1; Ord. No. 3442-86)  
Sec. 26-124. - Loading zones. 
(a)  A loading zone shall be construed to mean a portion of a street adjacent to a curb, shall be limited to spaces in front or to the sides of stores, warehouses and places of business where merchandise or material is unloaded or loaded for receipt of distribution, shall be located only at such places as shall be determined and designated by the traffic engineer and shall be designated and marked as a "no parking, loading zone." 
(b)  All loading zones determined and designated by the traffic engineer shall be open and available for all businesses and shall not be for the exclusive use of any individual person, store, business, warehouse or place of business. 
(c)  No vehicle, except such as is used for the act of loading or unloading merchandise or material, shall be parked in a loading zone between the hours designated by the traffic engineer for such purpose. Any person violating this subsection, as indicated by the sign so placed, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 1684, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-33)  
Sec. 26-125. - Parking on land of another without authority. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, or parts thereof on the private property of any other person without his consent. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-119; Ord. No. 4026-90)  
Sec. 26-126. - Parking lot operators not to park vehicles on streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who operates a lot or place for the storage or parking of vehicles for others, whether compensated therefor or not, and for any agent or employee of such person, to store, place or park any vehicle, after it has been delivered into such person's care, custody or control, upon any highway, street or road, or to order, cause or permit the same to be parked anywhere but on the lot at which the owner of the vehicle has delivered care, custody or control of the vehicle to the operator, agent or employee of such person. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1204, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-119.1)  
Sec. 26-126.1. - Parking of certain vehicles on streets in residential districts prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to be parked in the streets of the city, in any residential district, any vehicle whose overall length exceeds twenty (20) feet, or whose overall width exceeds eight (8) feet, or whose overall height exceeds eight (8) feet, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, and between the hours of 6:00 p.m., on Friday and 6:00 a.m., the following Monday, except for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers or cargo. The city manager may promulgate a policy to address criteria under which unlawfully parked vehicles may be towed. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following: (1) vehicles bearing disabled parking license plates, or displaying a permanent removable or temporary removable windshield placard as issued by the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles of the Commonwealth of Virginia; (2) public safety, public works or public utility vehicles while on duty and actively engaged in required job functions, regardless of size, including, but not limited to vehicles operated as the Newport News Police Department's Mobile Station, Tactical Unit and DUI Enforcement Trailer; and (3) tow trucks that are on call for the purpose of removing disabled vehicles. The terms "on duty" and "actively engaged" as used in subsection (b)(2) shall not include periods of time during which a vehicle operator is in an "on call" status or otherwise waiting for orders or instructions. 
(Ord. No. 4973-96; Ord. No. 4977-96)  
Sec. 26-127. - General penalty for violation of article. 
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article for which no penalty is specifically provided shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 223; Code 1961, §§ 23-129, 23-130; Ord. No. 3321-85, § 1)  
Sec. 26-128. - Notice of certain parking violations. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to approve and have prepared notices which charge that a person has: 
(1)  Violated the parking restrictions provided for in section 26-107; 
(2)  Parked on a crosswalk in violation of section 26-108; 
(3)  Parked with the left side of the vehicle to the curb in violation of section 26-109; 
(4)  Backed to the curb in violation of section 26-113; 
(5)  Parked too far from the curb in violation of section 26-114; 
(6)  Improperly parked in a designated parking space in violation of section 26-116; 
(7)  Double parked in violation of section 26-117; 
(8)  Parked on the wrong side of a one-way street in violation of section 26-118; 
(9)  Parked on a sidewalk in violation of section 26-119; 
(10)  Parked for over two (2) hours in violation of section 26-121; 
(11)  Parked in a loading zone in violation of section 26-124. 
(12)  Parked in a "no parking" zone in violation of section 26-136 or 26-139; 
(13)  Parked improperly in a metered space or zone in violation of section 26-150; 
(14)  Parked overtime in a metered space or zone in violation of section 26-151 or 26-152; 
(15)  Parked in a loading zone, bus stop or taxi stand in violation of section 26-155; 
(16)  Parked a vehicle other than a passenger automobile or other permitted vehicle in a metered parking lot in violation of section 26-164; 
(17)  Parked improperly in a metered parking lot in violation of section 26-167; 
(18)  Parked overtime in a metered parking lot in violation of section 26-168 or 26-169; 
(19)  Parked in front of fire hydrant or any driveway in violation of Section 46.2-1239 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to approve and have prepared notices which charge that a person has: 
(1)  Parked on private property without owner's consent in violation of section 26-125; 
(2)  Parked in funeral zone in violation of section 26-138; 
(3)  Left motor running on unattended vehicle in violation of Section 46.2-1071 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended; 
(4)  Parked in violation of the residential parking permit program as provided for in Article IX of this chapter; 
(5)  Parked in violation of residential district parking regulations for oversized vehicles as provided for in section 26-126.1; 
(6)  Parked near an intersection in violation of section 26-108.2. 
(c)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to approve and have prepared notices which charge that a person has failed to obtain and display any required decal or displayed a decal after its expiration date in violation of section 26-54. 
(d)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to approve and have prepared notices which charge that a person has improperly parked in a space designated for handicapped parking in violation of section 26-108.1. 
(e)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to approve and have prepared notices which charge that a person has improperly parked in a fire lane in violation of section 26-141. 
(f)  A notice approved by the chief of police under subsection (a), (b), (c) (d) or (e) above may be affixed, by a police officer or other authorized representative of the police department, to the windshield wiper, steering apparatus or other plainly visible portion of any motor vehicle involved in a violation specified in subsection (a), (b), (c) (d) or (e) above. Such notices shall be upon a printed form, which clearly indicates the specific violation charged and the time thereof. Such notice shall be deemed due notice to the registered owner of such motor vehicle of the specific violation set out therein. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 1436, § 1; Ord. No. 1745; Code 1961, § 23-36; Ord. No. 2483-78, § 1; Ord. No. 2613-80, § 1; Ord No. 2858-81; Ord. No. 3744-88; Ord. No. 3958-89, § 1; Ord. No. 4135-90; Ord. No. 4315-92, § 1; Ord. No. 5006-97; Ord. No. 5043-97; Ord. No. 5179-98; Ord. No. 5487-00, § 1) 
Editor's note— At the request of the city, the state law references in section 26-128(b)(3), (4) have been amended to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 26-129. - Right of person receiving notice under section 26-128 to waive court appearance and pay fine to city treasurer. 
(a)  Every person to whom due notice of a violation is given pursuant to section 26-128(a) may waive his/her right to appear and to be formally tried for the violation set forth in the notice; and upon the voluntary payment of a twenty dollar ($20.00) fine, or a fifteen dollar ($15.00) fine if the fine is paid to the city treasurer within five (5) business days of the issuance of such notice, such person shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charge set forth in such notice. In the event that no voluntary payment is received by the city treasurer by close of business thirty (30) days from the date of the first notice of violation, or received by the city treasurer by mail postmarked within thirty (30) days of the first notice of violation, the chief of police shall cause a second notice of violation to be mailed to the owner of the vehicle at his last known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the department of motor vehicles. The second notice shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "law enforcement notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in type at least fourteen (14) point or one-half (½) inch in height. Upon the voluntary payment of the twenty dollar ($20.00) fine plus the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) processing fee to the city treasurer within ten (10) business days from the date of the mailing of the second notice, or if received by the city treasurer by mail postmarked within ten (10) business days from the date of the mailing of the second notice sent by the chief of police, such person shall be deemed to have waived his right to appear and be formally tried, and shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charges set forth in such notice. 
(b)  Every person to whom due notice of a violation is given pursuant to section 26-128(b) may waive his/her right to appear and to be formally tried for the violation set forth in the notice; and upon the voluntary payment of a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine, or a twenty dollar ($20.00) fine if the fine is paid to the city treasurer within five (5) business days of the issuance of such notice, such person shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charge set forth in such notice. In the event that no voluntary payment is received by the city treasurer by close of business thirty (30) days from the date of the first notice of violation, or received by the city treasurer by mail postmarked within thirty (30) days of the first notice of violation, the chief of police shall cause a second notice of violation to be mailed to the owner of the vehicle at his last known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the department of motor vehicles. The second notice shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "law enforcement notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in all capital letters, bold face type, no smaller than the print type size used for the primary address on the envelope. If "window" envelopes are used, the words "Law-Enforcement Notice" shall be clearly visible through the window of the envelope. Upon the voluntary payment of the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fine plus the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) processing fee to the city treasurer within ten (10) business days from the date of the mailing of the second notice, or if received by the city treasurer by mail postmarked within ten (10) business days from the date of the mailing of the second notice sent by the chief of police, such person shall be deemed to have waived his right to appear and be formally tried and shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charges set forth in such notice. 
(c)  Every person to whom due notice of a violation is given pursuant to section 26-128(c) may waive his/her right to appear and to be formally tried for the violation set forth in the notice; and upon the voluntary payment of a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine, or a ninety-five dollar ($95.00) fine if the fine is paid to the city treasurer within five (5) business days of the issuance of such notice, such person shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charge set forth in such notice. In the event that no voluntary payment is received by the city treasurer by close of business thirty (30) days from the date of the first notice of violation, or received by the city treasurer by mail postmarked within thirty (30) days of the first notice of violation, the chief of police shall cause a second notice of violation to be mailed to the owner of the vehicle at his last known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the department of motor vehicles. The second notice shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "law enforcement notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in type at least fourteen (14) point or one-half (½) inch in height. Upon the voluntary payment of the one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine plus the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) processing fee to the city treasurer within ten (10) business days of the mailing of the second notice, or if received by the city treasurer by mail postmarked within ten (10) business days from the date of the mailing of the second notice sent by the chief of police, such person shall be deemed to have waived his right to appear and be formally tried and shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charges set forth in such notice. 
(d)  Every person to whom due notice of a violation is given pursuant to section 26-128(d) may waive his/her right to appear and to be formally tried for the violation set forth in the notice; and upon the voluntary payment of a one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) fine, or a one hundred twenty-five dollar ($125.00) fine if the fine is paid to the city treasurer within five (5) business days of the issuance of such notice, such person shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charge set forth in such notice. In the event that no voluntary payment is received by the city treasurer by close of business thirty (30) days from the date of the first notice of violation, or received by the city treasurer by mail postmarked within thirty (30) days of the first notice of violation, the chief of police shall cause a second notice of violation to be mailed to the owner of the vehicle at his last known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the department of motor vehicles. The second notice shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "law enforcement notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in type at least fourteen (14) point or one-half (½) inch in height. Upon the voluntary payment of the one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) fine plus a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) processing fee to the city treasurer within ten (10) business days of the mailing of the second notice, or if received by the city treasurer by mail postmarked within ten (10) business days from the date of the mailing of the second notice sent by the chief of police, such person shall be deemed to have waived his right to appear and be formally tried and shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charges set forth in such notice. 
(e)  Every person to whom due notice of a violation is given pursuant to section 26-128(e) may waive his/her right to appear and to be formally tried for the violation set forth in the notice; and upon the voluntary payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine, or a forty-five dollar ($45.00) fine if the fine is paid to the city treasurer within five (5) business days of the issuance of such notice, such person shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charge set forth in such notice. In the event that no voluntary payment is received by the city treasurer by close of business thirty (30) days from the date of the first notice of violation or received by the city treasurer by mail, postmarked within thirty (30) days of the first notice of violation, the chief of police shall cause a second notice of violation to be mailed to the owner of the vehicle at his last known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the department of motor vehicles. The second notice shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "law enforcement notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in type at least fourteen (14) point or one-half (½) inch in height. Upon the voluntary payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine plus a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) processing fee to the city treasurer within ten (10) business days of the mailing of the second notice, or received by the city treasurer by mail postmarked within ten (10) business days from the date of the mailing of the second notice sent by the chief of police, such person shall be deemed to have waived his right to appear and be formally tried and shall not be required to appear before the traffic court for trial upon the charges set forth in such notice. 
(f)  "Business day" as used in this section shall exclude weekends and federal, state and local holidays. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 1436, § 1; Ord. No. 1745; Code 1961, § 23-36; Ord. No. 2488-78, § 1; Ord. No. 2651-50; Ord. No. 3321-85; Ord. No. 3744-88; Ord. No. 4255-91; Ord. No. 4315-92, § 1; Ord. No. 4490-93; Ord. No. 5179-98; Ord. No. 5270-99; Ord. No. 5487-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5819-02, § 1)  
Sec. 26-130. - Presumption in prosecutions for parking violations. 
In any prosecution charging that a vehicle has been parked in violation of any provision of this article or other ordinance of the city, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked in violation of any such provision, together with proof that the defendant was, at the time of such violation, the registered owner of the vehicles, as required by Chapter 6 (section 46.2-600 et seq.) of Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 975, § 1; Ord. No. 1373, § 1; Ord. No. 1374, § 1; Ord. No. 1436, § 1; Ord. No. 1437, § 1; Ord. No. 1438, § 1; Ord. No. 1684, § 1; Ord. No. 1745; Code 1961, §§ 23-36, 23-39, 23-144, 23-158; Ord. No. 3958-89, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220.  
Sec. 26-131. - Removal of motor vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violations. 
(a)  Whenever there is found any motor vehicle parked upon the public streets or highways or public grounds against which there are three (3) or more outstanding unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices, such vehicle may, by towing or otherwise, be removed or conveyed to a place in the city designated by the chief of police for the temporary storage of such vehicle. The removal or conveyance of the vehicle shall be by, or under the direction of, an officer or member of the police department, or other authorized agent of the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the officer or member of the police department, or other authorized agent of the city, removing such motor vehicle or under whose direction such vehicle is removed to inform as soon as practicable the owner of the removed vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices, for which or on account of which, such vehicle was removed. 
(c)  The owner of such removed motor vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be permitted to repossess the vehicle by payment of outstanding parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed and by payment of all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage of the vehicle, and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay such owner be unknown and unascertainable, any such motor vehicle may be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 3321-85; Ord. No. 5301-99; Ord. No. 5340-99; Ord. No. 5376-99)  
Secs. 26-132—26-135. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - "NO PARKING" ZONES 
 
Sec. 26-136. - Defined; continuation of existing zones. 
(a)  A "no parking zone" shall be construed as an area, space or point within or at which no vehicle shall be permitted to park, when such space or point is designated and distinctly marked or indicated by "no parking" signs. 
(b)  No parking zones heretofore established and marked as such in the former cities of Newport News and Warwick shall continue as such until such time as changed by the traffic engineer or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-121)  
Sec. 26-137. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4643-94, adopted Aug. 23, 1994, repealed § 26-137, which pertained to no parking zone on portion of 25th Street. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 26-138. - In funeral areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any street or avenue where signs have been erected indicating that a church or any other place is being used or will be used for the purpose of a funeral, unless such vehicle is a part of the funeral procession. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is authorized to permit the location of funeral "no parking" signs, suitably worded, by duly licensed funeral directors, who shall place the signs on the sidewalk in front of a church or any other place where a funeral is to be held, at least two (2) hours prior to the time of the funeral procession. Such funeral director shall cause the signs to be removed when the funeral procession commences. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-123)  
Sec. 26-139. - In front of offices of physicians. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized and directed to locate and designate "no parking" zones or spaces, not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in length, in front of the offices of practicing physicians, when such offices are located on the ground floor of a building fronting on a public street. Should the office of such physician be situated on other than the ground floor of the building, and a suitable location is available nearby and the written consent of the owner or person in control of the premises abutting on the zone so to be located shall have been filed with the traffic engineer, the traffic engineer may thereupon designate and mark such space as a "no parking" zone for the exclusive use of the physician. 
(b)  No zone shall be designated under this section, except upon the written application of the physician. When designated, such zone shall be marked by suitable signs to be provided and placed by the city at the cost of the applicant. The exclusive use by the physician of such zone shall be only during the established office hours of the applicant and such hours shall be clearly shown on the signs. No such zone shall be designated when the applicant has a parking space on his or her own premises, at or convenient to his or her office. 
(c)  No vehicle other than that of the applicant shall be parked in such zone during the hours designated on such signs. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-125)  
Sec. 26-140. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4640-94, adopted Aug. 23, 1994, repealed § 26-140, which pertained to no parking zone in front of residence of disabled person. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 26-141. - In fire lanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any fire lane. 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of this section, the owner or lessee of the property or any agent of either, or any law enforcement officer when requested by the owner or lessee of the property or any agent of either, may remove it or have it removed to a storage area and shall report the removal to the chief of police, the department of motor vehicles and the owner thereof as promptly as possible. If the signs designating the fire lanes state "tow away zone" or words to that effect, then it shall be presumed that the owner or lessee of the property has authorized and requested any law enforcement officer to have any vehicle parked in violation of this section towed away. 
(Ord. No. 4134-90)  
Secs. 26-142—26-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING METERS ON STREETS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Fraudulent use of parking meters, § 28-24. 
State Law reference— Authority of city with respect to parking meters, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
 
Sec. 26-146. - Definition. 
The word "vehicle" as used in this division, shall mean any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a street or highway, except those operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-131)  
Sec. 26-147. - Meter zones established. 
(a)  The following described area of the city is hereby established as parking meter zones: 
Beginning at the southeast corner of 19th Street and Jefferson Avenue; thence along the east side of Jefferson Avenue to the northeast corner of 36th Street and Jefferson Avenue; thence along the north side of 36th Street to the C. & O. Railway tracks; thence along the C. & O. Railway tracks to a point in line with the north side of 41st Street extended; thence along this line to the northwest corner of 41st Street and Washington Avenue; thence along the west side of Washington Avenue to the northwest corner of 35th Street and Washington Avenue; thence along the north side of 35th Street to the northwest corner of 35th Street and West Avenue; thence along the west side of West Avenue to the northwest corner of 33rd Street and West Avenue; thence along the north side of 33rd Street to the James River; thence along the shoreline of the James River to the southwest corner of 23rd Street and Harbor Road; thence along the south side of 23rd Street to the main C. & O. Railway tracks; thence along said tracks to a point in line with the south side of 19th Street extended; thence along such line to the southeast corner of 19th Street and Jefferson Avenue, the point of beginning. 
(b)  Any and all previously established parking meter zones are abolished and the only parking meter zones to exist in the city are those set out in this section or those hereafter created by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 624; Code 1961, § 23-132)  
Sec. 26-148. - General powers and duties of traffic engineer relative to meters and meter zones. 
(a)  The traffic engineer, in his or her discretion and after due survey and study, shall have the power to cause parking meters to be installed or removed from all or any portion or portions of the zones established by section 26-147 and to set maximum and minimum time limits for all or any portion or portions of such zones, and to make and enforce such additional rules and regulations for such zones as parking conditions may require, subject to review at any time by the city council. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is hereby directed to provide for the regulation, control, operation and use of parking meters installed under this division and to maintain such meters in good working condition. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 624; Code 1961, §§ 23-132, 23-133)  
Sec. 26-149. - Location; manner of installation; required signals, etc. 
Parking meters installed in parking meter zones established by this division shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces designated in accord with this division. Each parking meter shall be installed and set to display, upon the deposit of a coin or coins of the United States, a signal indicating legal parking for the appropriate period of time corresponding to the number and value of the coin or coins deposited, but not to exceed the maximum time limit which has been or may be established for that area or zone of the street upon which such parking meter is installed, and shall continue to operate from the time of the deposit of such coin or coins therein until the expiration of the time purchased by such coin or coins, not to exceed, however, the maximum time fixed as a parking limit for the part of the street upon which such parking meter is placed. Each such meter shall also be so arranged that, upon the expiration of such legal parking time, it will indicate, by a mechanical operation and the exposure of a proper signal, that the lawful parking period has expired. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 624; Code 1961, § 23-134)  
Sec. 26-150. - Marking and use of metered spaces. 
(a)  The traffic engineer shall have lines or markings painted or placed on the curb or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter installed under this division, for the purpose of designating the parking space for which such meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked alongside of or next to any parking meter shall be parked within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park a vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings, and it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any place in such zone except within the spaces indicated for such parking. 
(b)  When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be alongside of and nearest to the parking meter. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in any such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such vehicle directed at and nearest to such meter. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, §§ 23-135, 23-136)  
Sec. 26-151. - Deposit of coin required; overtime parking. 
(a)  When any vehicle shall be parked in any space alongside of or next to which a parking meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this division, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited a coin or coins of the United States in such meter, and such parking space may then be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time corresponding to the number and value of the coin or coins deposited, but not to exceed, however, the maximum time limit allowed in such zone. If such vehicle shall remain parked in such parking space beyond the period of parking time corresponding to the number and value of the coin or coins deposited or the maximum time limit allowed in such space, whichever is shorter, the parking meter shall display a sign or signal showing illegal parking, in which event, the vehicle parked in such parking space shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter space provided for in this division. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle with motor vehicle license plates bearing the Purple Heart or Former POW designation. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 335; Ord. No. 624; Code 1961, §§ 23-137, 23-138; Ord. No. 5275-99)  
Sec. 26-152. - Deposit of coin for purpose of extending period for legal parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited, in any parking meter installed pursuant to this division, any coin or coins for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the period of legal parking time established for any on-street parking meter space, as posted on the parking meter. 
(b)  This section is intended and shall be construed as follows: The period of legal parking time, at any one (1) time, is posted on the parking meter controlling the parking space. No owner or operator shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to park in such space longer than the time posted, even though another coin is inserted in the meter, and every such person failing to remove the vehicle from such space at the expiration of the posted time shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 335; Code 1961, § 23-138)  
Sec. 26-153. - When sections 26-151 and 26-152 effective. 
The provisions of sections 26-151 and 26-152 shall be in effect on the days and during the hours when the parking meters installed under this division are in operation, as indicated on the meters. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-142)  
Sec. 26-154. - Purpose of required deposits. 
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters, as provided in this division, are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets and to cover the cost of the supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking spaces and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created by this division. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-141)  
Sec. 26-155. - Establishment of loading zones, bus stops, etc., in meter zones. 
The traffic engineer is authorized to set apart, within the parking meter zones established by this division, spaces for loading zones, bus stops, taxi stands and other places in which no parking by the general public shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-143) 
Cross reference— Buses, § 41-13 et seq.; taxicab stands generally, § 41-119 et seq.  
Sec. 26-156. - Penalty for violations of division. 
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this division shall be punished by a fine of not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00). In addition any person who violates section 26-151 or 26-152 shall, for each additional hour that such person remains in violation of such sections, be guilty of a separate violation and shall be punished by a fine of not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00) for each such separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 1373, § 1; Ord. No. 1437, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-144)  
Secs. 26-157—26-161. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - METERED PARKING LOTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Fraudulent use of parking meters, § 28-24. 
State Law reference— Authority of city with respect to parking meters, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
 
Sec. 26-162. - To be established by ordinance; continuation of existing lots. 
(a)  The city council shall, by ordinance, establish metered parking lots for the purpose of providing off-street parking space for passenger vehicles only. The metered parking lots heretofore established in the former Cities of Newport News and Warwick shall continue as such until such time as they may be changed by ordinance. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance establishing a metered parking lot and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-146)  
Sec. 26-163. - General powers and duties of traffic engineer with respect to lots. 
The traffic engineer is hereby directed to provide for the installation, regulation, control, operation and use of the parking meters provided for in this division and to maintain such meters in good working condition. The traffic engineer is authorized to make and enforce such additional rules and regulations concerning metered parking lots as parking conditions may require. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-147)  
Sec. 26-164. - Parking of certain vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, other than a private passenger automobile or sedan delivery or pick-up truck, three-quarters (¾) of a ton or under, in any parking space on a metered parking lot owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 223; Code 1961, § 23-156)  
Sec. 26-165. - Advertising and sales prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or cause to be advertised any article, or to advertise for sale or to sell, or offer for sale any motor vehicle of any kind or description, or any other article, on any metered parking lot owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 223; Code 1961, § 23-156) 
Cross reference— Distribution or deposit of advertising matter on public parking lots, §§ 3-4, 3-5.  
Sec. 26-166. - Location, manner of installing, etc., of meters. 
Parking meters installed in metered parking lots established as provided for in this division shall be placed adjacent to the individual parking places designated in accord with this division. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as to show or display by signal that the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter shall be set to display, upon deposit of a proper coin or coins of the United States therein, a signal indicting legal parking for the period of parking time corresponding to the number and value of the coin or coins deposited, but not to exceed, however, the maximum time fixed as a parking limit for the part of the parking lot upon which such parking meter is placed. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the maximum legal parking time established by the city for that particular lot or part of lot and also shall indicate, when operated, on its dial or by pointer, the amount of time purchased by the coin or coins deposited, not to exceed, however, the maximum time established for such lot or part of lot, and on expiration of such period of purchased time or maximum time, whichever occurs first, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 624; Code 1961, § 23-149)  
Sec. 26-167. - Marking and use of parking spaces. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is directed to have lines or markings painted or placed on each parking lot established pursuant to this division adjacent to each parking meter, for the purpose of designating the parking space for which such meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked alongside of, or next to, any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park such vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the areas so designated by such lines or markings, and it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any place in such parking lot except within the spaces indicated for such parking. 
(b)  When a parking space in any metered parking lot is provided and clearly marked, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be alongside of and nearest to the parking meter. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, §§ 23-146, 23-150, 23-150.1)  
Sec. 26-168. - Deposit of coin required; overtime parking. 
(a)  When any vehicle shall be parked in any space alongside of or next to which a parking meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this division, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited a coin or coins of the United States in such meter, and such parking space may then be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time corresponding to the number and value of the coin or coins deposited, but not to exceed, however, the maximum time fixed as a parking limit for the lot or part of lot upon which such parking meter is placed. If such vehicle shall remain parked in such parking space beyond the period of parking time corresponding to the number and value of the coin or coins deposited or beyond the maximum time limit set for that lot or part of lot, whichever is shorter, the parking meter shall display a sign or signal showing illegal or overtime parking, in which event the vehicle parked in such parking space shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter space in a lot established pursuant to this division. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking meter space. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle parked on parking lot "C," as heretofore established, when such vehicle has affixed thereto an identifying tag or marker issued by the judge of the circuit court indicating that the owner or driver of the vehicle is a juror or witness in such court. The tag or marker so issued by the judge shall indicate thereon the date the tag or marker shall exempt the owner or operator from paying the meter fee required by this section. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle with motor vehicle license plates bearing the Purple Heart or Former POW designation. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 335; Ord. No. 624; Code 1961, §§ 23-151, 23-152; Ord. No. 5275-99)  
Sec. 26-169. - Deposit of coin for purpose of extending period of legal parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any coin or coins, for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the period of legal parking time established for any off-street parking meter space, as posted on the parking meter. 
(b)  This section is intended and shall be construed as follows: The period of legal parking time, at any one (1) time, is posted on the parking meter controlling the parking space. No owner or operator shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to park in such space longer than the time posted, even though another coin is inserted in the meter, and every such person failing to remove the vehicle from such space at the expiration of the posted time shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 335; Code 1961, § 23-152)  
Sec. 26-170. - When sections 26-168 and 26-169 in effect. 
The provisions of sections 26-168 and 26-169 shall be in effect only during the hours and on the days specified in the ordinance establishing the metered parking lot involved. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-148)  
Sec. 26-171. - Purpose of required deposits. 
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this division are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets and to cover the cost of the supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking spaces and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking lots created pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-155)  
Sec. 26-172. - Penalty for violations of division. 
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this division shall be punished by a fine of not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00). In addition, any person who violates section 26-168 or 26-169 shall, for each additional hour that such person remains in violation of such section, be guilty of a separate violation and shall be punished by a fine of not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than ten dollars ($10.00) for each such separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 143; Ord. No. 1374, § 1; Ord. No. 1438, § 1; Code 1961, § 23-158)  
Secs. 26-173—26-177. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - UNMETERED PARKING LOTS 
 
Sec. 26-178. - Application of division generally. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to and govern the use of unmetered parking lots owned by the city.  
Sec. 26-179. - Division applicable at all times; exceptions. 
The provisions of this division, except as otherwise provided, shall apply to parking for the entire period of twenty-four (24) hours each day, Sundays and legal holidays excluded. 
(Ord. No. 223; Code 1961,§ 23-129)  
Sec. 26-180. - To provide parking space for passenger vehicles and sedan delivery pickup trucks; parking of other trucks prohibited. 
All unmetered city owned parking lots shall provide off-street parking space for passenger vehicles and sedan delivery and pickup trucks, three-quarters (¾) of a ton or under. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck, except sedan delivery or pickup trucks three-quarters (¾) of a ton or under, on any such parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 223; Code 1961, § 23-129)  
Sec. 26-181. - Designation and use of parking spaces. 
The traffic engineer shall have lines or markings painted or placed on the parking lots governed by this division, for the purpose of designating the parking spaces, and each vehicle parked in such a lot shall be parked within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park such vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings, and it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any place in such parking lot except within the spaces indicted for such parking. 
(Ord. No. 223; Code 1961, § 23-129)  
Sec. 26-182. - Twenty-four-hour parking limit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of such person to be parked for more than twenty-four (24) hours continuously on any parking lot governed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 223, § 23-129)  
Sec. 26-183. - Prohibition against parking during certain hours. 
Parking in any lots governed by this division may be prohibited during certain hours of the day by the traffic engineer or by ordinance, and when signs are posted in any such lot indicating the hours during which parking is not allowed, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of such person to be parked in such lot during such hours. Such regulations heretofore adopted by the cities of Newport News and Warwick shall continue in effect until such time as they are changed by the traffic engineer or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 223; Code 1961, § 23-129)  
Sec. 26-184. - Repairing or washing vehicle prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to repair or wash any vehicle on any parking lot governed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 223; Code 1961, § 23-129)  
Sec. 26-185. - Advertising and sales prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or cause to be advertised any article, or to advertise for sale or to sell, or offer for sale any motor vehicle of any kind or description or any other article on any parking lot governed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 223; Code 1961, § 23-129) 
Cross reference— Distribution or deposit of advertising matter on public parking lots, §§ 3-4, 3-5.  
Secs. 26-186—26-195. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this article, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1201. See also, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1213, 46.2-1217. 
 
Sec. 26-196. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Abandoned motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer that: 
(1)  Is left unattended on public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours in violation of a state law or local ordinance; or 
(2)  Has remained for more than forty-eight (48) hours on private property without the consent of the property's owner, regardless of whether it was brought onto the private property with the consent of the owner or person in control of the private property; or 
(3)  Is left unattended on the shoulder of a primary highway. 
Demolisher. Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle such vehicle. 
Motor vehicle. Any automobile, van, truck, trailer or semi-trailer. 
Traffic hazard. Any motor vehicle found on the public streets or grounds of the city, unattended by the owner or operator and constituting a hazard to traffic, or which is parked so as to be in violation of the law. 
Unclaimed motor vehicle. Any vehicle which is abandoned and for which no owner can be located after having followed the procedure outlined in this article. 
Vehicle removal certificate. A transferable document issued by the department of motor vehicles for any abandoned motor vehicle that authorizes the removal and destruction of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2261, § 2; Code 1961, § 23-262; Ord. No. 6406-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6639-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6844-12, § 1)  
Sec. 26-197. - Police may take possession; indemnity of city when vehicle removed from private property; presumption of abandonment. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle is found to be abandoned or is found to constitute a traffic hazard in the city, the police department or its agent may take possession of the vehicle. 
(b)  In the event an abandoned motor vehicle is on private property, the vehicle may not be removed without the written request of the owner of such property. Further, the property owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or expense incurred by the city in the removal, storage and sale of the vehicle. 
(c)  It shall be presumed that any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, or part thereof is abandoned if it: 
(1)  Lacks either a current license plate; or a current county, city or town license or sticker; or a valid state safety inspection certificate or sticker; and 
(2)  It has been in a specific location for four (4) days without being moved. 
(Ord. No. 2261, § 2; Code 1961, § 23-263; Ord. No. 4026-90) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1213, 46.2-1217, 46.2-1201.  
Sec. 26-198. - Search for owner. 
(a)  Any person in possession of an abandoned motor vehicle shall initiate with the Department of Motor Vehicles of the Commonwealth of Virginia, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles, a search for the owner and/or lienholder of record of the vehicle, requesting the name and address of the owner of record of the motor vehicle and all persons having security interests in the motor vehicle on record in the office of the department of motor vehicles, describing, if ascertainable, the motor vehicle by year, make, model and vehicle identification number. 
(b)  If the department of motor vehicles confirms owner or lienholder information, the department of motor vehicles will notify the owner, at the last known address of record, and lienholder, at the last known address of record, of the notice of interest in their vehicle, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and advise them to reclaim and remove the vehicle within fifteen (15) days, or if the vehicle is a manufactured home or mobile home, one hundred twenty (120) days, from the date of notice. Such notice shall be sufficient regardless of whether or not it was ever received. Following the notice required, if the motor vehicle remains unclaimed, the owner and all persons having security interests in the motor vehicle shall have waived all right, title, and interest in the motor vehicle. 
Whenever a vehicle is shown by the records of the department of motor vehicles to be owned by a person who has indicated that he is on active military duty or service, any person having an interest in such vehicle shall comply with the provisions of the federal Servicemembers Civil Relief act (50 U.S.C. app. 501 et seq.). 
(c)  If the records of the department of motor vehicles contain no address for the owner or no address of any person shown to have a security interest, or if the identity and addresses of the owner and all persons having security interests cannot be determined with reasonable certainty, the person in possession of the abandoned motor vehicle shall obtain from the department of motor vehicles a vehicle removal certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2261, § 2; Code 1961, § 23-264; Ord. No. 6406-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6639-09, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1202.  
Sec. 26-199. - Sale. 
If an abandoned motor vehicle is unclaimed, as provided for in section 26-198, the city shall sell the abandoned vehicle at public auction in accordance with Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. From the proceeds of such sale, the city, or its authorized agent, shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the vehicle in custody and all notice and publication costs incurred. Any remainder from the proceeds of such sale shall be held for the owner of the abandoned vehicle or any persons having security interests therein, as their interest may appear, for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited into the treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2261, § 2; Code 1961, § 23-265; Ord. No. 5302-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1203.  
Sec. 26-200. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6639-09, § 2, adopted Oct. 27, 2009, repealed § 26-200, which pertained to vehicles abandoned in garages, and derived from Ord. No. 2261, § 2; Code 1961, § 23-266; Ord. No. 6406-07, § 1. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 26-201. - Demolition of inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, the police department may dispose of any abandoned inoperable vehicle to a demolisher, without title and without following the notification procedures required by this article. The demolisher, upon taking custody of the inoperable motor vehicle, shall notify the state division of motor vehicles in the manner prescribed by the commissioner of the division of motor vehicles. Such demolisher shall, in disposing of the inoperable vehicle, follow the provisions of Section 46.2-1206 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  In the event the police department shall turn over an inoperable vehicle to a demolisher, the department shall ensure that the vehicle is inoperable prior to the demolisher taking possession of the inoperable vehicle. The police department shall further ensure that the inoperable vehicle is subsequently demolished. The police department shall then seek reimbursement from the state division of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2261, § 2; Code 1961, §§ 23-267, 23-268; Ord. No. 3958-89, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1205, 46.2-1207.  
Secs. 26-202—26-211. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 26-212. - Right to cross intersections diagonally. 
Pedestrians may cross an intersection diagonally when all traffic entering the intersection has been halted by lights, semaphores or signals by a peace or police officer. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-92) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-923.  
Sec. 26-212.1. - Pedestrian control signals. 
(a)  Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words, numbers, or symbols meaning "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place such signals shall indicate and apply to pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the highway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Don't Walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the highway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island and remain there while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to proceed across a highway in the direction of a signal that reads "Don't Walk." 
(c)  Any pedestrian violating this section shall be fined an amount not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 6518-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-213. - Unlawful carrying of certain canes or walking sticks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, unless totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated, while on any public street or highway, to carry in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is metallic or white in color or white tipped with red. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-99) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.1.  
Sec. 26-214. - Duty to comply with directions of police. 
All pedestrians shall comply at all times with any direction, by voice, hand or whistle, made by any member of the city's police force engaged in directing travel and traffic. Any pedestrian violating this section shall be fined not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 143; Code 1961, § 23-101; Ord. No. 6526-08, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-935.  
Sec. 26-215. - Interference with traffic prohibited. 
(a)  Intent of section. The intent of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and visitors of the city and to enable the free, orderly, and uninterrupted movement of motor vehicles on public roadways within the city by limiting interactions between pedestrians and motor vehicles located within the traffic or travel lane of highways or public roadways located within the city. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "Roadway" includes all public roads, streets, and highways open to vehicular traffic within the city. This definition excludes private roads, private property, and public parking areas. 
(2)  "Motor vehicle" means every self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion device by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a highway, except devices moved by human power. 
(c)  Findings. The city council hereby finds the following: 
(1)  Allowing transactions in which items are exchanged between pedestrians and occupants of motor vehicles operating in the traffic or travel lane of roadways is inherently dangerous, is distracting to both pedestrians and drivers of motor vehicles, threatens the safety and well-being of the pedestrians and motor vehicle occupants, interferes with the free flow of traffic, and potentially threatens the safety and well-being of nearby third parties; 
(2)  The traffic or travel lane of roadways in which motor vehicles are present and operating is not designed for and is not an appropriate location for anything other than travel; 
(3)  The prohibition against interfering with traffic as set forth herein is narrowly tailored to serve the city's substantial interest in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare of citizens and visitors of the city; and 
(4)  This prohibition leaves open many alternative channels for interactions which do not disrupt traffic flows or create a danger to those present on roadways. 
(d)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  A pedestrian to exchange or attempt to exchange any item with the occupant of a motor vehicle while the motor vehicle is located in a traffic or travel lane of any roadway. 
(2)  The occupant of any motor vehicle to exchange or attempt to exchange any item with a pedestrian while the motor vehicle is located in a traffic or travel lane of any roadway. 
(e)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The distribution, receipt, or exchange of any item with the occupant of a motor vehicle parked on private property or parked in a public parking area. 
(2)  Any law enforcement officer acting within the scope of his or her official duties. 
(3)  The distribution, receipt, or exchange of any item with the occupant of a motor vehicle located in the roadway after a motor vehicle accident, or to assist the occupant of a disabled motor vehicle, or to assist a pedestrian or motor vehicle occupant experiencing a medical emergency. 
(f)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction. 
(Ord. No. 7418-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7418-17, adopted October 10, 2017, amended § 26-215 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 26-215, pertained to distribution of handbills, etc., solicitation of contributions, and sale of merchandise or services on highways, public roadways, and medians prohibited, and derived from Ord. No. 6704-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6708-10, § 1.  
Secs. 26-216—26-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 26-221. - Residential permit parking. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of this article, and in addition to those streets designated in section 26-226, the city manager or his designee is authorized to designate streets within residential areas in the city on which parking may be authorized beyond the posted restricted period. This program shall be known as the residential permit parking program ("RPPP"). Such parking shall be limited to vehicles bearing a valid residential parking permit issued pursuant to this article, or to vehicles otherwise exempted from the posted restricted period. 
(b)  A "residential area" is one (1) which is either designated as a residential zoning district, or which contains streets primarily abutted by residential property and non-business property such as schools, parks, churches, hospitals and nursing homes, and designated as such by the director of engineering, or his designee, or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2855-81; Ord. No. 4015-90; Ord. No. 6550-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-222. - Eligibility requirements. 
(a)  In addition to those areas designated in section 26-226, a block on a street within a residential area shall be deemed eligible for residential permit parking in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  A petition requesting inclusion in the residential parking permit program, and signed by authorized representatives of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the households in the one-block area must be received by the city manager. 
(2)  A parking survey shall be conducted of the petitioning block, the results of which must indicate that vehicles occupy at least seventy-five (75) percent of the curb faces or road shoulder during peak parking periods and at least twenty-five (25) percent of such vehicles are owned by persons not residing on the block. 
(3)  In the event that such criteria are met, the city manager shall designate the eligible block or blocks as being within a residential parking permit program area. 
(b)  Following the designation of a residential parking permit (hereinafter referred to as "permit") area by ordinance or by the procedure outlined in this article, the director of engineering, or his designee, shall issue appropriate parking permits and shall cause parking signs to be erected in program areas indicating conditions under which parking shall be permitted. A permit shall be issued upon application, and payment of the application fee, only to a motor vehicle owner who resides or owns a business on property immediately adjacent to a street, avenue or other location within the residential parking permit area, and for only such vehicles as are normally garaged at said residence or business. One (1) permit shall be issued for each vehicle licensed at that address or each person who is a licensed driver residing at that address, whichever is less, up to a total of three (3) permits. If the resident is in possession of a vehicle registered to his or her employer and provided for the use of the resident by the owner, a permit shall be issued for that vehicle as well. Where the owner of a building within a residential parking area is a non-resident landlord or when a non-resident uses or leases the building for commercial purposes, only one (1) permit shall be issued to the non-resident owner. Applicants for permits will be required to present their vehicle registration, driver's license, required fees, and proof of residence acceptable under the procedures for residential parking permit program along with the application. Other information may be required as deemed necessary by the director of engineering, or his designee, in order to guarantee proper issuance of the permit. 
(c)  The operator of a vehicle displaying a valid residential parking permit may park a motor vehicle operated by him on the street on which the residence is located within the designated residential parking area during such time as the parking of motor vehicles therein is permitted. While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has been issued is so parked, such permit shall be displayed in a manner designated by the director of engineering, or his designee, so as to be clearly visible. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder a parking space within a designated residential parking permit area. 
(d)  Any request for variance in the total number of permits will be subject to determination by the director of engineering, or his designee, in accordance with the procedures for issuing residential parking permit program (RPPP) permits prepared by the department of engineering, as approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2855-81; Ord. No. 2876-82, § 1; Ord. No. 6550-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-223. - Unauthorized use or display of permits; presumption of violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or display or allow to be used or displayed a residential parking permit issued hereunder upon any vehicle other than the vehicle for which such permit was issued. 
(b)  It shall constitute a violation of this regulation for any person to falsely represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to furnish any false information in an application to the director of engineering or his designee in order to obtain a residential parking permit. 
(c)  In any prosecution charging that a vehicle has been parked in violation of any provision of this article, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked in violation of any such provision, together with proof that the defendant was, at the time of such violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2855-81; Ord. No. 5303-99; Ord. No. 6550-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-224. - Revocation of parking permit. 
The director of engineering, or his designee, is authorized to revoke the residential parking permit of any permittee found to be in violation of this article; and, upon written notification thereof, the permittee shall surrender such permit to the director of engineering or his designee. Failure when so requested to surrender a residential parking permit shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2855-81; Ord. No. 6550-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-225. - Annual permit fee. 
An annual residential parking permit fee of six dollars ($6.00) per vehicle is hereby established to cover the administrative costs of permits issued or renewed pursuant to this section. The permit shall be renewed annually pursuant to such procedures as the director of engineering or his designee shall establish. 
(Ord. No. 2855-81; Ord. No. 3890-89; Ord. No. 3989-89; Ord. No. 6550-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6746-10, § 1)  
Sec. 26-226. - Designated residential permit parking areas. 
The following streets and blocks are designated to be within a residential parking permit program area: 
28th Street, between West Avenue and the James River. 
29th Street, between West Avenue and the James River. 
30th Street, between West Avenue and the James River. 
31st Street, south side, between West Avenue and the James River. 
36th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
36th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Washington Avenue. 
47th Street, between Huntington Avenue and the railroad tracks. 
48th Street, between Washington Avenue and the railroad tracks. 
49th Street, south side, between Washington Avenue and the railroad tracks. 
50th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
51st Street, between Newport News Shipyard and Warwick Boulevard. 
52nd Street, between Newport News Shipyard and Warwick Boulevard. 
53rd Street, between Newport News Shipyard and Warwick Boulevard. 
54th Street, between Newport News Shipyard and Warwick Boulevard. 
55th Street, between Newport News Shipyard and Warwick Boulevard. 
56th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
57th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
58th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
59th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
60th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
61st Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
62nd Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
63rd Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
64th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
65th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
66th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
68th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
69th Street, between Huntington Avenue and Warwick Boulevard. 
70th Street, between Belvedere Drive and Huntington Avenue. 
71st Street, between Belvedere Drive and Warwick Boulevard. 
72nd Street, between Belvedere Drive and Warwick Boulevard. 
Barbara Court, from Dorene Place to the cul-de-sac. 
Belvedere Drive, between 70th Street and 73rd Streets. 
Belvedere Drive, from 70th Street to River Road. 
Benton Way (west side), from Huntington Avenue to 71st Street. 
Boyd Circle. 
Briar Patch Place, from Shoe Lane to and including its cul-de-sac. 
Buxton Avenue, east side from Salters Creek to 25th Street. 
Carywood Lane, from Lucas Creek Road to Ashford Place. 
Connors Drive. 
Copeland Lane: 
North side, from Warwick Boulevard to Gatewood Road. 
Cynthia Court, from Rhoda Drive to the cul-de-sac. 
Daisy Circle. 
Dorene Place, from Shields Road to Rhoda Drive. 
Fairway Lane, from Moores Lane North to the cul-de-sac. 
Fenwood Crescent, east of Stoney Drive. 
Flora Drive, between Connors Drive and Carnation Drive. 
Fontaine Road, between Gatewood Road and Commodore Drive East. 
Garrow Road, from Stoney Drive to the east dead end. 
Hitchens Lane, from Gatewood Road to Warwick Boulevard. 
Huntington Avenue: 
West side, between 5407 Huntington Avenue and 5411 Huntington Avenue. 
West side, from 48th Street to 50th Street. 
East side, from 51st Street to 54th Street. 
West side, from 69th Street to 70th Street. 
Leland Place. 
Lou Mac Court, from Monarch Drive to David Circle. 
Lucas Creek Road: 
Between Denbigh Boulevard and Carywood Lane. 
Between Carywood Lane and Godfrey Drive. 
Meadow Drive, from Shoe Lane to dead end. 
Menchville Court, from Menchville Road to the cul-de-sac. 
Monarch Drive, from Menchville Road to Lou Mac Court. 
Nutmeg Quarter Place, from Sweetbriar Drive to 400 feet South of Sweetbriar Drive. 
Paddock Drive, between Shoe Lane and Mimosa Drive. 
Quince Circle. 
Rhoda Drive, from Shields Road to Dorene Place. 
Scott Road, from Crittenden Lane to Crittenden Lane. 
Shields Road, north side from Dorene Place to Rhoda Drive. 
Shoe Lane, between Paddock Drive and Moores Lane North/South. 
Shoe Lane, from Moores Lane North/South to Meadow Drive. 
Shoe Lane, from Meadow Drive to Bull Lane. 
Spaulding Drive. 
Stoney Drive. 
Sweetbriar Drive, from 450 feet East of Warwick Boulevard to Timberline Crescent. 
Terri Sue Place, from Dorene Place to the cul-de-sac. 
Warwick Boulevard: 
East side, from 45th Street to 50th Street. 
West side service road, from 69th Street north to and including cul-de-sac. 
West Avenue: 
West side, from 28th Street to 29th Street and from 31st Street to 32nd Street. 
East side, from 28th Street to 30th Street and from 31st Street to 32nd Street. 
West side, from 30th Street to 31st Street. 
East side, from 30th Street to 31st Street. 
Whisperwood Drive. 
(Ord. No. 2855-81; Ord. No. 4015-90; Ord. No. 4084-90; Ord. No. 4110-90; Ord. No. 4121-90; Ord. No. 4243-91; Ord. No. 4276-91; Ord. No. 4339-92; Ord. No. 4513-93; Ord. No. 4715-95; Ord. No. 4794-95; Ord. No. 4806-95, § 1; Ord. No. 4901-96, § 1Z; Ord. No. 4932-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5127-98; Ord. No. 5414-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5426-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5500-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5674-01; Ord. No. 5734-02; Ord. No. 5762-02; Ord. No. 5802-02; Ord. No. 5814-02; Ord. No. 5828-02; Ord. No. 5855-02; Ord. No. 6280-06; Ord. No. 6446-08; Ord. No. 6468-08; Ord. No. 6503-08; Ord. No. 6525-08; Ord. No. 6543-08; Ord. No. 6544-08; Ord. No. 6640-09; Ord. No. 6691-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6761-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6831-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6906-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6917-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6922-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6934-13, § 1; Ord. No. 6949-13, § 1; Ord. No. 6956-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7010-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7238-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7511-18, § 1; Ord. No. 7582-19, § 1; Ord. No. 7587-19, § 1; Ord. No. 7633-20, § 1)  
Sec. 26-227. - Annual visitor/temporary passes. 
(a)  For each residence, one (1) annual visitor pass shall be issued at the time the residential parking permit required by section 26-225 is obtained and shall expire contemporaneously with said permit. All such passes shall be subject to all provisions of this article and any other rules and regulations covering their use. Such visitor's pass may be used for a single vehicle for no more than seven (7) consecutive days, unless such vehicle is registered to a contractor, other person that regularly conducts business in or upon the resident(s premises, a caregiver, or visitor in temporary residence on the premises. 
(b)  Upon application to the chief of police or his designee, temporary passes may be issued for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. 
(c)  Use of either annual visitor passes or temporary passes inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall result in termination of said passes. 
(d)  There shall be no fee for the issuance of temporary passes or annual visitor passes. 
(Ord. No. 2855-81; Ord. No. 4025-90; Ord. No. 4085-90; Ord. No. 6550-08, § 1)  
Sec. 26-228. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be punished as set forth in section 26-127 through section 26-129 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2855-81)  
Sec. 26-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 26-230. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them: 
Golf cart means a self-propelled vehicle that is designed to transport persons playing golf and their equipment on a golf course. 
Multi-purpose path means that area of a public street designated by the city for pedestrian travel, and use by golf carts, and utility vehicles. 
Sidewalk means that area of a public street set aside or used for pedestrian travel which is parallel to and within the boundary lines of a street. 
Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the city, including the streets and alleys, and, for law-enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets that have been specifically designated "highways", as that term is defined in § 46.2-100 of the State Code, by ordinance, and also including sidewalks and multi-purpose paths. 
"Utility vehicle" means a motor vehicle that is (i) designed for off-road use, (ii) powered by an internal combustion engine of no more than twenty-five (25) horsepower or an electric motor which restricts the speed of the utility vehicle to less than thirty-five (35) miles per hour, and (iii) used for general maintenance, security, agricultural, or horticultural purposes. "Utility vehicle" does not include all-terrain vehicles as defined in § 46.2-915.1 of the State Code, riding lawn mowers, or any other vehicle whose definition is included in § 46.2-100 of the State Code. 
(Ord. No. 6106-05, § 1)  
Sec. 26-231. - Golf cart and utility vehicle operations on streets not otherwise designated for such operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a golf cart or utility vehicle on or over any street, sidewalk, or multi-purpose path in the city, except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 6106-05, § 1)  
Sec. 26-232. - Limitations on golf cart and utility vehicle operations on designated streets. 
(a)  Golf cart and utility vehicle operations on designated streets shall be in accordance with the following limitations: 
(1)  A golf cart or utility vehicle may be operated only on designated streets where the posted speed limit is twenty-five (25) miles per hour or less. No golf cart or utility vehicle shall cross any street at an intersection where the street being crossed has a posted speed limit of more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour; 
(2)  No person shall operate any golf cart or utility vehicle on any street unless he has in his possession a valid driver's license; 
(3)  Every golf cart or utility vehicle, whenever operated on a street, shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem in conformity with § 46.2-1081 of the State Code; and 
(4)  Golf carts and utility vehicles shall be operated on designated streets only between sunrise and sunset, unless equipped with such lights as are required in Article 3 (§ 46.2-1010 et seq.) of Chapter 10 of the State Code. 
(5)  Golf carts and utility vehicles operating on designated streets pursuant to this article shall be insured by a policy of liability insurance with coverage of not less than three hundred thousand dollars (three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per accident. In lieu of coverage provided by an insurance policy, the owner of such a golf carts or utility vehicles may self-insure the liability coverage if the Commissioner of the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles has issued a certificate of self-insurance pursuant to § 46.2-368 of the State Code. 
(b)  The limitations of subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not apply to golf carts and utility vehicles being operated as follows: 
(1)  To cross a street from one (1) part of a golf course to another part thereof, or to another adjacent golf course; or to travel between a person's home and golf course if (i) the trip would not be longer than one-half (½) mile in either direction, and (ii) the speed limit on the street is no more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(2)  To the extent necessary for local government employees, operating only upon streets within the city, to fulfill a governmental purpose, provided the golf cart or utility vehicle is being operated on streets with speed limits of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less; and 
(3)  As necessary by employees of public or private two-year or four-year institutions of higher education if operating on streets within the property limits of such institutions, provided the golf cart or utility vehicle is being operated on streets with speed limits of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less. 
(Ord. No. 6106-05, § 1)  
Sec. 26-233. - Procedure for designation of streets for golf cart and utility vehicle operations. 
(a)  No street or portion thereof may be designated for use by golf carts and utility vehicles unless that portion of the street has been reviewed and approved for such usage by the city council and designated for such use in this article. 
(b)  Prior to approving a street or portion thereof for use by golf carts and utility vehicles, the city council shall (i) consider the speed, volume, and character of motor vehicle traffic using such streets, and (ii) determine that golf cart and utility vehicle operation on a particular street is compatible with state and local transportation plans and consistent with the Commonwealth's Statewide Pedestrian Policy provided for in Section 33.1-23.03:001 of the state code, after receiving a recommendation as to such use from the city manager. 
(c)  No street or portion thereof shall be designated for use by golf carts and utility vehicles if such golf cart and utility vehicle operations will impede the safe and efficient flow of motor vehicle traffic. 
(Ord. No. 6106-05, § 1)  
Sec. 26-234. - Designated streets for golf cart and utility vehicle use. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the city code to the contrary, the following portions of streets in the city are designated for use by golf carts and utility vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this article and state law: 
(a)  A crossing located on Warwick Boulevard at its intersection with Sweetbriar Drive extending east along Sweetbriar Drive a distance of approximately four hundred (400) feet. Golf carts and utility vehicles shall travel in the proper travel lane with the direction of the traffic flow, and shall obey all traffic signs and signals. Golf carts and utility vehicles shall not travel along Warwick Boulevard, or on the sidewalks of Warwick Boulevard or Sweetbriar Drive outside the limits of the designated crossing except to cross the sidewalks at a right angle to proceed from the paved portion of the street to the adjacent property. 
(b)  Along multi-purpose paths on both sides of Avenue of the Arts extending from its intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of Shoe Lane to the westerly right-of-way line of Warwick Boulevard. Crossings are restricted to median breaks and areas adjacent to marked pedestrian crossings. Golf carts and utility vehicles may not travel along Shoe Lane, Warwick Boulevard, or on their adjacent sidewalks, and may only travel within the limits of the multi-purpose path along Avenue of the Arts or cross its sidewalks at a right angle to proceed from the paved portion of the street to the multi-purpose path or adjacent property. 
(c)  A crossing located on Moore's Lane North adjacent to the pedestrian crossing/speed table which joins the Christopher Newport University athletic fields, and is located approximately five hundred (500) feet south of the intersection of Moore's Lane North with the southerly right-of-way line of Prince Drew Road. Golf carts and utility vehicles may not travel along Moore's Lane North, or on its sidewalks outside the limits of the designated crossing except to cross the sidewalk at a right angle to proceed from the paved portion of the street to the adjacent property. 
(d)  A crossing located on Prince Drew Road adjacent to the pedestrian crossing which is located approximately three hundred (300) feet west of the intersection of Prince Drew Road and the westerly right-of-way line of Warwick Boulevard. Golf carts and utility vehicles may not travel along Prince Drew Road, or on its sidewalks outside the limits of the designated crossing except to cross the sidewalks at a right angle to proceed from the paved portion of the street to the adjacent property. 
(e)  Along the designated path on both sides of Museum Drive from its intersection with East Boundary Road to its intersection with Museum Parkway. Golf cart and utility vehicle crossings are restricted to areas where Museum Drive is either undivided or where median crossovers exist. Golf carts and utility vehicles shall travel along Museum Drive only within the limits of such designated paths. 
(Ord. No. 6106-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6138-05)  
ARTICLE XI. - ADDITIONAL FINE FOR EXCEEDING THE MAXIMUM SPEED ON DESIGNATED RESIDENTIAL THROUGH STREETS 
 
Sec. 26-235. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to supplement the Traffic Calming Program of the City of Newport News, by adding additional penalties and options to augment available traffic calming methods. 
(Ord. No. 6355-07, § 1)  
Sec. 26-236. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in this article: 
Additional fine street is a street, or portion thereof, which has been designated as such in this article, on which signs displaying the maximum speed limit and the penalty as provided in this article for violations are displayed; a highway in a residence district. 
Dead end street is a street which connects with or crosses another street at only one (1) end. 
Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the city, including streets and alleys; and for law enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets which have been specifically subject to city enforcement of city motor vehicle laws by an ordinance adopted by the city council. 
Residential through street is any street in a residence district having a posted speed limit of not more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour which is not a dead end street. 
Residence district means the territory contiguous to a street which is zoned as a residential district; or which is not zoned as a residential district, but where seventy-five (75) percent or more of the property contiguous to such street on either side thereof, for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more along the street, is occupied by dwellings and land improved for dwelling purposes. 
(Ord. No. 6355-07, § 1)  
Sec. 26-237. - Additional two hundred dollar fine for speed limit violation on additional fine streets. 
(a)  Operation of any motor vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit on an additional fine street is unlawful and shall constitute a traffic infraction, and in addition to any other penalty provided by law, shall be punished by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(b)  No portion of the fine provided for in this section shall be suspended unless the court so orders and the defendant successfully completes twenty (20) hours of community service. 
(Ord. No. 6355-07, § 1)  
Sec. 26-238. - Procedure for consideration of an additional fine street. 
(a)  Upon receipt by the city of a petition signed by at least seventy-five (75) percent of the owners or tenants of all residential structures having lot frontage upon a residential through street, or portion thereof, the city manager shall cause such traffic calming studies and other traffic studies and investigations hereinafter referred to as a "staff report," as he shall deem necessary and material, to be conducted to identify a need to curtail excessive speeding, and shall thereupon present such petition together with a staff report to city council for consideration. 
(b)  In addition to the petition procedure provided in subsection (a) of this section, city council may, on its own initiative, direct the city manager to conduct traffic calming studies and other traffic studies and investigations as he shall deem necessary and material on a residential through street, or portion thereof, and present a staff report to city council for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 6355-07, § 1)  
Sec. 26-239. - Procedure for city council designation of additional fine streets. 
If, based upon the staff report required by section 26-238, and upon such other information and considerations as city council shall deem necessary, city council finds that the additional two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine provided for herein should apply to the residential through street, or portion thereof, in question, then city council may pass an ordinance amending section 26-240 designating said residential through street as an additional fine street, whereupon the city manager shall take all actions necessary to erect signs as prescribed by the Virginia Commonwealth Transportation Board or its successor in order to put such additional two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine into effect. 
(Ord. No. 6355-07, § 1)  
Sec. 26-240. - Designated additional fine streets. 
The following streets, or portions thereof, are designated as additional fine streets, and as such, violations of the posted speed limit shall be a traffic infraction and punished by a fine as provided in section 26-237: 
(a)  Beechmont Drive from Lucas Creek Road to Loraine Drive/Loraine Circle. 
(b)  Bellwood Road from Jefferson Avenue to the Hampton city line. 
(c)  Brick Kiln Boulevard from Jefferson Avenue to Kiln Creek Parkway. 
(d)  Kiln Creek Parkway from its northernmost intersection with the York county line to its southernmost intersection with the York county line. 
(e)  Maxwell Lane from Normandy Lane to Warwick Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 6355-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6474-08, § 1; Ord. No. 7005-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7308-16)  
Chapter 27 - OBSCENITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Lewd, indecent, etc., dancing or performances at public dance halls or teenage dance clubs, § 5-33. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of council to adopt ordinance similar to the provisions of this article, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.2. 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise provided, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Knowingly means having a general knowledge of, or reason to know, or belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of the character and content of any material described in this article which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant. 
Obscene means that which, considered as a whole, has as its dominant theme or purpose an appeal to prurient interest in sex, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, excretory functions or products thereof, or sadomasochistic abuse, and which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters, and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 1; Ord. No. 1169, § 1; Ord. No. 1774; Code 1961, § 24-1) 
State Law reference— Similar definition of "obscene," Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372.  
Sec. 27-2. - Obscene items enumerated. 
For the purpose of this article, obscene items shall include: 
(1)  Any obscene book; or 
(2)  Any obscene leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, booklet, picture, painting, drawing, photograph, film, negative, slide, motion picture; or 
(3)  Any obscene figure, object, article, instrument, novelty, device or recording or transcription used or intended to be used in disseminating any obscene song, ballad, words or sounds. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 3; Code 1961, § 24-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-373.  
Sec. 27-3. - Production, publication, sale, possession, etc., of obscene items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly: 
(1)  Prepare an obscene item for the purpose of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Print, copy manufacture, produce or reproduce any obscene item for purposes of sale or distribution; or 
(3)  Publish, sell, rent, lend, transport intrastate commerce or distribute or exhibit any obscene item, or offer to do any of these things; or 
(4)  Have in such person's possession, with intent to sell, rent, lend, transport or distribute any obscene item. 
Possession in public or in a public place of any obscene item shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "distribute" shall mean delivery in person or by mail or messenger or by any other means by which obscene items may pass from one (1) person to another. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 2; Ord. No. 963, § 1; Ord. No 1169, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-374.  
Sec. 27-4. - Obscene exhibitions and performances generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly: 
(1)  Produce, promote, prepare, present, manage, direct, carry on or participate in any obscene exhibition or performance, including the exhibition or performance of any obscene motion picture, play, drama, show, entertainment, exposition, tableau or scene; provided, that no employee of any person or legal entity operating a theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place which represents such obscene exhibition or performance shall be subject to prosecution under this section if the employee is not the manager of the theatre or an officer of such entity, and has no financial interest in such theatre, other than receiving salary and wages; or 
(2)  Own, lease or manage any theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place and lease, let, lend or permit such theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place to be used for the purpose of presenting such obscene exhibition or performance. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 4; Ord. No. 1169, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-375.  
Sec. 27-5. - Advertising obscene items, exhibitions or performances generally. 
Every person who knowingly prepares, prints, publishes or circulates, or causes to be prepared, printed, published or circulated, any notice or advertisement of any obscene item referred to in section 27-2, or of any obscene performance or exhibition referred to in section 27-4, stating or indicating where such obscene item, exhibition or performance may be purchased, obtained, seen or heard, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 5; Ord. No. 1169, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-5) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-376.  
Sec. 27-6. - Obscene placards, posters, bills, etc. 
Every person who knowingly exposes, places, displays, posts up, exhibits, paints, prints or marks, or causes to be exposed, placed, displayed, posted, exhibited, painted, printed or marked, in or on any building, structure, billboard, wall or fence, or on any street, or in or upon any public place, any placard, poster, banner, bill, writing or picture which is obscene, or which advertises or promotes any obscene item referred to in section 27-2, or any obscene exhibition or performance referred to in section 27-4, or who knowingly permits the same to be displayed on property belonging to or controlled by such person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 6; Ord. No. 1169, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-377.  
Sec. 27-7. - Coercing acceptance of obscene articles or publications. 
No persons shall, as a condition to any sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication, require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any other article, book or other publication which is obscene; nor shall any person deny or threaten to deny any franchise or impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure or refusal of any person to accept such articles, books or publications, or by reason of the return thereof. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 7; Ord. No. 1169, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-378.  
Sec. 27-8. - Obscene photographs, slides and motion pictures. 
(a)  Every person who knowingly: 
(1)  Photographs himself or any other person, for purposes of preparing an obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Models, poses, acts or otherwise assists in the preparation of any obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; 
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 9; Ord. No. 1169, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-382.  
Sec. 27-9. - Operating modeling studio for obscene poses, pictures, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business of providing models or facilities for lewd and indecent sketching, painting or photographing of the human figure where the model postures or is reproduced by sketches, paintings or photographs, in a manner which: 
(1)  Appeals to prurient interests; 
(2)  Is utterly without socially redeeming quality or character; and 
(3)  Patently offends contemporary community standards. 
(b)  Educational institutions, museums and art galleries are not within the purview of this section. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties prescribed for a violation of this section, the commissioner of the revenue shall revoke the business license of the establishment wherein the provisions of this section shall have been violated. 
(Ord. No. 1600; Code 1961, §§ 21C-2, 21C-3)  
Sec. 27-10. - Indecent exposure. 
Every person who intentionally makes an obscene display or exposure of his or her person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, or procures another to so expose himself or herself, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. No person shall be deemed to be in violation of this section for breastfeeding a child in any public place or any place where others are present. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 10; Ord. No. 1169, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-10; Ord. No. 7286-16, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387.  
Sec. 27-10.1. - Indecent exposure by entertainers, waitresses, waiters, etc. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section the phrase "expose, exhibit or display nude breast or breasts" shall mean the exposure, exhibition or display of a portion of the female breast or breasts below the uppermost portion of the areola (the pigmented area surrounding the nipple of a breast), assuming a normal standing position of the female, and the term "lower torso" shall mean that portion or the male or female body consisting of the private parts or genital organs and the anal cleft or cleavage of the buttocks. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any female person eighteen (18) years of age or older to expose, exhibit or display her nude breast or breasts under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  While performing any dance or other type of entertainment in or at a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverages for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or in any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged. 
(2)  While working as a waitress, bartender or other type of employment in or at a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverage for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or in any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged. 
This subsection includes, but is not limited to, the wearing of any costume, garment or material which, by virtue of construction or transparency of material, exposes, exhibits or displays such female's breast or breasts under the above conditions. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person eighteen (18) years of age or older to expose, exhibit or display his or her lower torso under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  While performing any dance or other type of entertainment in or at a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverages for consumption, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or in any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged. 
(2)  While working as a waitress, waiter or bartender or other similar type of employee in or at a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverages for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or in any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged. 
This subsection includes, but is not limited to, the wearing of any costume, garment or material which, by virtue of construction or transparency of material, exposes, exhibits or displays such person's lower torso under the above conditions. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or any other person lawfully in charge of a tavern, restaurant or any public place in the city serving food or beverages for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged, to procure, assist or knowingly to permit any person to violate the provisions of this section in such place. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to the exhibition, presentation, showing or performance of any play, ballet, drama, tableau, production or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher learning or other similar establishment which is primarily devoted to such exhibitions, presentations, shows or performances as a form of expression of opinion, communication, speech, ideas, information, act or drama, as differentiated from commercial or business advertising, promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advertising, promotion, selling or serving products or services or otherwise advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise, such as a hotel, motel, bar, nightclub, restaurant, tavern, dance hall, photography studio or a commercial establishment for which a price of admission is charged. 
(Ord. No. 3461-86, § 1)  
Sec. 27-10.2. - Live exhibitions or performances. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall be construed as follows: 
Business establishment shall be deemed to include the real property of a business, or any entity serving food or beverages to the public for compensation, charging an admission fee or receiving a donation, or in any private club or organization wherein dues or membership fees are charged, as well as all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the grounds, private walkways and parking lots or garages adjacent thereto which are owned or controlled by the property owner, lessee, or employees or agents thereof. 
Direct line of sight means the ability to directly view an area without the benefit of assistance of a mirror, video camera or similar aid. 
Live exhibition or performance means modeling, dancing or any similar activity which involves a person or persons physically performing for the benefit of one (1) or more other persons. 
Manager's station means any check-out counter, desk, or other place or position where an employee, agent, manager or owner of a business establishment sits or stands or is assigned to sit or stand. 
Performer means a person engaged in a live exhibition or performance in a business establishment. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, organization or other legal entity. 
State of nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof immediately below the top to the areola. 
Viewing area means any area within a business establishment where a live exhibition or performance is taking place. 
(b)  The City of Newport News hereby finds and declares that the unregulated practice of live exhibitions or performances in any viewing area, private or semi-private rooms, booths, or cubicles within business establishments (i) encourages criminal activities of a sexual nature including, but not limited to, fornication, masturbation, prostitution, public nudity and sodomy, (ii) facilitates sexual liaisons of a casual nature which create unhealthy conditions, and (iii) increases the likelihood that other criminal activities, such as sexual assaults and drug-related offenses, will occur. 
The concern over sexually-transmitted diseases, and the deleterious effect on both existing businesses and surrounding neighborhoods caused by increased crime and the downgrading of property values, demands reasonable regulation of live exhibitions or performances in business establishments which provide such exhibitions or performances in any viewing areas, private or semi-private rooms, booths, or cubicles within business establishments in order to (i) protect the health, safety and welfare of the city's citizens and visitors; (ii) protect citizens and visitors from increased crime; and (iii) preserve the quality of life, property values, the character of surrounding neighborhoods, and the city's tourism industry and other economic interests. 
The intent of this section is not to suppress any activities protected by the First Amendment, but is to enact content-neutral regulations which are specifically designed and intended to prevent the deleterious secondary effects associated with live exhibitions or performances in business establishments which provide such exhibitions or performances in private or semi-private rooms, booths, viewing areas or cubicles. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate for himself or herself, or as an officer, employee or agent, a business establishment where live exhibitions or performances take place, unless the following requirements have been met. 
(1)  No viewing area of the business establishment shall be obstructed by curtains, doors, walls, display racks or any other permanent or temporary enclosure or barrier. 
(2)  At lease one (1) employee other than the performer must be on duty at all times that any patron, customer or member of the audience is inside the business establishment, and such employee must have a direct line of sight of any viewing area during any live exhibition or performance. 
(3)  In any business establishment which is configured to include a manager's station, there must be an unobstructed view, from the manager's station, of all viewing areas and any other area of the business establishment, except restrooms, to which any patron, customer or member of the audience is permitted access for any purpose. If the business establishment has two (2) or more manager's stations, all viewing areas and any other area of the business establishment, except restrooms, to which any patron, customer or member of the audience is permitted access for any purpose must be visible from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(4)  No performer shall be permitted to touch the breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks or groin of any person or persons, including himself or herself or any patron, customer or member of the audience, regardless of whether such parts of the body are fully or partially covered by clothing, or are uncovered. 
(5)  No patron, customer or member of the audience shall be permitted to touch the breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks or groin of any performer regardless of whether such parts of the body are fully or partially covered by clothing, or are uncovered. 
(6)  No sofa, futon, cot, bed, mattress or similar furnishings shall be located in any viewing area or in any other area of the business establishment to which patrons, customers or members of the audience are permitted access. 
(7)  No performer shall appear in a state of nudity in the viewing area or in any other area of the business establishment to which any patron, customer or member of the audience is permitted access. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any performer in a business establishment to touch the breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks or groin of any person or persons, including himself or herself, or any patron, customer or member of the audience, regardless of whether such parts of the body are fully or partially covered by clothing, or are uncovered. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any patron, customer or member of the audience to touch the breasts, genitals, anus, buttocks or groin of any performer in a business establishment, regardless of whether such parts of the body are fully or partially covered by clothing, or are uncovered. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to the exhibition, presentation, showing or performance of any play, ballet, drama, tableau, production or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher learning or other establishment which is primarily devoted to such exhibitions, presentations, shows or performances as a form of expression of opinion, communication, speech, ideas, information, art or drama. 
(g)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(h)  If any subsection, clause or other portion of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5362-99, § 1)  
Sec. 27-11. - Public display of obscene materials. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection: 
(1)  The word "knowledge" includes actual or constructive knowledge of the subject material. A person shall be deemed to have constructive knowledge of its character and content if such person has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent person on notice as to the suspect nature of the material. 
(2)  The terms "nudity," "sexual conduct" and "sadomasochistic abuse" shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 27-25. 
(3)  The term "prurient interest" shall mean a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. 
(4)  The term "transportation facility" means any conveyance, premise or place used for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether by air, railroad, motor vehicle or any other method. It includes aircraft, watercraft, railroad cars, buses and airboat, railroad and bus terminals and stations and all appurtenances thereto. 
(b)  The public display of nudity, sexual conduct and sadomasochistic abuse within the city is a public nuisance. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display within the city offensive sexual material when, with knowledge of its character and content, such person displays or permits to be displayed, in or on any window, showcase, newsstand, display rack, wall, billboard, display board, viewing screen, moving picture screen, marquee or similar place, in such manner that the display is easily visible from or on any public street, sidewalk, thoroughfare, transportation facility, newsstand or any other business or commercial establishment open to the general public, any pictorial, three-dimensional or other visual representation of a person or a portion of the human body that predominately appeals to prurient interest in sex and that: 
(1)  Depicts nudity or sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse; or 
(2)  Depicts or appears to depict nudity or sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse, with the area of the male or female subject's unclothed or apparently unclothed genitals, pubic area or buttocks, or of the female subject's unclothed or apparently unclothed breast, obscured by a covering or mark placed or printed on or in front of the material displayed or obscured or altered in any other manner. 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 24A-1—24A-3)  
Sec. 27-12. - Employing or permitting minor to assist in violation of article. 
Every person who intentionally, in any manner, hires, employs, uses or permits any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to do or assist in doing any act or thing constituting any offense under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 8; Ord. No. 1169, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-379.  
Sec. 27-13. - Proceeding against obscene book. 
(a)  Whenever any citizen of the city or the city attorney has reasonable cause to believe that any person is engaged in the sale or commercial distribution of any obscene book in the city, such citizen or the city attorney may institute a proceeding in the circuit court of the city for adjudication of the obscenity of the book. 
(b)  A proceeding under this section shall be instituted by filing with the court a petition: 
(1)  Directed against the book by name or description; 
(2)  Alleging the obscene nature of the book; and 
(3)  Listing the names and addresses, if known, of the author, publisher and all other persons interested in its sale or distribution. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a petition pursuant to this section, the court, in term or in vacation, shall forthwith examine the book alleged to be obscene. If the court finds no probable cause to believe the book obscene, the judge thereof shall dismiss the petition; but if the court finds probable cause to believe the book obscene, the judge thereof shall issue an order to show cause why the book should not be adjudicated obscene. The order to show cause shall be: 
(1)  Directed against the book by name or description; 
(2)  Published once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the city; 
(3)  If their names and addresses are known, served by registered mail upon the author, publisher and all other persons interested in the sale or distribution of the book; and 
(4)  Returnable twenty-one (21) days after its service by registered mail or the commencement of its publication, whichever is later. 
(d)  When an order to show cause is issued pursuant to this section, and upon four (4) days' notice to be given to the persons and in the manner prescribed by the court, the court may issue a temporary restraining order against the sale or distribution of the book alleged to be obscene. 
(e)  On or before the return date specified in the order to show cause issued under subsection (c), the author, publisher and any person interested in the sale or distribution of the book may appear and file an answer. The court may, by order, permit any other person to appear and file an answer amicus curiae. 
(f)  If no one appears and files an answer on or before the return date specified in the order to show cause, the court, upon being satisfied that the book is obscene, shall order the clerk of the court to enter judgment that the book is obscene, but the court, in its discretion, may except from its judgment a restricted category of persons to whom the book is not obscene. 
(g)  If an appearance is entered and an answer filed, the court shall order the proceeding set on the calendar for a prompt hearing. The court shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the rules of civil procedure applicable to the trial of cases by the court without a jury. At the hearing, the court shall receive evidence, including the testimony of experts, if such evidence be offered, pertaining to: 
(1)  The artistic, literary, medical, scientific, cultural and educational value, if any, of the book, considered as a whole; 
(2)  The degree of public acceptance of the book, or books of similar character, within the city; 
(3)  The intent of the author and publisher of the book; 
(4)  The reputation of the author and publisher; 
(5)  The advertising, promotion and other circumstances relating to the sale of the book; 
(6)  The nature of classes of persons, including scholars, scientists and physicians, for whom the book may not have prurient appeal, and who may be subject to exception pursuant to subsection (f). 
(h)  In making a decision on the obscenity of the book, the court shall consider, among other things, the evidence offered pursuant to subsection (g), if any, and shall make a written determination upon every such consideration relied upon in the proceeding in its findings of fact and conclusions of law or in a memorandum accompanying them. 
(i)  If it finds the book not obscene, the court shall order the clerk of the court to enter judgment accordingly. If it finds the book obscene, the court shall order the clerk of the court to enter judgment that the book is obscene, but the court, in its discretion, may except from its judgment a restricted category of persons to whom the book is not obscene. 
(j)  While a temporary restraining order made pursuant to subsection (d) is in effect, or after the entry of a judgment pursuant to subsection (f) or (i), any person who publishes, sells, rents, lends, transports in intrastate commerce or distributes or exhibits the book, or has the book in possession with intent to publish, sell, rent, lend, transport in the city, or distribute or exhibit the book, is presumed to have knowledge that the book is obscene under the provisions of this article. 
(k)  Any party to a proceeding under this section, including the petitioner, may appeal from the judgment of the court to the Supreme Court of Virginia, as otherwise provided by law. 
(l)  It is expressly provided that the petition and proceeding authorized under this section shall be intended only to establish scienter in cases where the establishment of such scienter is thought to be useful or desirable by the petitioner, and the provisions of this section shall in nowise be construed to be a necessary prerequisite to the filing of criminal charges under this article. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 12; Code 1961, § 24-12) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-384.  
Sec. 27-14. - Exceptions from article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any book, magazine or other printed or manuscript material by any library, school or institution of higher learning supported by public appropriation; 
(2)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any work of art by any museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning supported by public appropriation; 
(3)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau or motion picture by any theatre, museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning supported by public appropriation. 
(Ord. No. 302, § 11; Code 1961, § 24-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-383.  
Secs. 27-15—27-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES RELATING TO JUVENILES 
 
Sec. 27-25. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Harmful to juveniles means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, when it: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of juveniles; and 
(2)  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for juveniles; and 
(3)  Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for juveniles. 
Juvenile means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both the character and content of any material described herein, which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and the age of the juvenile; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such juvenile. 
Nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Sadomasochistic abuse means actual or explicitly simulated flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
Sexual conduct means actual or explicitly simulated acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be female, breast. 
Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 1: Ord. No. 1774; Code 1961, § 24-13) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-390.  
Sec. 27-26. - Unlawful sales or loans to juveniles generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell or loan to a juvenile: 
(1)  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles; or 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in paragraph (1) of this subsection, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to juveniles. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 27-27. - Admitting juveniles to premises exhibiting obscene films or other presentations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly exhibit to a juvenile or to knowingly sell to a juvenile an admission ticket or pass or to knowingly admit a juvenile to premises whereon there is exhibited, a motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles. 
(Ord. No. 1168, § 1; Code 1961, § 24-14) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 27-28. - Misrepresentation to persons mentioned in sections 27-26 and 27-27 as to juvenile's age, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to falsely represent to any person mentioned in section 27-26 or 27-27, or to his agent, that such juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age or older, with the intent to procure any material set forth in section 27-26, or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation set forth in section 27-27. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false representation to any person mentioned in section 27-26 or 27-27, or to his agent, that he is the parent or guardian of any juvenile, or that the juvenile is eighteen (18) years of age, with the intent to procure any material set forth in section 27-26, or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation set forth in section 27-27. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 27-29. - Display of obscene materials at business establishments open to juveniles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, expose or display in public, at a newsstand or any other business or commercial establishment frequented by juveniles or where juveniles are or may be invited as part of the general public, any pictorial, three-dimensional or other visual representation of a person or a portion of the human body that predominately appeals to prurient interest in sex and that meets the requirements of section 27-11(c). 
(Ord. No. 1839, § 1; Code 1961, § 24A-3)  
Sec. 27-30. - Exhibition of motion picture harmful to juveniles where visible from street or other place off exhibitor's premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any motion picture which, in whole or in part, depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles, whereby any portion of such film is visible from a public street, sidewalk, alley, public thoroughfare or any other place off the premises of the motion picture exhibitor, open to the general public or where the general public is invited for business purposes. 
(Code 1961, § 24-15) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.  
Sec. 27-31. - Exceptions from article. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any work of art, book, magazine or other printed or manuscript material by any accredited museum, library, school or institution of higher learning. 
(2)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau or motion picture by any theatre, museum, school or institution of higher learning, either supported by public appropriation or which is an accredited institution supported by private funds. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.1.  
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES—MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Attempt to commit misdemeanor. 
Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the attempt, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27.  
Sec. 28-2. - Causing or encouraging minors to commit misdemeanors, etc. 
Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, including the parent of any child, who shall cause or encourage any child under the age of eighteen (18) years to commit any misdemeanor, or who shall send or cause any such child to go into any place for any unlawful purpose, or who shall in any way subject any such child to vicious or immoral influences, or who shall induce, cause, encourage or contribute toward the dependency, neglect or delinquency of any such child, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. When the offense consists of having or attempting to have intercourse with any female child under the age of eighteen (18) years, the fact that such female was not of previous chaste character or had been married may be shown in mitigation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-371.  
Sec. 28-3. - Prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to certain minors. 
The proprietor of every retail establishment which offers for sale any tobacco product, including but not limited to cigarettes and cigars, shall post in a conspicuous manner and place a sign or signs indicating that the sale of tobacco products to any person under eighteen (18) years of age is prohibited by law. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), which penalty shall be paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 16; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-10; Ord. No. 4232-91)  
Sec. 28-4. - Curfew for certain minors. 
(a)  Intent. Council enacts this section prescribing, in accordance with prevailing community standards, regulations for the conduct of minors in public places at night, for the good of minors, for the support and furtherance of the institution of the family, and for the general public good, safety and welfare. Council does not intend hereby to prohibit or interfere with any lawful activity. Council intends hereby to ensure that minors in public places at night after curfew are provided with responsible adult supervision, and to promote and enhance parental control over minors. 
(b)  Factfinding. Council finds that the curfew for certain minors section has been a significant factor in deterring juvenile delinquency in the past, and that it should now be updated and amplified in compliance with changes in the law and in response to increases in drug related crime and crime in general within the city. Council further finds that Newport News' stability as a community is based on the institution of the family; that parental responsibility for the whereabouts of their children is the norm; and that legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility, because they encourage parental responsibility, decrease juvenile delinquency. Council further finds that youths at night are more vulnerable to crime and peer pressure than adults; that minors lack experience, perspective and judgment to recognize and avoid detrimental choices such as drugs, alcohol and crime; and that the city's restriction on minors' movement after 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and after 11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday reinforces parental authority and home life, and encourages parents to actively supervise their children. 
Council is aware that proceedings before a Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court pursuant to this section constitute status offenses governed by Code of Virginia, 1950, Section 16.1-278.6, as amended. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, as used in this section, shall mean the following: 
(1)  The word "officer" shall mean a member of the Newport News Police Department or any other law enforcement officer. 
(2)  The word "guardian" shall mean a legal guardian or other adult person having care, custody or control of a minor. 
(3)  The word "minor" shall mean a person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to be present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless accompanied by his/her parent or guardian or unless such minor is on an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian or is engaged in a lawful employment or going directly to the place of such employment or returning directly to his place of residence from the place of such employment. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to be present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on Friday or Saturday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless accompanied by his/her parent or guardian or unless such minor is on an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian or is engaged in a lawful employment or going directly to the place of such employment or returning directly to his place of residence from the place of such employment. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor to permit, allow or encourage such minor to be present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, in violation of provisions of subsections (d) or (e) of this section. 
(g)  Exceptions. In the following cases, a minor in or upon a public place under the circumstances prohibited by subsections (d) and (e), shall not be in violation of this section: 
(1)  When a minor is in a motor vehicle engaged in interstate travel. This is intended, from excess of caution, to exempt from regulation bona fide interstate travel through, beginning or ending, in the city. 
(2)  When the minor was attending an activity on the property of or sponsored by a city or state agency or body, or a school or a religious organization, or was returning to the minor's place of residence therefrom, without detour or stop. 
(3)  When a minor is a volunteer firefighter or volunteer rescue squad member and is responding to emergency calls in that capacity. 
(4)  When the minor is attending a specified engagement or performance, or participating in any assembly or expressive activity protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution; provided that the minor shall have in his possession written permission including the signature, address and telephone number, of a parent, guardian or other adult person having care, custody or control of such minor to attend such activity or event, and shall return directly to his residence upon conclusion thereof. 
(5)  When the minor has exited an arena, performance hall, theater, baseball stadium, ball, or like destination for entertainment or spectator sports, and the minor can present substantiating evidence of having been to such a venue and can demonstrate that the minor is taking the most direct route to a motor vehicle or designated retrieval space that is not on a sidewalk or street. 
(h)  Any minor taken into custody for a violation of this section, shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  So long as funds are appropriated therefor, the officer shall transport the minor to the city's facility designated as a juvenile curfew reception center. The officer will contact the on-call intake officer to facilitate placement of the minor for protective custody if the parent cannot be reached within a reasonable time but prior to the facility closing. In the event the minor is released to the parent or guardian, it shall be evidenced by the parent's signature on the Juvenile History Sheet utilized by the Newport News Police Department. An explanation of the reason for the detention shall be given to the parent or guardian. A record of this event containing a brief description of the circumstances shall be kept on file by the Newport News Police Department. 
(2)  Should any such minor refuse to give such officer his/her name and address or the name, address and telephone number of his/her parent or guardian or in the event no parent or guardian can be located, or if located is unable to accept custody of such minor, such officer shall take such minor to the intake division of the juvenile and domestic relations district court of the city to be dealt with in the manner required by law. 
(i)  Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, or who shall knowingly give a false name, address or telephone number to such officer, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. In addition, any minor found guilty of violating this section may be subject to any order of disposition authorized by Code of Virginia, 1950, Sections 16.1-278.4 and 16.1-278.5, as amended. 
(j)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor who has been emancipated. 
(k)  Severability. Severability is intended throughout and within this section. If any provision (including inter alia any exception, part, phrases or term), is for any reason held invalid, or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, then the remainder of this section shall continue in full force and effect, and its application to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 7; Code 1961, § 25-13; Ord. No. 4247-91; Ord. No. 4723-95; Ord. No. 4782-95; Ord. No. 5821-02, § 1; Ord. No. 7184-15) 
State Law reference— Curfew for minors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.  
Sec. 28-4.1. - Curfews after declarations of emergency. 
(a)  Pursuant to the police powers granted to the city by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1102, and in the interest of promoting public safety, the city manager, or his designee, is hereby authorized to impose a curfew after the declaration of an emergency, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Curfew" means an order issued by the city manager prohibiting persons from being present on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city or any portion thereof designated by the city manager during specified times of the day or night. 
(2)  "City manager" means the city manager, or his designee. 
(3)  "Natural disaster" means any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake, drought, fire or other natural catastrophe resulting in damage, hardship, suffering or possible loss of life. 
(4)  "Manmade disaster" means any condition following an attack by an enemy or foreign nation upon the City of Newport News that results in substantial damage of property or injury to persons in the United States, and may be by use of bombs, missiles, shell fire, nuclear, radiological, chemical or biological means or other weapons or by overt paramilitary actions; terrorism, foreign and domestic; any industrial, nuclear or transportation accident, explosion, conflagration, power failure, or other condition such as sabotage, oil spills, and other injurious environmental contaminations that threaten or cause damage to property, human suffering, hardship or loss of life. 
(c)  The city manager may declare a curfew if he deems such action necessary for the preservation of life or property, the implementation of emergency mitigation, preparedness, response actions or recovery actions anticipated or resulting from the dangers caused by a natural or manmade disaster or the resulting effects thereof, pursuant to the following procedure: 
(1)  The authority conferred upon the city manager by this section shall arise only after either the state or the city declares a state of emergency in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code § 44-146.19 or § 44-146.21 for a geographical area located within the city; 
(2)  The curfew shall be announced in such manner as is reasonably calculated to provide notice to the public of the imposition of the curfew. Termination of curfew shall be in like manner; 
(3)  The declaration of a curfew, circumstances justifying its imposition, time and areas of the city in which the curfew is in effect, and the means and time of the public announcement of the curfew shall be recorded in a written document signed by the city manager and maintained in the records of the city; 
(4)  No curfew shall be imposed except in areas and at times that can be justified as necessary for the public safety; and 
(5)  The action of the city manager in imposing a curfew during a natural or manmade disaster shall be ratified by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting, or within fourteen (14) days of the declaration of a state of local emergency, whichever occurs sooner. 
(d)  After the declaration and public announcement of a curfew, it shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person, after having been warned by a law enforcement officer, to remain on any street, road, alley, avenue, park or other public place in the city, or in any vehicle operating or parked thereon, in any portion of the city designated by the city manager; and 
(2)  The owner or proprietor of any retail, wholesale or eating and drinking establishment, entertainment venue or similar establishment, in any portion of the city designated by the city manager to which the curfew applies, or other person in control of such establishment, to allow any person to remain on the premises without the express written permission of the city manager; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to lodging establishments serving registered guests. 
(e)  The following persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while on duty or traveling to and from work: 
(1)  Hospital personnel; 
(2)  City employees and volunteers authorized by the city manager; 
(3)  Military personnel; 
(4)  Employees of public utility companies; 
(5)  Private emergency medical transport workers; 
(6)  Other emergency workers as authorized by the city manager; and 
(7)  Employees of lodging establishments. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or restrict travel to a hospital in the event of a medical emergency, nor shall such travel be considered in violation of this section. 
(g)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 6148-05; Ord. No. 6973-13)  
Sec. 28-5. - Prohibited trick or treat activities. 
(a)  If any person beyond the seventh grade of school or over twelve (12) years of age shall engage in the activity commonly known as "trick or treat" or any other activity of similar character or nature under any name whatsoever, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting any parent, guardian or other responsible person having lawfully in his custody a child twelve (12) years old or younger, from accompanying such child who is playing "trick or treat" for the purpose of caring for, looking after or protecting such child. However, no accompanying parent or guardian shall wear a mask of any type. 
(b)  If any person shall engage in playing "trick or treat" or any other activity of similar character or nature under any name whatsoever after 8:00 p.m., such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1558, § 1; Code 1961, § 25-56; Ord. No. 3663-87)  
Sec. 28-6. - Obstructing justice by threats or force. 
(a)  If any person without just cause knowingly obstructs a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness or any law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties as such or fails or refuses without just cause to cease such obstruction when requested to do so by such judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness or law enforcement officer, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If any person, by threats or force, knowingly attempts to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness or an officer of a court, or any law enforcement officer, lawfully engaged in his duties as such, or to obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court, he shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3914-89) 
Cross reference— Interfering with firefighters, § 16-3. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460.  
Sec. 28-7. - Calling or summoning emergency medical services vehicle or firefighting apparatus without just cause; malicious activation of fire alarm. 
Any person who without just cause therefor calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any emergency medical services vehicle or firefighting apparatus, or any person who maliciously activates a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building , regardless of whether an emergency medical vehicle or fire apparatus responds or not, is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 13; Code 1961, § 25-2; Ord. No. 7386-17) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16; unjustified activation of security alarm system to summon police department, § 32-48. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.  
Sec. 28-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7417-17, § 1, adopted October 10, 2017, repealed § 28-8, which pertained to panhandling and derived from Ord. No. 173, § 4; Code 1961, §§ 25-6, 26-6; Ord. No. 6845-12, § 1.  
Sec. 28-9. - Assault and battery. 
Any person who shall commit a simple assault or assault and battery shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 2; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, §§ 25-3, 25-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57.  
Sec. 28-10. - Abusive language. 
If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 8; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416.  
Sec. 28-11. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
A person is guilty of disorderly conduct and a Class 1 misdemeanor if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, such person: 
(a)  In any street, highway, public building, or while in or on a public conveyance or public place, engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; 
(b)  Willfully, or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts any funeral, memorial service, or meeting of the city council or a division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption: (i) prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the funeral, memorial service; or meeting or (ii) has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such disruption is directed; or 
(c)  Willfully, or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts the operation of any school or any activity conducted or sponsored by any school, if the disruption: (i) prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the operation or activity; or (ii) has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed. 
However, the conduct prohibited under subdivision (a), (b) or (c) of this section shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance, meeting, operation or activity may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2178, Code 1961, § 25-14; Ord. No. 2319; Ord. No. 6699-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415.  
Sec. 28-12. - Intoxication in public; penalty; transportation of public inebriates to detoxification center. 
If any person is intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other self-administered intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. If a court-approved detoxification center is available for the admission of such person, a law enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 12; Ord. No. 1653, § 1; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-34; Ord. No. 4051-90) 
Cross reference— Intoxicated persons prohibited at public dance halls and teenage dance clubs, § 5-30; operating bicycle or moped while under influence of liquor, § 10-24; driving while under influence of alcohol, § 26-72; intoxicated persons prohibited in recreation buildings, § 29-46. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388; authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.2.  
Sec. 28-12.1. - Drinking alcoholic beverages, or offering to another, in public place; penalty; exceptions. 
(a)  If any person takes a drink of an alcoholic beverage or offers a drink thereof to another, whether accepted or not, at or in any public place, he shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in any rooms or areas approved by the commonwealth in a licensed establishment, provided such establishment or the person who operates the same is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail for on-premises consumption and the alcoholic beverages drunk or offered were purchased therein. 
(c)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in any room or area approved by the commonwealth at an event for which a banquet license or mixed beverage special events license has been granted. Nor shall this section prevent, upon authorization of the licensee, any person from drinking his own lawfully acquired alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in approved areas and locations at events for which a coliseum or stadium license has been granted. 
(d)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another on a chartered boat being used for the transportation of passengers for compensation which is not licensed by the commonwealth and which does not sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 5870-03)  
Sec. 28-13. - Profanity, threats, etc., over telephone. 
(a)  If any person shall use obscene, vulgar, profane, lewd, lascivious or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature, or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate or harass any person, over any telephone in this city, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be the duty, on pain of contempt of court, of each telephone company in this city to furnish immediately, in response to a subpoena issued by a circuit court, such information as it, its officers and employees, may possess which, in the opinion of the court, may aid in the apprehension of persons suspected of violating the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 68; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-427, 18.2-431.  
Sec. 28-14. - Adultery and fornication generally. 
(a)  Any person, being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his or her spouse shall be deemed guilty of adultery. 
(b)  Any person, not being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any other person shall be deemed guilty of fornication. 
(c)  If any person commits adultery or fornication, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 1; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-40) 
Cross reference— Joint occupancy of hotel rooms by persons of opposite sex, § 21-4. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-344, 18.2-365.  
Sec. 28-15. - Adultery and fornication by persons forbidden to marry. 
If any person commits adultery or fornication with any person whom he or she is forbidden by law to marry, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to a person committing adultery or fornication with his daughter or granddaughter, or with her son or grandson, or her father or his mother. 
(Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-41) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-366, which declares adultery or fornication by persons mentioned in the exceptions to be a felony.  
Sec. 28-16. - Lewd and lascivious cohabitation. 
If any persons, not married to each other, lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together, or whether married or not, be guilty of open and gross lewdness and lasciviousness, each of them shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Upon a repetition of the offense, and conviction thereof, each of them shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 30; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-42) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-345.  
Sec. 28-17. - Prostitution generally. 
Any person who, for money of its equivalent, commits adultery or fornication, or offers to commit adultery or fornication, or any act in violation of section 18.2-361, Code of Virginia, and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof, shall be guilty of being a prostitute, or prostitution, which shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3083-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-346.  
Sec. 28-18. - Bawdy places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any bawdy place, or to reside in or at or visit, for immoral purposes, any bawdy place. Each and every day such bawdy place shall be kept, resided in or visited shall constitute a separate offense. In a prosecution under this section, the general reputation of the place may be proved. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "bawdy place" shall mean any place, within or without any building or structure, which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 173, §§ 50, 51; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-43) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347.  
Sec. 28-19. - Aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or any officer, employee or agent of any firm, association or corporation, with knowledge of, or good reason to believe, the immoral purpose of such visit, to take or transport or assist in taking or transporting, or offer to take or transport, on foot or in any way, any person to a place, whether within or without any building or structure, used or to be used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, or to procure or assist in procuring, for the purpose of illicit sexual intercourse, or any act in violation of Section 18.2-361, Code of Virginia, or to give any information or direction to any person with intent to enable such person to commit an act of prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 49; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-45; Ord. No. 3083-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-348.  
Sec. 28-20. - Using vehicle to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or chauffeur of any vehicle, with knowledge or reason to believe the same is to be used for such purpose, to use the same or to allow the same to be used for the purpose of prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, or to aid or promote such prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse by use of any such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 52; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-46) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-349.  
Sec. 28-21. - Confinement at city farm or hospital of persons violating section 28-17 through 28-20. 
Every person convicted of violating any of the provisions of sections 28-17 through 28-20 may, in the discretion of the court or judge, be confined at a city farm or hospital available for such confinement in lieu of confinement in jail. 
(Ord. No. 173, §§ 54, 55; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-47) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-350.  
Sec. 28-22. - Drugs or other noxious chemical substances: Inhaling or causing others to do so. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deliberately smell or inhale any drugs or any other noxious chemical substances, including but not limited to fingernail polish or model airplane glue, containing any ketones, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons or vapors, with the intent to become intoxicated, inebriated, excited, stupefied or to dull the brain or nervous system. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than one duly licensed, to deliberately cause, invite or induce any person to smell or inhale any drugs or any other noxious substances or chemicals containing any ketone, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons or vapors with the intent to intoxicate, inebriate, excite, stupefy or to dull the brain or nervous system of such person. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1747, § 1; Code 1961, § 25-57) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-264.  
Sec. 28-22.1. - Selling of imitation controlled substances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or otherwise distribute to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age any imitation controlled substance. The term "imitation controlled substance" shall mean any substance other than a controlled substance or prescription drug, or combination of such substance which by representation or appearance (including but not limited to name, color, shape, size and markings) would lead a reasonable person to believe that the substance is a controlled substance, or which purports to act, either alone, in multiple doses, or in combination with a substance or substances, like a controlled substance, either stimulant or depressant. 
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3108-83)  
Sec. 28-22.2. - Selling of imitation controlled substances constitutes a nuisance. 
The sale or distribution of any imitation controlled substance, as defined in section 28-22.1, to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall constitute a nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3108-83)  
Sec. 28-23. - Drugs or other noxious chemical substances: Sale or transfer to minors. 
(a)  No person shall sell, give or otherwise transfer to any other person under the age of eighteen (18) years any substance mentioned in section 28-22; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall be considered applicable to: 
(1)  The sale of any tube or container of glue that is marked by the manufacturer "anti-sniffant," "nontoxic," and having the property of releasing vapors or fumes for the purpose of discouraging the intentional smelling or inhaling of glue. 
(2)  The sale of a model kit containing as a part thereof a tube or container of any such glue. 
(3)  The sale of a tube or other container of any such glue immediately in conjunction with the sale of a model kit requiring the use of approximately such quantity of glue for the assembly of a model. 
(4)  The transfer of a tube or other container of such glue from parent to child or from a guardian to ward. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1747, § 1; Code 1961, § 25-57)  
Sec. 28-24. - Fraudulent use of pay phones, parking meters and other coin-operated machines. 
(a)  No person shall operate, cause to be operated or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine. 
(b)  No person shall obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise or any other service or property from any such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine lawful coin of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1023, § 1; Code 1961, § 25-54) 
Cross reference— Parking meters, § 26-146 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-179.  
Sec. 28-25. - Loitering for the purpose of engaging in a prostitution offense. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "public place" means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility or the doorways and entranceways to any building which fronts on any of the aforesaid places, or a motor vehicle in or on any such place. 
(b)  Any person who remains or wanders about in a public place and repeatedly beckons to, or repeatedly stops, or repeatedly attempts to stop, or repeatedly attempts to engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles, or repeatedly interferes with the free passage of other persons, for the purpose of prostitution, as defined in section 28-17, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person who remains or wanders about in a public place and repeatedly beckons to, or repeatedly stops, or repeatedly attempts to stop, or repeatedly attempts to engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicles, or repeatedly interferes with the free passage of other persons, for purposes of aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse, as defined in section 28-19, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3083-83)  
Sec. 28-26. - Loitering for purpose of engaging in narcotics activity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or remain about any place with one (1) or more persons for purposes of unlawfully using, selling, giving, distributing, or possessing a controlled substance, as defined in the Drug Control Act, Chapter 34 of Title 54.1, Code of Virginia, or an imitation controlled substance, as defined in section 18.2-247, Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 3083-83)  
Sec. 28-27. - Damaging property generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously, or with wanton disregard for the rights of others, damage, injure, mutilate or deface any property, real or personal, public or private, not belonging to such person. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 6; Ord. No. 173, §§ 32, 45, 56, 65; Ord. No. 1640; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, §§ 25-19, 25-19.1, 25-20, 25-21, 25-22, 26-8) 
Cross reference— Responsibility for damage to property in armory auditorium, § 7-22; damaging books, documents or papers belonging to law library, § 22-40; damaging traffic signs, § 26-20. 
State Law reference— Damaging property, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137 et seq.  
Sec. 28-28. - Injuring, tampering with, etc., vehicles, aircraft, etc. 
(a)  Any person who shall, individually, or in association with one (1) or more others, willfully break, injure, tamper with, or remove any part or parts of, any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or who shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crack or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad in motion, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This subsection shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel by the holder of a lien thereon or by the agents or employees of such lienholder. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-146—18.2-148.  
Sec. 28-28.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6882-12, § 3, adopted May 22, 2012, effective July 1, 2012, repealed § 28-28.1, which pertained to hunting and trapping prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 2987-82.  
Sec. 28-29. - Trespass generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to trespass on any land, building or structure of another; provided, that this section shall not be construed to apply to situations within the purview of sections 28-30 and 28-31. For each violation of this section, the offender shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 66; Ord. No. 1778; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-49)  
Sec. 28-30. - Trespass after having been forbidden to do so. 
(a)  If any person without authority of law goes upon or remains upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted by such persons or by the holder of any easement or other right-of-way authorized by the instrument creating such interest to post signs on such lands, structures, premises, or portion or area thereof, at a place or places where it or they may be reasonably seen, or if any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order issued pursuant to Sections 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-253.4, 16.1-278.2 through 16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, 16.1-279.1, 19.2-152.8, 19.2-152.9 or 19.2-152.10, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or an ex parte order issued pursuant to sections 20-103, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 15.2-1717.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, a procedure is hereby established by which an owner, lessee, or custodian of real property may designate all sworn officers of the Newport News Police Department as persons lawfully in charge thereof as those terms are used in subsection (a) of this section, for the purpose of forbidding another to go or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises as specified in the designation. Pursuant to said procedure developed by the chief of police and adopted hereby, said designation shall be in writing and placed on file with the Newport News Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 67; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-51; Ord. No. 4341-92; Ord. No. 5845-02, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119.  
Sec. 28-31. - Peeping toms. 
If any person shall enter upon the property of another, in the nighttime, and secretly or furtively peep through or attempt to so peep into or through, or spy through, a window, door or other aperture of any building structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure be permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy be permanent or temporary, such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 44; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-52) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130.  
Sec. 28-32. - Picketing or disrupting tranquility of residences. 
(a)  It is hereby declared that the protection and preservation of the home is the keystone of democratic government; that the public health and welfare and the good order of the community require that members of the community enjoy in their homes a feeling of well-being, tranquility and privacy, and when absent from their homes carry with them the sense of security inherent in the assurance that they may return to the enjoyment of their homes; that the practice of picketing before or about residences and dwelling places causes emotional disturbance and distress to the occupants; that such practice has as its object the harassing of such occupants; and without resort to such practice, full opportunity exists, and under the terms and provisions of this section will continue to exist, for the exercise of freedom of speech and other constitutional rights; and that the provisions hereinafter enacted are necessary in the public interest, to avoid the detrimental results herein set forth. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before or about the residence or dwelling place of any individual. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any persons to assemble with another person or persons in a manner which disrupts or threatens to disrupt any individual's right to tranquility in such individual's home. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit: 
(1)  The picketing in any lawful manner, during a labor dispute, of the place of employment involved in such labor dispute; 
(2)  The picketing in any lawful manner of a construction site; or 
(3)  The holding of a meeting or assembly on any premises commonly used for the discussion of subjects of general public interest. 
(e)  Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished as for a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each day on which a violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the penalties herein provided, any court of general equity jurisdiction may enjoin conduct, or threatened conduct, prescribed by this section, and may, in any such proceeding, award damages, including punitive damages, against the persons found guilty of actions made unlawful by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1396, § 1; Ord. No. 1778; Code 1961, § 25-31.1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-418, 18.2-419.  
Sec. 28-33. - Boarding or alighting from moving train; unauthorized entering of freight car. 
Any person, other than the employees of railway companies in actual service, who shall attempt to get on or off any railway car or locomotive while in motion, or to enter any freight car standing upon the track, within the corporate limits of the city, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 58; Code 1961, § 25-36) 
Cross reference— Boarding or alighting moving vehicles generally, § 26-11.  
Sec. 28-34. - Loitering on railroad tracks. 
No person shall loiter or be found on the tracks of any railway company within the corporate limits of the city, except in passing over such tracks at a public or private crossing, without the consent of such railway company. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 59; Code 1961, § 25-37)  
Sec. 28-35. - Nuisances generally. 
Any person who shall cause or permit the existence of any public nuisance not otherwise provided for in the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor for each day the nuisance may continue, after due notice shall have been given to remove, correct or abate the same. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 57; Code 1961, § 25-28) 
Cross reference— Noisy animals or birds as nuisances, § 6-9; sanitary nuisances, § 20-4; certain collections of standing or flowing water declared to be nuisances, § 20-23. 
State Law reference— Authority of city with reference to abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115.  
Sec. 28-36. - Loud noises prohibited. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. The city council hereby finds and declares that certain noise is a hazard to public health, welfare, peace and safety and the quality of life of the citizens of Newport News; that the people have a right to and should be ensured of an environment free from noise that jeopardizes public health, welfare, peace and safety or degrades the quality of life; and that it is the public policy of the city council to prevent such noise to the extent such action is not inconsistent with state or federal law or Constitutional rights. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms arranged, designed, or intended to be occupied as living quarters, having rigid exterior wall structures. 
Emergency and public safety work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical injury, illness, or property damage, or work performed by public and private service companies constructing, inspecting, and repairing utilities, repairing and maintaining roads, bridges, and highways, providing snow removal, and the operation of public safety and emergency vehicles. 
Enclosed dwelling unit means the dwelling unit has its doors and windows closed. 
Enclosed vehicle means a vehicle with all operable doors, windows, sunroof, and other openings closed. 
Medical care facility is defined as set forth in Section 32.1-102.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Plainly audible means any sound that can be heard by the human ear with or without a medically approved hearing aid or device. Specific words or phrases need not be discernible. The detection of bass reverberations is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound. The sound must not be so faint that its source cannot be identified. 
School means a public school subject to Title 22.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, a private school serving children in one (1) or more grades between kindergarten and grade twelve (12), a school for students with disabilities as that term is defined in Section 22.1-319 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, a child day care center as that term is defined in Section 63.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and any public or private institution of higher learning, as those terms are defined in Section 23.1-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(c)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used or operated any television, radio, audio system in a motor vehicle, record, tape or compact disc player, drum, musical instrument, loudspeaker, communication system, amplification system, or any other sound production or reproduction system or device in such a manner that it is plainly audible inside the confines of another person's enclosed dwelling unit. 
(2)  Play, use, operate or permit to be played, used, or operated any radio, audio system, record, tape or compact disc player, drum, musical instrument, loudspeaker, communication system, amplification system, or any other sound production or reproduction system, within a motor vehicle such that it is plainly audible within another person's enclosed vehicle. 
(3)  Play, use, operate, or permit to be played, used or operated any television, radio, audio system in a motor vehicle, record, tape or compact disc player, drum, musical instrument, loudspeaker, communication system, amplification system, or any other sound production or reproduction system or device from outside the walls of an assisted living facility, court, medical care facility, nursing home, or school in such a manner that it is plainly audible within the confines of the same while it is being used as such. 
(d)  Exemptions. The prohibitions found in this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Activities permitted by law for which a specific license or permit has been granted by the city, state or federal government; including, but not limited to, noise generated by and necessary for the conduct of public festivals, parades, special events, and celebrations of recognized federal, state and local holidays. 
(2)  Noise created by and as a result of publicly sponsored events on property owned or controlled by the public entity sponsoring such events. 
(3)  Activities for which local regulation of noise has been preempted by state or federal law or which the city has no authority to regulate. 
(4)  Noise created for purposes of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, provided such noise ceases once any such threat is no longer imminent. 
(5)  Noise created in the performance of emergency and public safety work or law enforcement activities. 
(6)  Warning devices. Sound produced by a horn or warning device of a vehicle when used as a warning device, including back-up alarms for trucks and other equipment. 
(7)  Clocks, bells, and carillons between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., provided that any such sounds do not occur for more than five (5) consecutive or non-consecutive minutes in any one (1) hour. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(2)  A second violation and every additional violation of this section within any twelve-month period shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(3)  In addition to, and not in lieu of, the penalties proscribed herein, the city may apply to the circuit court for an injunction against the continuing violation of any provision of this section and may seek any other remedy or relief authorized by law. Nothing in this section is intended to preclude or be a precondition to private actions to abate or enjoin nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 36; Ord. No. 254; Code 1961, § 25-12; Ord. No. 2732-81; Ord. No. 2862-81; Ord. No. 4231-91; Ord. No. 6637-09, § 2; Ord. No. 6954-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7470-18, § 1; Ord. No. 7498-18, § 1)  
Sec. 28-37. - Abandoned or discarded refrigerators and other airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two (2) cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the door or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 48; Code 1961, § 25-38) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319.  
Sec. 28-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6333-07, § 1, adopted February 27, 2007, repealed § 28-38, which pertained to tattooing or operating tattoo establishment. See also the Code Comparative Table. The user's attention is directed to Ch. 20, Art. IV for similar provisions.  
Sec. 28-39. - Sale, discharge, etc., of stink bombs, itch powder, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, keep for sale, barter, exchange or dispose of by purchase, gift or in any other manner, or to set off, discharge or explode, within the limits of the city, any stink bomb, itch powder or like nuisance powder or bomb of whatever kind. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to set off, discharge, place or explode any such nuisance powder or bomb in any public building, theater, motion picture building or assembly hall, or upon any public property, sidewalk or street. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for wholesale dealers to have, keep, store or sell such nuisance powders or bombs, except when such nuisance powders or bombs are intended for sale, shipment and delivery in original or unbroken packages outside of the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  For each violation of any of the provisions of this section, the offender shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 64; Code 1961, § 25-49)  
Sec. 28-40. - Unlawful use, possession, etc., of registered bottles or other receptacles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner or the agent or licensee thereof, to take, use, convert or destroy, or have unlawfully in his possession, ship, or attempt to ship, or to fill or refill, without the consent of the owner, or of some person duly authorized, any bottles or other receptacles registered by the owner in accordance with Sections 59.1-94 and 59.1-95 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished, for the first offense, by imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days nor more than one (1) year, or by a fine of five dollars ($5.00) and, in addition thereto, fifty cents ($0.50) for each such bottle or other receptacle involved in such violation, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For each subsequent violation, such person shall be punished by imprisonment for not less than twenty (20) days nor more than one (1) year, or by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and, in addition thereto, one dollar ($1.00) for each bottle or other receptacle involved in such violation, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 69; Code 1961, § 25-7)  
Sec. 28-41. - Directing beam of laser pen, flashlight or similar device into the eyes of another person. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to intentionally, and without good cause, direct the beam from a laser pen, flashlight or similar device into the eyes (or eye) of another person. 
(Ord. No. 5249-99, § 1)  
Sec. 28-42. - Unlawful use of laser pointing devices. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, "laser pointing device" is defined as any hand-held device which emits light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation which is visible to the human eye. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without good cause, to focus, point or shine the beam of a laser pointing device directly or indirectly into the eyes or eye of another person or into the eyes or eye of an animal; or to focus, point or shine the beam of a laser pointing device in such a manner as to harass or annoy or injury another person or an animal. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 5253-99) 
State Law reference— Pointing laser at law enforcement officer, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57.01.  
Sec. 28-43. - Urination or defecation in public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in public or in a place open to public view except in public restroom facilities. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 5896-03)  
Chapter 29 - PARKS, SQUARES AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements, Ch. 5; regulations governing use of armory auditorium, § 7-14 et seq.; watercraft, docks, piers and waterways, Ch. 11; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 38; swimming pools, Ch. 39; admissions tax, § 40-230 et seq.; gunnery ranges and shooting areas, § 43-21 et seq.; archery ranges, § 43-45 et seq.; right of owners of subdivisions to designate parcels of land for common use for recreational purposes, App. B, § 8-01.6. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish parks, recreation facilities and playgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1806 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6977-13, § 2, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 29-1, which pertained to the naming and dedication of Huntington Park and derived from Ord. No. 172, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 26-1, 26-2.  
Sec. 29-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6977-13, § 2, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 29-2, which pertained to the dedication of Block 49, Points of Pines and Lakeville, as park, and derived from Ord. No. 172, § 1; Code 1961, § 26-2.  
Sec. 29-3. - Establishment and composition of department of parks, recreation, and tourism. 
There is hereby established a department of parks, recreation and tourism, which shall consist of the director of parks, recreation and tourism and such other officers and employees, organized into such bureaus, sections and other units, as may be provided by ordinance or by the order or directive consistent therewith. Whenever the phase "parks and recreation" is found in the City Code, it shall mean "parks, recreation and tourism." 
(Ord. No. 2789-81; Ord. No. 6203-06; Ord. No. 6278-06) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to create departments, § 4.02(B).  
Sec. 29-4. - General responsibilities of department of parks and recreation. 
The department of parks and recreation shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Organizing and conducting recreation programs for all age groups in various parts of the city; 
(2)  Operating all public parks, grounds, playfields and playgrounds of the city, both within and without its boundaries; 
(3)  Operating and maintaining nurseries for flowers, vines, shrubs and trees for use in the public parks, grounds, streets and ways of the city; 
(4)  Planting and care of all flowers, vines, shrubs and trees in the public parks, grounds, streets and ways of the city; 
(5)  Operating all buildings, museums, gardens, monuments, lakes, swimming pools, rest rooms, restaurants, refreshment stands and other facilities and establishments situated in the public parks and grounds under the jurisdiction of the department; 
(6)  Promoting, sponsoring and managing public concerts, entertainment and other recreational activities; and 
(7)  Exercising and performing such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2789-81; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-5. - Appointment, qualifications and general powers and duties of director of parks and recreation. 
(a)  The director of parks and recreation shall be appointed by the city manager. The director of parks and recreation shall be the head of the department of parks and recreation, and such director shall be a person trained and experienced in recreation activities with experience in the administration of public recreation or parks. 
(b)  The director of parks and recreation shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department of parks and recreation. 
(c)  The director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to establish charges and fees for use of certain parks and recreation facilities, events, and activities. Such charges and fees shall be subject to final written approval by the city manager prior to implementation. 
(Ord. No. 2789-81; Ord. No. 6976-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-6. - Rules and regulations of director of parks and recreation. 
(a)  The director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to make rules and regulations governing the operation and use of, and conduct in, parks, squares, playgrounds, recreation buildings and other recreation areas owned or operated by the city. Rules and regulations adopted by the director and the ordinances contained in article II of chapter 29 as referenced in section 29-20(a), apply to city festivals and special events on private and other public property (such as City Center at Oyster Point Fountain Plaza and on school board property) on which the city has been granted permission to conduct such festivals or events. 
(b)  The director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to make rules and regulations, consistent with the Charter and ordinances of the city, for the conduct of the business of the department of parks and recreation. 
(c)  The director of parks and recreation shall have the authority to make rules and regulations governing the application for special event and activity permits, under his purview, and for the operation and conduct of special events and activities on city property, and on other property for which the city has received consent to conduct or sponsor a special event or activity. Notwithstanding the above, the department of engineering may issue special event permits for activities conducted on the city's streets and sidewalks outside of city park lands and other recreation facilities. 
(d)  When such rules and regulations are approved by the city council, it shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2789-81; Ord. No. 6978-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-7. - Use of park facilities; charges for use of such facilities and admission to recreation activities; sale or exchange of surplus nursery products. 
When authorized by the council and upon such terms and conditions as it may provide, the department of parks and recreation may allow use, on a short term basis, of facilities or activities at such facilities in the public parks and grounds under its jurisdiction, fix and collect charges for the use of its facilities and services, fix and collect fees or charges for admission to concerts, entertainments and other recreational activities sponsored by it, and sell or exchange the surplus products of the city nurseries. The city manager is hereby authorized to establish and modify such fees and charges to ensure that the fees and charges remain in a competitive posture with regard to the market for such facilities, services, activities and products. 
(Ord. No. 2789-81; Ord. No. 6697-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6697-10 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2010.  
Sec. 29-8. - Use of school property for recreational purposes. 
The department of parks and recreation may utilize grounds and buildings under the jurisdiction of the school board at such hours and on such days as they are not in use for educational purposes, subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the school board may establish, and provided that the department of parks and recreation shall be responsible for any damage or extra expense arising from its use of the school grounds and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2789-81)  
Sec. 29-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6977-13, § 2, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 29-9, which pertained to the repair of buildings, drives and walks in parks, and derived from Ord. No. 2789-81.  
Sec. 29-10. - Leased property. 
The provisions of sections 29-6, 29-7, 29-26, 29-27, 29-30 and 29-46 of this chapter shall not apply to any portion of a park or recreation facility that is one (1) acre, or more, in size and is leased from the city for a period of twenty (20) years, or more, during the time such lease is in effect. The exemption provided herein shall cease whenever such lease expires or is terminated. Nothing herein shall be construed as restricting the power of the city council to amend, modify or repeal this section. 
(Ord. No. 3389-85)  
Secs. 29-11—29-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL REGULATIONS GOVERNING PARKS, SQUARES, BEACHES, GOLF COURSES, ETC.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The ordaining clause of Ord. No. 2909-82 specified "That Chapter 29 … Article II … be, and the same hereby is, amended and reordained to read as follows", with the text of the ordinance containing §§ 29-25—29-52, thus technically repealing §§ 29-20—29-24. In order to accurately reflect the intent of the council, Ord. No. 2928-82 was adopted, reading as follows: 
That Ordinance 2909-82 be and hereby is amended to provide that only Section 29-25 through Section 29-52 are amended by the said Ordinance 2909-82. 
Cross reference— Littering parks, § 19-21. 
 
Sec. 29-20. - Application of article; definitions. 
(a)  The rules and regulations embodied in this article shall apply to all park lands and waters, roadways therein, recreation facilities, structures, monuments and fountains, bathing beaches, golf courses and the flora and fauna located on park or recreation property and in waters or other properties owned by or under the jurisdiction of the city and under the temporary or permanent control or management of the department of parks and recreation. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term "director" means the director of parks and recreation or his duly authorized representative. 
(c)  As used in this article, the term "recreational facility" shall be construed to mean and include all areas named in section 29-20(a). 
(d)  As used in this article, the term "member" means those individuals with permanent addresses in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 2; Ord. No. 714; Code 1961, § 26-4; Ord. No. 2790-81; Ord. No. 2908-82, § 1; Ord. No. 4701-95, § 1; Ord. No. 5109-98; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-21. - Violations of article. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 29-22. - Individuals may be issued no trespassing notices restricting access to certain recreational facilities. 
Park Rangers shall have the authority to issue no trespassing notices to individuals for committing acts in a recreational facility that would constitute a violation of any law or ordinance or would violate any of the rules and regulations of this article. A written notice shall be issued to the violator restricting access to one (1) or more recreational facilities and notifying the violator that if they return during the term of the no trespassing notice they may be charged with trespassing. A sixty (60) day no trespassing notice may be issued for first time offenders; a six (6) month no trespassing notice may be issued for a second offense; and a twelve (12) month notice may be issued for third or subsequent offenses. Individuals shall have the right to appeal and to apply for reinstatement to such recreational facility, in accordance with procedures promulgated by the director. Any person that violates the no trespassing notice may be prosecuted in accordance with Section 28-30. 
(Ord. No. 7505-18)  
Sec. 29-22.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5628-10, § 2, repealed § 29-22.1, which pertained to club membership (other). See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 29-23. - Golf course fees and regulations. 
The director is authorized to establish a schedule of charges for use and access to the golf courses owned and operated by the city. Such fees and charges shall be approved in writing by the city manager before implementation. 
(Ord. No. 716; Ord. No. 904; Ord. No. 1424, § 1; Ord. No. 1941, § 1; Ord. No. 2200; Ord. No. 2215; Ord. No. 2247; Code 1961, § 26-30.1; Ord. No. 2473-78; Ord. No. 2476-78; Ord. No. 2478-78; Ord. No. 2522-79, § 1; Ord. No. 2535-79, § 1; Ord. No. 2729-81; Ord. No. 2747-81, § 1; Ord. No. 3316-85; Ord. No. 3562-87, § 1; Ord. No. 3894-89, § 1; Ord. No. 4262-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4701-95, § 1; Ord. No. 4899-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5002-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5628-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6976-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-23.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5628-10, § 2, repealed § 29-23.1, which pertained to winter charges. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 29-23.2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6976-13, § 2, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 29-23.2, which pertained to ladies' day and derived from Ord. No. 2893-82; Ord. No. 3315-85; Ord. No. 3562-87, § 1; Ord. No. 3894-89, § 1; Ord. No. 4262-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4701-95, § 1; Ord. No. 5002-97, § 1.  
Sec. 29-24. - Huntington Park Tennis Center fees. 
The director of parks and recreation is authorized to establish a schedule of charges for use and access to any tennis courts owned and operated by the city. All tennis center fees and charges shall be approved in writing by the city manager before implementation. 
(Ord. No. 6681-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6976-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-25. - Theatricals and musical entertainment. 
No person shall have or give any theatrical or musical entertainment in any recreational facility, unless a special activity permit is issued or written consent is given by the department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 3; Code 1961, § 26-5; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6978-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-26. - Posting signs or advertisements; sale of goods generally. 
(a)  No person, other than employees of the City of Newport News or other governmental agencies working in their official capacity, shall affix any sign, notice, banner, advertisement or printed material in any recreational facility. 
(b)  No person shall offer for sale or rent any goods, articles, privileges, commodities or services whatsoever or solicit for any purpose in any recreational facility, without obtaining written permission from the director, and for such time and at such places as the director may determine. This section shall not be construed to apply to the sale of food, soft drinks and other like goods pursuant to section 29-27. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 4; Code 1961, § 26-6; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6978-13, § 1) 
Cross reference— Advertising, § 3-1 et seq.  
Sec. 29-27. - Sale of food and soft drinks; canteen concessions. 
(a)  The sale of food, soft drinks or other like goods is prohibited in any park or recreational facility, except from canteens, concessions or vending machines as operated by concessionaries authorized by the director. 
(b)  The director is hereby authorized to advertise for bids for the rental of canteen concessions at any park or recreational facility, and to award a contract for the operation of such concessions; based on the most advantageous bid to the city, taking into account the character, reputation, financial responsibility of the bidder and qualifications of the bidder to operate the concession in a proper and satisfactory manner. The city manager shall have the right to accept or reject any such bid. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 12; Ord. No. 172, § 5; Code 1961, §§ 26-7, 26-43; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Cross reference— Food, § 17-1 et seq.  
Sec. 29-28. - Operating or parking vehicles in recreational facilities generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park any vehicle in any park or recreational facility of the city, except on the roadways and parking areas provided for this purpose and in other areas designated for such purpose by the director. Nor shall any vehicles be parked in a manner as to impede or obstruct the normal safe flow of traffic. 
(b)  All the provisions of chapter 26 shall be applicable to all park or recreational facilities owned by or under the jurisdiction of the city, except those provisions specifically changed or modified by this article. 
(Ord. No. 172, §§ 20, 21; Code 1961, §§ 26-26, 26-27; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-29. - Vehicles entering recreational facilities; driving in indicated direction. 
No person driving a vehicle shall enter or leave any park or recreational facility except directly by the highway and then only by the roadways as laid out in such facility for that purpose, nor shall a person drive a vehicle in any direction over the roadways other than as indicated or directed by signs placed by city authority along such roadways unless designated otherwise by the director. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 22; Code 1961, § 26-28; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-30. - Commercial vehicles or trucks or vehicles of hucksters, hawkers, etc. 
(a)  No commercial vehicle will be permitted in any recreational facility except vehicles carrying picnickers and their supplies to and from the picnic areas or vehicles carrying marketing goods, wares and merchandise, supplies or materials of any kind, for use in programs and/or operation of that facility, and except as provided in subsection (b) below. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for hucksters, hawkers or vendors to bring their vehicles into any recreational facility without authorization from the director. 
(Ord. No. 172, §§ 5, 20; Code 1961, §§ 26-7, 26-25; Ord. No. 2909-82)  
Sec. 29-31. - Washing, repairing or servicing vehicles. 
No person shall use any park or recreational facility for washing, repairing or servicing, other than replacing a flat tire, of any vehicle designed for self-propulsion. Abandonment of such vehicles is prohibited. If mechanical disablement occurs, immediate steps must be taken for removal. 
(Ord. No. 715; Code 1961, § 26-26.1; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-32. - Use of nature trails, pedestrian paths, etc. 
No persons other than those authorized by the director shall operate a motorized vehicle upon natural trails, pedestrian paths, bikeways or bridle paths, specifically designated and established for such use. Nothing in this Code prevents the use of motorized wheelchairs or similar devices used by persons with disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-33. - Operation of nonlicensed motorized vehicles. 
No person shall operate a nonlicensed motorized vehicle in any park or recreational facility unless in an area specifically designated for such use by the director. Nothing in this Code prevents the use of motorized wheelchairs or similar devices used by persons with disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-34. - Skateboarding. 
No person shall ride or use a skateboard in any park or recreational facility unless in an area designated for such use by the director. When skateboarding in any designated area, helmets are required and must be worn. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-32.  
Sec. 29-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6977-13, § 3, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 29-35, which pertained to carrying weapons and derived from Ord. No. 172, § 7; Code 1961, § 26-9; Ord. No. 2269; Ord. No. 2909-82.  
Sec. 29-36. - Throwing or discharging missiles. 
No person shall throw or discharge any missiles, paintballs, projectiles of any type, golf balls or the like, whether by hand, slingshot, pneumatic gun or otherwise, in any park or recreational facility except in areas which are expressly set aside by the director for this particular purpose. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 10; Code 1961, § 26-10; Ord. No. 2269; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6882-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-34.  
Sec. 29-37. - Making fires. 
No person shall make a fire in any park or recreational facility other than in grills, fireplaces or other areas as designated and approved for such use by the director. All fires shall be closely monitored and completely extinguished by persons starting and using them before those persons leave the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 7; Code 1961, § 26-12; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-35. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 29-37.1. - Smoking, use of tobacco and tobacco products may be prohibited or restricted. 
Smoking may be prohibited or restricted in parks, squares, playgrounds, recreational facilities and beaches owned or operated by the city by regulations developed by the director of parks and recreation and approved in writing by the city manager. 
For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  Recreational facility means an area that is within one hundred (100) yards of any playground equipment, any soccer field, any baseball field, any softball field, any volleyball court, any basketball court and any football field, or within the stands or seats in proximity to said recreational facility; and 
(2)  Smoking means the carrying or holding of any lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or the lighting of, or inhaling or exhaling the smoke of, a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or the use of tobacco or tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 5011-97; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-38. - Entering toilets of opposite sex. 
No person shall enter at any park or recreational facility or toilet set aside for the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 8; Code 1961, § 26-13; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-36.  
Sec. 29-39. - Injuring, molesting, etc., birds and animals. 
No person shall injure, molest or disturb any animals or birds, their homes or their young; nor shall any person give, make suffer or attempt to give any such animal or bird any noxious, injurious or disagreeable food, article or substance. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 11; Code 1961, § 26-16; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-37. 
Cross reference— Animal and welfare ordinance, § 6-54 et seq.  
Sec. 29-40. - Regulations for horses and ponies. 
No person shall bring, ride or drive a horse or pony within the limits of any park or recreational facility not provided with city-maintained bridle paths or other areas designated or approved for such use by the director. Where such areas are provided, no person shall leave a horse or pony unattended. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 17; Code 1961, § 26-22; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-38. 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 29-41. - Fouling springs, etc.; swimming; turning on spigots. 
No person shall foul or pollute in any manner, any watercourse, water supply or body of water, or swim or wash in any lake, pond, stream, spring or fountain in the parks, nor start the water flowing from any water supply or spigot not specifically fixed as a watering place for people or animals. The provisions of this section relative to swimming shall not apply to swimming pools, wading pools or bathing beaches provided for this purpose by the council. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 13; Code 1961, § 26-18; Ord. No. 2909-82) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-39.  
Sec. 29-42. - Climbing, or attaching swing or hammock to trees. 
No person shall climb a tree, nor attach a swing, hammock or other object to any tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation located on city property. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 15; Code 1961, § 26-20; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-40.  
Sec. 29-43. - Damaging, etc., recreation and parks equipment, etc. 
No person shall damage, deface, destroy, remove, injure or improperly use any recreation and parks property including equipment, facilities or the natural environment. Nor shall any person remove, relocate or rearrange any furniture, equipment or structure in any park or recreational facility without the approval of the director or his authorized representative. Persons guilty of damaging, defacing, or destroying property shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-44. - Use of recreation and parks equipment. 
No person shall use any recreation and parks equipment for any purpose than its intended use. Additionally, persons using such equipment shall be responsible for any damage to same resulting from careless or unnecessarily rough usage. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82)  
Sec. 29-45. - Entering prohibited areas 
No person shall enter or go upon any enclosure, lawn, slope, trail or any other area of a park or recreational facility where there is a sign prohibiting ingress. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 15; Code 1961, § 26-20; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-42.  
Sec. 29-46. - Consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages in or on recreation facilities; exception for parks and recreation facilities; intoxicated persons prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage or have in his possession any opened alcoholic beverage container while in or on a recreation facility owned by the city. 
(b)  Parks and recreation facilities shall be exempt from the operation of the prohibitions contained in subsection (a) of this section when authorized by the city manager (or his designee) and when authorization to sell or distribute beverages on premises and to consume same is granted by the appropriate alcoholic beverage control permit or license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person who is intoxicated, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, to be on the grounds or in the buildings or structures of parks and recreation facilities. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of alcohol or self-administered drugs to enter upon or utilize any other park or recreation facility owned or operated by the city. 
(e)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 7; Code 1961, § 26-32; Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 2927-82; Ord. No. 4413-92; Ord. No. 5629-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6480-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7071-14; Ord. No. 7221-15) 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 29-43. 
Cross reference— Public drunkenness generally, § 28-12.  
Sec. 29-47. - Control of litter, etc., at recreational facilities. 
No person shall throw, deposit or leave any litter, refuse or rubbish of any kind in any park or recreational facility except in public receptacles and in such manner that the litter, refuse or rubbish will be prevented from being carried by the elements. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter, refuse or rubbish shall be carried away from the area by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1) 
Cross reference— Garbage, litter and other solid waste, Ch. 19.  
Sec. 29-47.1. - Prohibited items on beaches and adjacent areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, carry, or have in his possession upon the sand beaches or upon any parking area or right-of-way adjacent to any of the sand beaches of the city, or any city-owned pool or pool area, any glass container. 
(Ord. No. 4253-91; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-48. - Use of recreational facilities by children under the age of ten. 
No person or guardian shall permit a child under the age of ten (10) years to make use of any park or recreational facility without providing for direct supervision for the entire period of visit. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-49. - Use of electronic metal-detecting devices. 
No person shall utilize any type of electronic metal-detecting device in any park or recreational facility without first obtaining written approval from the director, except for the sandy portion of the beaches of Huntington Park, Anderson Park and King-Lincoln Park. (This Code shall not pertain to parks, recreation and tourism employees working in an official capacity.) 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-50. - Regulations for dogs. 
(a)  No person shall permit his animal to run at large in or on any park or recreational facility, with the exception of any area designated by the city as a "dog-park." In the case of a dog, the dog's owner or his agent must secure the animal by a collar with a chain, cord or leash not exceeding eight (8) feet in length, and have the animal under complete and immediate control while in or on the recreational facility, except that a dog may be off-leash so long as it is in such areas and during such times as have been specifically designated for off-leash in writing by the Director of the Newport News Department of Parks, Recreation and Tourism. The owner or custodian of any dog found running at large in a pack shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per dog so found. For the purpose of this section, a dog shall be deemed to be running at large in a pack if it is running at large in the company of one (1) or more other dogs that are also running at large. 
(b)  The term "off-leash" for purposes of this section means that the dog is not secured by its owner or owner's agent by a collar with a chain, cord or leash not exceeding eight (8) feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 5416-00; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7576-19) 
Cross reference— Dogs generally, § 6-22 et seq.  
Sec. 29-51. - Fishing. 
No person shall fish from the bank or by boat in any reservoir or body of water owned by or under the jurisdiction of the city except in areas specifically designated for such use by the director of parks, recreation and tourism. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-52. - Use of programs and facilities, etc. 
No person shall engage in or make use of any activity, program or facility for which a fee is charged without first paying same and adhering to the rules and regulations governing use of said park or recreational facility. Issuance of a permit does not exempt any person from the rules and regulations as set forth, and the director has the authority to revoke any and all permits upon the finding of violation of any rules or regulations by any person. 
(Ord. No. 2909-82; Ord. No. 6977-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-53. - Establishment of fees for the use of city-owned waterfront facilities. 
Leeward Marina. Any person who moors or ties a vessel to any portion of the Leeward Marina, or to another boat so moored or tied, shall first obtain the permission of the marina manager for such docking privileges and shall pay the required fees. The director of parks and recreation is authorized to establish a schedule of charges for vessels using the marina. Such fees must be approved in writing by the city manager prior to implementation. 
(Ord. No. 3721-88; Ord. No. 3793-88; Ord. No. 3850-89; Ord. No. 3912-89; Ord. No. 4101-90; Ord. No. 5106-98; Ord. No. 5441-00; Ord. No. 5719-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6681-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6976-13, § 1)  
Sec. 29-53.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7261-16, § 1, adopted April 26, 2016, repealed § 29-53.1, which pertained to flying of model aircraft prohibited. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
ARTICLE III. - DIASCUND CREEK AND LITTLE CREEK RESERVOIRS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Watercraft, docks, piers and waterways, Ch. 11; water supply, Ch. 42. 
 
Sec. 29-54. - Application of article; definition. 
The provisions of this article shall govern the use of the Diascund Creek Reservoir and the Little Creek Reservoir and the surrounding city-owned property. Whenever the word "reservoir" is used in this article, it shall mean and include both such reservoirs. 
(Ord. No. 246; Ord. No. 259; Ord. No. 1570, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 26-48, 41-25)  
Sec. 29-55. - Purpose of development. 
In addition to providing an additional source of water supply, in developing the Diascund Creek Reservoir and the Little Creek Reservoir, the city intends to enhance the natural beauty of the areas and to provide recreational areas for public use. 
(Ord. No. 246; Ord. No. 259; Ord. No. 1570; Code 1961, §§ 26-47, 41-24)  
Sec. 29-56. - Applicability of state law. 
The provisions of title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia, "Waters of the State, Ports and Harbors," shall apply to the reservoir, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1570, § 6; Code 1961, § 41-31)  
Sec. 29-57. - Right of access by owners of abutting land. 
Owners of land abutting reservoir property shall have free and unrestricted use of city-owned marginal lands for access to the reservoir, subject to federal, state and county laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 246; Ord. No. 259, § 1; Ord. No. 1570, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 26-49, 41-26)  
Sec. 29-58. - Hunting and fishing on surrounding property. 
Hunting and fishing by the public on city-owned property surrounding the reservoir shall be subject to existing federal, state and county laws and regulations and is prohibited on the dam and roadways. 
(Ord. No. 246; Ord. No. 259, § 2; Ord. No. 1570, § 2; Code 1961, §§ 26-51, 41-27)  
Sec. 29-59. - Construction of duck blinds, wharves, etc. 
The construction of duck blinds, wharves, docks, piers and other structures in the reservoir or on the surrounding city-owned property is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 246; Ord. No. 259, § 3; Ord. No. 1570, § 3; Code 1961, §§ 26-50, 41-28)  
Sec. 29-60. - Limitations on fishing and boating. 
The use of the reservoir for fishing and boating is restricted only by the following limitations: 
(1)  No washing or bathing. 
(2)  No gasoline or internal-combustion engines on boats. 
(3)  No dumping of trash overboard. 
(4)  No violation of federal, state and county laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 246; Ord. No. 259, § 4; Ord. No. 1570, § 4; Code 1961, §§ 26-52, 41-29)  
Secs. 29-61—29-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VIRGINIA WAR MUSEUM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4946-96, amended Art. IV, §§ 29-71—29-76, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV, pertained to the War Memorial Museum. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 29-71. - General; purpose. 
The City of Newport News owns and controls the Virginia War Museum located in Huntington Park, including its buildings, fixtures, and historical materials and objects. The museum exists to study, preserve, document, disseminate and exhibit U.S. military history since 1775; Virginia's role in this history; and the impact of war upon American social, technological, political and economic life. The purpose of this article is to set forth general regulations concerning the operation and use of this unique resource. 
(Ord. No. 4946-96)  
Sec. 29-72. - Operation. 
The director of parks and recreation, under the supervision of the city manager, shall have general management and control over the operation of the Virginia War Museum. 
(Ord. No. 4946-96)  
Sec. 29-73. - Maintenance, repairs and alterations. 
All alterations, repairs and maintenance of the Virginia War Museum building, fixtures, exhibits and historical collections shall be under the direction and supervision of the city through the city manager and the department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 4946-96)  
Sec. 29-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6977-13, § 4, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 29-74, which pertained to authorized uses of building, and derived from Ord. No. 4946-96.  
Sec. 29-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6977-13, § 4, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 29-75, which pertained to restrooms and derived from Ord. No. 4946-96.  
Sec. 29-76. - Charges for access and use. 
The director of parks, recreation and tourism is authorized to establish a schedule of charges for admission and program attendance for public access and use of the museum. Such fees and charges shall be approved in writing by the city manager before implementation. 
(Ord. No. 4946-96; Ord. No. 6976-13, § 1)  
Chapter 30 - PAWNBROKERS; BUYERS OF OLD GOLD AND SILVER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2691-80, adopted Aug. 25, 1980, amended and reordained Ch. 30 to read as set out in §§ 30-1—30-14. Formerly, Ch. 30, §§ 30-1—30-6, was derived from Ord. No. 173, §§ 40, 42, 43; and Code 1961, §§ 27-1, 27-3—27-6. Subsequently, Ord. No. 4953-96, amended Ch. 30, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Automobile graveyards, Ch. 8. 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4000 et seq.; precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54-1-4100 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PAWNBROKERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1, adopted June 23, 1998, amended Art. I, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 30-1—30-12. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. I pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Definition of pawnbroker. 
"Pawnbroker" means any natural person who lends or advances money or other things for profit on the pledge and possession of tangible personal property, or other valuable things, other than securities or written or printed evidences of indebtedness or title, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a stipulated price. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1; Ord. No. 7566-19, § 1)  
Sec. 30-2. - License required; license authorized by court; building designated in license; penalty. 
(a)  No natural person shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker without being properly licensed as authorized by the circuit court for the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
(b)  No natural person shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker without having a valid business license issued by the commissioner of the revenue for the City of Newport News, Virginia, however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any pawnbroker licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia prior to July 1, 1998. 
(c)  The circuit court of the City of Newport News, Virginia, may authorize the commissioner of the revenue for the City of Newport News, Virginia, to issue to any natural person who has not been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude in the last ten (10) years, a license to engage in the business of a pawnbroker. No such license shall be issued by the commissioner of the revenue for the City of Newport News, Virginia, except with such authority. Prior to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall furnish his date of birth, a sworn statement or affirmation disclosing any criminal convictions or any pending criminal charges, whether within or without the commonwealth, and such other information as may be required by this article. The license shall designate the building in which the licensee shall carry on such business. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any pawnbroker licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia prior to July 1, 1998. 
(d)  No natural person shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker in any location other than the one (1) designated in his license, except with consent of the circuit court for the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
(e)  Any natural person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Any pawnbroker not a natural person may continue to operate pursuant to a valid, unexpired license until June 30, 2020. Thereafter, only natural persons shall be permitted to operate as pawnbrokers. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1; Ord. No. 7566-19, § 1)  
Sec. 30-3. - Bond required; private action on bond. 
(a)  No natural person shall be licensed as a pawnbroker or engage in the business of a pawnbroker without having in existence a bond with surety in the minimum amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to secure the payment of any judgment recovered under the provisions of subsection (b). 
(b)  Any person who recovers a judgment against a licensed pawnbroker for the pawnbroker's misconduct may maintain an action in his own name upon the bond of the pawnbroker if the execution issued upon such judgment is wholly or partially unsatisfied. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1; Ord. No. 7566-19, § 1)  
Sec. 30-4. - Memorandum to be given pledgor; fee; lost ticket charge. 
Every pawnbroker shall at the time of each loan deliver to the person pawning or pledging anything (also known as "pawner"), a memorandum or note, signed by him, containing the information required by section 30-7. A lost-ticket fee of five dollars ($5.00) may be charged, provided that the pawner is notified of the fee on the ticket. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1)  
Sec. 30-5. - Sale of goods pawned. 
No pawnbroker shall sell any pawn or pledge item until (i) it has been in his possession for the minimum term set forth in the memorandum, but not less than thirty (30) days plus a grace period of fifteen (15) days and (ii) a statement of ownership is obtained from the pawner. If a motor vehicle is pawned, the owner of the motor vehicle shall comply with the requirements of Section 46.2-637 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. In the event of default by the pawner, the pawnbroker shall comply with the requirements of Section 46.2-633, of the Code of Virginia, as amended. Otherwise, the pawnbroker shall comply with the requirements of Section 46.2-636 et seq., of the Code of Virginia, as amended. All sales of items pursuant to this section may be made by the pawnbroker in the ordinary course of his business. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6984-13, § 1)  
Sec. 30-6. - Interest chargeable. 
(a)  No pawnbroker shall ask, demand or receive a greater rate of interest than ten (10) percent per month on a loan of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or less, or seven (7) percent per month on a loan of more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or five (5) percent per month on a loan of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more, secured by a pledge of tangible personal property. No loan shall be divided for the purpose of increasing the percentage to be paid the pawnbroker. Loans may be renewed based on the original loan amount. Loans may not be issued that compound the interest or storage fees from previous loans on the same item. 
(b)  An annual percentage rate computed and disclosed under the provisions of the federal Truth-in-Lending Act shall not be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6984-13, § 1)  
Sec. 30-7. - Records to be kept; credentials of person pawning goods. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each loan or transaction in the course of his business, including transactions in which secondhand goods, wares or merchandise is purchased for resale. The account shall be recorded at the time of the loan or transaction and shall include: 
(1)  A description, serial number, and a statement of ownership of the goods, article or thing pawned or pledged or received on account of money loaned thereon, or purchased for resale; 
(2)  The time, date and place of the transaction; 
(3)  The amount of money loaned thereon at the time of pledging the same, or paid as the purchase price; 
(4)  The rate of interest to be paid on such loan; 
(5)  The fees charged by the pawnbroker, itemizing each fee charged; 
(6)  The full name, residence address, telephone number, and driver's license number or other form of identification of the person pawning, pledging or selling the goods, article or thing, together with a particular description, including the height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair and eye color, and any other identifying marks, of such person; 
(7)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of an unexpired government-issued identification card bearing the current legal address and a photograph of the person pawning, pledging, or selling the goods, article or thing, such as a driver's license or military identification card. If the government-issued identification card does not bear the current legal address, the person shall present other documentation verifying his current legal address. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; 
(8)  A digital image of the form of identification used by the person involved in the transaction; 
(9)  As to loans, the terms and conditions of the loan, including the period for which any such loan may be made; and 
(10)  All other facts and circumstances respecting such loan or purchase. 
(b)  A pawnbroker may maintain at his place of business an electronic record of each transaction involving goods, articles or things pawned or pledged or purchased. If maintained electronically, a pawnbroker shall retain the electronic records for at least one (1) year after the date of the transaction and make such electronic records available to any duly authorized law-enforcement officer upon request. 
(c)  For each loan or transaction, a pawnbroker may charge a service fee for making the daily electronic reports to the appropriate law-enforcement officers required by Section 54.1-4010 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, creating and maintaining the electronic records required under this section, and investigating the legal title to property being pawned or pledged or purchased. Such fee shall not exceed five (5) percent of the amount loaned on such item or paid by the pawnbroker for such item or three dollars ($3.00), whichever is less. 
(d)  No goods, article, or thing shall be pawned or pledged or received on account of money loaned or purchased for resale if the original serial number affixed to the goods, article, or thing has been removed, defaced, or altered. 
(e)  The Newport News Chief of Police shall adopt regulations consistent with the regulations promulgated by the superintendent of state police specifying the nature of the particular description for the purposes of subdivision (a)(6) above. The Newport News Chief of Police shall adopt regulations consistent with the regulations promulgated by the superintendent of state police specifying the nature of identifying credentials of the person pawning, pledging or selling the goods, article or thing. Such credentials shall be examined by the pawnbroker, and an appropriate record retained thereof. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5939-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6984-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7566-19, § 1)  
Sec. 30-8. - Daily reports. 
Every pawnbroker shall prepare a daily report of all goods, articles or things pawned or pledged with him or sold to him that day and shall file such report by noon of the following day with the Chief of Police for the City of Newport News, Virginia. The report shall include the pledgor's or seller's name, residence, and driver's license number or other form of identification, a photograph or digital image of the form of identification used by the pledgor or seller; and a description of the goods, articles or other things pledged or sold. Daily reports shall be maintained in an electronic format as identified by the chief of police, and shall be filed by each pawnbroker by electronic mail or any other electronic means of reporting approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5939-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6763-11, § 1, eff. 3-1-2011; Ord. No. 6984-13, § 1)  
Sec. 30-9. - Officers may examine records or property; warrantless search and seizure authorized. 
Every pawnbroker and every employee of the pawnbroker shall admit to the pawnbroker's place of business during regular business hours, any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the City of Newport News, Virginia, or any law-enforcement official of the state or federal government. The pawnbroker or employee shall permit the officer to (i) examine all records required by this article and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen and (ii) search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing, or known or believed by him to have been stolen. However, the officer shall not take possession of any article without providing to the pawnbroker a receipt. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1)  
Sec. 30-10. - Property pawned not to be disfigured or changed. 
No property received on deposit or pledge or purchased by any pawnbroker shall be disfigured or its identity destroyed or affected in any manner (i) so long as it continues in pawn or in the possession of the pawnbroker while in pawn; or (ii) in an effort to obtain a serial number or other information for identification purposes. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5939-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6984-13, § 1)  
Sec. 30-11. - Care of tangible personal property; evaluation fee. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers shall store, care for and protect all of the tangible personal property in the pawnbroker's possession and protect the property from damage or misuse. Nothing in this article shall be construed to mean that pawnbrokers are insurers of pawned property in their possession. 
(b)  A pawnbroker may charge a monthly storage fee for any items requiring storage, which fee shall not exceed five (5) percent of the amount loaned on such item. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1)  
Sec. 30-12. - Penalties. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 30-2, any licensed pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. In addition, the court may revoke or suspend the pawnbroker's license for second and subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. No. 5148-98, § 1)  
Secs. 30-13—30-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6810-11, § 1, adopted July 12, 2011, repealed Art. II, §§ 30-21—30-29, which pertained to junk and secondhand dealers and derived from Ord. No. 4953-96. 
 
Secs. 30-21—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUYERS OF GOLD AND SILVER 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
Coin means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
Dealer means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of (i) purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; (ii) removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or (iii) buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from manufactured articles. "Dealer" includes all employers and principals on whose behalf a purchase is made, and any employee or agent who makes any purchase for or on behalf of his employer(s). The definition of dealer shall not include persons engaged in the following: 
(1)  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of an estate being administered by the fiduciary; 
(3)  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by the retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in; 
(4)  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business; 
(5)  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers, or by mail originating outside the Commonwealth; and 
(6)  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing non precious scrap metals which incidentally many contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a by-product. 
Gems means any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
Precious metals means any item except coins composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or platinum alloys. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96)  
Sec. 30-32. - Records to be kept; copy furnished to local authorities. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each purchase shall be retained by the dealer for at least twenty-four (24) months and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, the price paid for each item, and a digital image of all precious metals or gems involved in the transaction; 
(2)  The date, time and place of receiving the items purchased; 
(3)  The full name, residence address (in addition to any post office box number, if any), work place, home and work telephone numbers, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color, and other identifying marks of the person selling the precious metals or gems; 
(4)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of an unexpired government-issued identification card bearing the current legal address and a photograph of the person selling the precious metals or gems, such as a driver's license or military identification card. If the government-issued identification card does not bear the current legal address, the person shall present other documentation verifying his current legal address. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency and the number thereon; 
(5)  A statement of ownership from the seller; and 
(6)  A digital image of the form of identification used by the person involved in the transaction. 
(b)  The information required by subdivisions (1) through (3) of subsection (a) of this section shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer and a copy shall be mailed or delivered within twenty-four (24) hours of the time of purchase to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96; Ord. No. 6984-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7155-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7566-19, § 1)  
Sec. 30-33. - Officers may examine records or property; warrantless search and seizure authorized. 
Every dealer or his employee shall admit to his place of business during regular business hours, the chief of police, or his designee, and any law enforcement officer of the state or federal government. The dealer or his employee shall permit the officer to (i) examine all records required by this article and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen and (ii) search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing or known or believed by him to have been stolen. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96)  
Sec. 30-34. - Credentials and statement of ownership required from seller. 
No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first (i) ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an unexpired identification card issued by a governmental agency with the current legal address and a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one (1) other corroborating means of identification, and (ii) obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. If the government-issued identification card does not bear the current legal address, the person shall present other documentation verifying his current legal address. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96; Ord. No. 7566-19, § 1)  
Sec. 30-35. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of eighteen (18). 
(b)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96)  
Sec. 30-36. - Dealer to retain purchases. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of twenty (20) consecutive week days, Saturdays and Sundays not included, from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from his place of business. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of twenty (20) consecutive week days, Saturdays and Sundays not included, after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96; Ord. No. 5375-99; Ord. No. 7155-15, § 1)  
Sec. 30-37. - Record of disposition. 
Each dealer shall maintain for at least twenty-four (24) months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person, firm or corporation to which he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by section 30-36. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased the item. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96)  
Sec. 30-38. - Bond or letter of credit required of dealers when permit obtained. 
(a)  Every dealer shall secure a permit as required by section 30-40 and each dealer at the time of obtaining such permit shall enter into a recognizance to the city secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this Commonwealth, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this article. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the Commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the city for ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(b)  A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96)  
Sec. 30-39. - Private action on bond or letter of credit. 
Any person aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer which violated the provisions of this chapter may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against the dealer and his surety. Recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96)  
Sec. 30-40. - Permit required; method of obtaining permit; no convictions of certain crimes; approval of weight devices; renewal; permanent location required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer as defined in section 30-31 without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police. 
(b)  To obtain a permit, the dealer shall file with the chief of police an application form which includes the dealer's full name, any aliases, address, age, date of birth, sex and fingerprints; the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer(s), if any; and the location of the dealer's place of business. Upon filing this application and the payment of a two hundred dollar ($200.00) application fee, the dealer shall be issued a permit by the chief of police, or his designee, provided that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven (7) years prior to the date of application. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any ordinance similar in substance to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Before a permit may be issued, the dealer must have all weight devices used in his business inspected and approved by state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police. 
(d)  This permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained with an annual permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). No permit shall be transferable. 
(e)  If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays, and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96)  
Sec. 30-41. - Exemptions from chapter. 
(a)  The chief of police, or his designee, may waive by written notice implementation of any one (1) or more of the provisions of this article, except section 30-35, for particular numismatic, gem or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations, provided that the purpose of the exhibitions is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof, engaged in buying or selling gold and silver bullion. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96)  
Sec. 30-42. - Penalties, first and subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this article, the chief of police may revoke the dealer's permit for one (1) full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory for two (2) full years from the date the conviction becomes final upon a second conviction and for each subsequent conviction thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 4953-96; Ord. No. 6763-11, § 1, eff. 3-1-2011) 

Chapter 31 - PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1, adopted September 25, 2007, effective October 1, 2007, amended Ch. 31, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 31 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Authority of city with respect to pension and retirement systems, § 2.02(H). 
Cross reference— Employees benefits generally, § 2-93 et seq.; application of accumulated sick leave as credit to retirement benefits, § 2-123; right of retiring employees to retain group life insurance, § 2-151. 
State Law reference— Pensions, benefits and retirement, Code of Virginia, title 51.1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - SOCIAL SECURITY 
 
Sec. 31-1. - Extension of benefits to eligible employees. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend to the eligible employees thereof, effective as of July 1, 1958, the benefits of the federal old-age and survivors insurance system, as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto. In pursuance of this policy, the city manager shall take such action as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-2; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-2. - Withholdings from salaries or wages. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees for the purpose provided in section 31-1 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable federal laws and regulations, and shall be paid over to the federal agencies or their designees in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 3; Code 1961, § 32-4; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-3. - Records and reports. 
The city manager shall maintain such records and submit such reports pertaining to the subject matter of this article as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 5; Code 1961, § 32-6; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Secs. 31-4—31-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT FUND  
DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION; PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 31-20. - Created; title; operative date. 
An employees' retirement plan and trust is hereby created and continued under authority of the Charter of the City of Newport News, which shall be known as the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund, and shall continue to be operative as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-7; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-21. - Statement of purpose; amendments. 
(a)  The purposes of the fund are to provide an orderly means whereby employees of the city, and employees of a participating employer, who become eligible for retirement or incapacitated as the result of a medical disability may be retired from active service without prejudice and to assist such employees in providing for their old age, disability, death and termination of employment, thus effecting economy and efficiency in the administration of city government. 
(b)  No amendments to any provision of this article shall be enacted by the city council unless and until such amendments shall have been studied by the board of trustees of the fund and the board's recommendations shall have been received by the city council. 
(c)  The board shall have full discretion and authority to resolve all questions arising in the administration, interpretation and application of the retirement plan as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-22. - Non-discrimination. 
All determinations made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be made in a uniform and non-discriminatory manner with respect to similarly situated members. Determinations of actuarial assumptions and other equivalency factors to be used in conjunction with the fund shall be determined by the board from time-to-time based on recommendation of the fund's actuary and set forth in a written document constituting part of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-23. - Cessation of benefits. 
The benefits provided for in this chapter shall be payable to a recipient only so long as the recipient is eligible to receive such benefits based on the provisions of this chapter and evidence acceptable to the board. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-24. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 31-25. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases, wherever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context, shall have the following meanings: 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit of equivalent value when computed on the basis of interest and mortality tables upon application of specific factors which have been adopted by the board for use in the computation of actuarial equivalents hereunder. For purposes of this definition, the applicable mortality table means, with respect to an annuity commencement date occurring prior to December 31, 2002, the mortality table provided in Revenue Ruling 95-6 ("GAM '83 blended mortality table"). Effective with respect to distributions with an annuity commencement date on or after December 31, 2002, the applicable mortality table used for purposes of adjusting any benefit limitation under IRC section 415(b)(2)(B), (C) or (D), as set forth in section 31-54 of this article, and the applicable mortality table used for purposes of satisfying the requirements of IRC section 417(e), is the table prescribed in Revenue Ruling 2001-62 ("GAR 94 blended mortality table"), as amended or revised. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, and effective for distributions with an annuity commencement date beginning after December 31, 2008, the applicable mortality table that is used for purposes of adjusting any benefit or limitation under IRC section 415(b)(2)(B), (C), or (D), as set forth in section 31-54 of this article, shall be the applicable mortality table within the meaning of IRC section 417(e)(3)(B). Such assumptions and factors shall be recommended by the fund's actuary and approved by the board from time to time and set forth in a schedule which shall be incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
Annuity commencement date means the first day of the first period for which a benefit is payable as an annuity, or, if the benefit is not payable as an annuity, the first day on which all events have occurred which entitle the member or beneficiary to such benefit. 
Average final compensation means the average annual compensation earned by a member from a participating employer during the member's thirty-six (36) highest earned consecutive months of service. 
Beneficiary means any person or legal entity duly and properly designated by the member to receive any benefits which may be payable under the fund upon or after death, other than benefits payable to a surviving spouse. Despite the preceding, to the extent provided in a domestic relations order, beneficiary also means the spouse, former spouse, child, or other dependent of a member who is recognized by such order as having a right to receive all or a portion of any benefits payable under the fund upon or after the death of such member. 
Board means the board of trustees provided for in section 31-70 to administer the fund. 
City means the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
Compensation means salary and other gross amounts, as set forth in rules and policies of the board, paid to a member by a participating employer for services rendered, including overtime compensation except as limited below. Compensation does not include (i) payments to a member by a participating employer for accumulated paid medical leave upon retirement, or paid personal leave upon termination or retirement; (ii) reimbursements, (iii) allowances, and non-salary payments paid to an employee in accordance with written administrative policies of the city; (iv) overtime compensation in excess of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) earned in a calendar year by a city employee, by an employee of an elected official, or by a school board employee who is a non-VRS participant, on and after March 1, 2010; and (v) accumulated compensatory leave paid on and after March 1, 2010. 
The annual compensation limit described in IRC section 401(a)(17) shall be deemed to be satisfied for plan years beginning before July 1, 1996. Effective July 1, 1996, the annual compensation of each member taken into account under the fund shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000), as adjusted by the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service for increases in the cost-of-living, in accordance with IRC section 401(a)(17)(B). In determining benefit accruals in any plan year beginning after June 30, 2002, the annual compensation of each member taken into account shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000), as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with IRC section 401(a)(17)(B). Annual compensation means compensation during the plan year or such other consecutive 12-month period over which compensation is otherwise determined under the fund (the determination period). The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins with or within such calendar year. 
Credited service means the total service credit of an employee including credit obtained or earned through service, portability, leave exchange, and purchase and which is taken into account in the determination of benefits to be paid from the fund pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Dependent child or children means natural or adopted unmarried children of a member or retiree: (i) who has not attained age eighteen (18); or (ii) who has not attained age twenty-three (23) and is a full-time student. A child who becomes functionally incapacitated prior to age eighteen (18), or twenty-three (23) in the case of a full-time student, as determined under the fund's disability guidelines and unable to perform gainful activity shall be considered a dependent so long as such incapacity continues based on evidence acceptable to the board. 
Deputy sheriff means any employee of the sheriff who has been actively employed by the sheriff in a regular full-time status in a position which has been designated in or considered by the city's classification and pay plan listing, or its predecessor or successor document, as eligible for retirement benefits as a public safety employee pursuant to section 31-52, section 31-53, or section 31-54 of this Code. 
Disability guidelines mean the disability guidelines adopted by the board from time to time for purposes of making disability determinations under the fund. 
Effective date of retirement shall be the first day of the month following either acceptance of a properly completed application by the city's department of finance, or the date of eligibility for retirement, whichever is later. 
Elected official means a member of the city council, the Clerk of the Newport News Circuit Court, the Newport News Commonwealth's Attorney, the Newport News Commissioner of the Revenue, the Newport News Sheriff, and the Newport News Treasurer. 
Employee means any person now or hereafter directly employed by a participating employer as defined in this section, whose services are compensated in whole or in part by the participating employer, and who is employed in a regular full-time or equivalent position as defined by the administrative policies of the city for membership eligibility. 
Equivalent positions means those job classifications for employment positions as set forth in the administrative policies of the city for membership eligibility approved by the Newport News City Manager and City Council. No equivalent position can be added to the policies without such approval. 
Firefighter means an employee of the city who has actively served as a member of the city's fire department in a regular full-time status in a position which has been designated in or considered by the city's classification and pay plan, or its predecessor or successor document, as eligible for early retirement benefits as a public safety employee pursuant to section 31-40, section 31-52, section 31-53, and section 31-54 of this Code. 
Fund means the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund. 
Gainful activity means activity which yields or is capable of yielding income equal to or exceeding annualized federal minimum wages using two thousand eighty (2,080) hours as a standard year. 
IRC means the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Limitation year means the plan year. 
Member means any retiree, any employee who is compulsorily included in the membership of the fund pursuant to the provisions of section 31-30, any elected official, and employees of elected officials who have been recommended by the board and granted membership by city council. 
Participating employer means the city, the school board, and the elected officials of the city as defined in this chapter. 
Plan year means the twelve (12) consecutive month period beginning on July 1 and ending on the next following June 30. 
Police officer means an employee who has actively served as a member of the city's police department in a regular full-time status in a position which has been designated in or considered by the city's classification and pay plan, or its predecessor or successor document, as eligible for early retirement benefits as a public safety employee pursuant to section 31-40, section 31-52, section 31-53, and section 31-54 of this Code. Employees who are employed by the school board as school crossing guards and who, prior to December 31, 1979, were employed in the same capacity as sworn officers of the police department, shall be considered to be police officers for purposes of section 31-40, section 31-52, section 31-53 or section 31-54 of this Code. 
Political subdivision means any county, city or town of the Commonwealth of Virginia; any agency, subdivision, branch or unit of the Commonwealth of Virginia which has been created under the authority of an act of the Virginia General Assembly; and any commission, committee, authority, agency or body created by a county, city or town of the Commonwealth of Virginia which has been authorized to hire employees. 
Public safety employee means a police officer, a firefighter, the sheriff and deputy sheriffs as defined in this article. 
Recipient means a person receiving benefits or allowances from the fund. 
Reserve means the retirement and benefits reserve provided for in division 6 of this article. 
Retiree means a vested member who has terminated employment with a participating employer and has applied, qualified and been approved for receipt of retirement benefits from the fund based on age or credited service, or both; or an employee who has been deemed totally and permanently disabled and retired under the provisions of this article. 
Salary means an employee's base pay, generally calculated and expressed on a per hour or annual basis. In the case of an hourly employee, salary means the employee's base hourly rate times (2,080) hours. 
The salary limit described in IRC section 401(a)(17) shall be deemed to be satisfied for plan years beginning before July 1, 1996. Effective July 1, 1996, the annual salary of each member taken into account under the fund shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000), as adjusted by the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service for increases in the cost-of-living, in accordance with IRC section 401(a)(17)(B). In determining benefit accruals in any plan year beginning after June 30, 2002, the annual salary of each member taken into account shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), as adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with IRC section 401(a)(17)(B). Annual salary means salary during the plan year or such other consecutive 12-month period over which salary is otherwise determined under the fund (the determination period). The cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual salary for the determination period that begin with or within such calendar year. 
School board means the Newport News, Virginia School Board. 
Service means time worked by an employee for a participating employer for which that employee was paid salary. 
Sheriff means the Sheriff of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
Spouse means a current husband or wife who is joined in matrimony with a member under state laws which are not against the public policy of and are recognized as lawful by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Termination of service means the last day of regular full-time employment with a participating employer as defined by the city's personnel administrative manual. 
Vested means having qualified to receive retirement benefits pursuant to section 31-36 of this article. 
VRS means the Virginia Retirement System. 
VRS participant means an employee who is employed by the school board and who is a member of VRS, provided such employee was hired by the school board prior to July 1, 2009. 
Year means the city's fiscal year unless clearly intended otherwise by the context within which the term is used. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2970-82; Ord. No. 3298-25; Ord. No. 4732-95; Ord. No. 5044-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5163-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5368-99; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6562-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6602-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6974-13, § 1; Ord. No. 6989-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7387-17)  
Secs. 31-26—31-29. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MEMBERSHIP 
 
Sec. 31-30. - Membership generally. 
The following described persons shall be compulsorily included as members of the fund: 
(a)  All employees hired by the city prior to March 1, 2010, and as defined in section 31-25. 
(b)  All employees hired by the school board prior to July 1, 2009, and as defined in section 31-25. 
(c)  Elected officials who are elected prior to March 1, 2010, and all employees of elected officials hired prior to March 1, 2010, and as defined in section 31-25 whose membership in the fund has been requested by an elected official, recommended by the board and approved by city council pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Elected officials as herein defined may elect membership in the fund for themselves by making written notice to the board and agreeing to abide by the provisions of this article. Once an elected official makes an election, membership shall be compulsory for that elected official throughout the official's term(s) of office provided the initial election was prior to March 1, 2010, and the elected official's subsequent terms, if any, are consecutive with no break in service. 
(2)  Elected officials as herein defined may elect to provide membership in the fund for their employees by making written notice to the board and agreeing to abide by the provisions of this article. Once an elected official makes an election for their employees, membership shall be compulsory for all existing employees of that elected official and all employees hired by that elected official prior to March 1, 2010. 
(3)  All employees of elected officials whose membership in the fund has been previously established as provided in this section. 
(4)  Elected officials shall make elections as provided in this section within ninety (90) days of taking the oath of office as an elected official. Elected officials who do not exercise their options for membership for themselves or their employees as herein provided within ninety (90) days of taking the oath of office shall exclude themselves from membership and shall exclude those employees that they subsequently hire from membership during their term(s) of office. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 4; Ord. Nos. 220, 407, 1805; Code 1961, § 32-10; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6602-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010, shall be in effect on and after March 1, 2010.  
Sec. 31-31. - Exclusions from membership. 
The following persons shall not be members of the fund: 
(1)  Employees hired or rehired by the city on or after March 1, 2010. 
(2)  Employees who are not serving in a regular full-time or equivalent position as defined by the administrative policies of the city for membership eligibility. 
(3)  Persons who are classified as "independent contractors," "vendors," or "consultants" of a participating employer. 
(4)  Elected officials and employees of elected officials who have not become members as provided in section 31-30. 
(5)  Persons who are leased employees. For this purpose, effective July 1, 1997, "leased employee" means any person who is not otherwise an employee of a participating employer and who, pursuant to an agreement between a participating employer and any other person (a "leasing organization"), has performed services for a participating employer, or for a participating employer and related persons (determined in accordance with IRC section 414(n)(6)), on a substantially full-time basis for a period of at least one (1) year, and such services are performed under the primary direction or control of a participating employer. 
(6)  Employees hired or rehired by the school board on or after July 1, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 3097-83; Ord. No. 3476-86; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6602-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6974-13, § 1)  
Sec. 31-32. - Cessation of membership. 
The membership of any person in the fund shall cease upon: 
(1)  Termination of service as an employee prior to vesting; 
(2)  The transfer of assets of the fund attributable to the member to VRS or another political subdivision of the Commonwealth pursuant to the portability provision of section 31-42 of this Code; or 
(3)  Death of the member. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-33. - Rights under this article not subject to assignment, execution, garnishment, etc. 
The right of a member to a service retirement allowance, disability benefit, death benefit, or any other right accrued or accruing to any member or beneficiary under the provisions of this article shall be unassignable and not be subject to sale, execution, garnishment or attachment, or any other legal process. Notwithstanding the preceding, the fund shall recognize domestic relations orders in accordance with IRC section 414(p)(11) or its successor. 
A domestic relations order does not fail to be treated as a qualified domestic relations order, as defined in IRC section 414(p), solely because (i) the domestic relations order is issued after the death of the member, (ii) at the time the domestic relations order is issued, the spouse no longer meets the definition of surviving spouse under the fund, (iii) the domestic relations order is issued after the member's or beneficiary's annuity commencement date, or (iv) the domestic relations order is issued after, or revises, a prior domestic relations order. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 30; Code 1961, § 32-36; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 5909-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6562-09, § 1)  
Sec. 31-34. - Virginia Retirement System (VRS). 
(a)  All eligible employees of the city or of an elected official hired or rehired on or after March 1, 2010, shall be members of VRS, and subject to the provisions of VRS. 
(b)  Subject to applicable law, all eligible elected officials who are elected on or after March 1, 2010, and who are not members of the fund under section 31-30, shall be members of VRS, and subject to the provisions of VRS. 
(c)  Any person who is a member of the fund on February 28, 2010 other than employees of the school board shall have the option, at no cost to the city, of becoming a member of VRS and terminating his membership in the fund thereafter upon filing with the department of finance prior to March 1, 2011 a notice of election on a form provided by the department. Such notice of election when filed shall be irrevocable, unless otherwise provided by law. Any such person electing to become a member of VRS shall accept the provisions of VRS. 
(Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010, shall be in effect on and after March 1, 2010.  
DIVISION 4. - CREDITED SERVICE 
 
Sec. 31-35. - Credited service for work performed for a participating employer. 
(a)  Each member shall receive credited service as set out in this division. 
(b)  For each member of the fund on January 1, 1983, the credited service of such member as an employee prior to July 1, 1977, shall be equal to the credited service of such member with respect to such service as was determined as of December 31, 1982, in accordance with the provisions of the fund in effect on December 31, 1982. The amount of such credited service for each member shall be conclusively determined as of December 31, 1982 and shall not be subject to adjustment after January 1, 1983, except to the extent necessary to correct a mistake of fact or clerical error. 
(c)  On and after July 1, 1977, each member shall receive credited service for each month of service rendered to a participating employer while in a regular full-time or equivalent position as defined by the administrative policies of the city. 
(d)  Credited service shall be measured in years, with each month of credited service in excess of complete years being considered as one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of a year. 
(1)  In computing the credited service of any member, other than a school board employee member, fifteen (15) days or more of service during any month (fourteen (14) days or more of service during the month of February) shall constitute a month of service and twelve (12) months of service shall constitute a year. 
(2)  In computing the credited service of any school board employee member, the school employment year, be it ten (10), eleven (11), or twelve (12) months, shall constitute a year of service, so long as the employee completes the employment year; otherwise fifteen (15) days or more of service during any month (fourteen (14) days or more of service during the month of February) shall constitute a month of service and twelve (12) months of service shall constitute a year. 
(e)  Any accumulated unused paid medical leave shall be credited as additional credited service for benefits computation unless forfeited pursuant to section 2-123. Effective July 1, 2008, one (1) month of service shall be credited for each one hundred sixty (160) hours (three hundred forty-two (342) hours for firefighters assigned to twenty-four-hour shifts) of accumulated paid medical leave. 
In no event shall credited service for unused paid medical leave be granted to a member who is an employee of the school board and receives payment in consideration of accumulated unused paid medical leave. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the credited service provisions set forth in the other subsections of this section, credited service for persons appointed by the city council to offices of the city shall be established as follows: 
(1)  For each of the first two (2) years of appointed service, the appointees shall be entitled to two point five (2.5) years of credited service. 
(2)  For each year after the first two (2) years of appointed service, appointees shall be entitled to one (1) year of credited service. 
This subsection shall apply to those persons appointed by city council to offices of the city who were not vested on December 13, 1988, and to all subsequent appointees to such offices. 
(g)  Effective July 1, 2003, any member who is eligible to retire under section 31-52 or section 31-53 of this Code may, at their option immediately prior to their retirement date, exchange up to six hundred forty (640) hours of paid personal leave (eight hundred sixty-four hours (864) for firefighters assigned to a twenty-four-hour shifts) for credited service at the then current, cost-neutral exchange rates established by the board's actuary. This exchange of paid personal leave for credited service may not be used in meeting the eligibility requirements of section 31-52 or section 31-53. 
(h)  In lieu of or in addition to leave exchange under subsection (g), any member who is eligible to retire under section 31-52 or section 31-53 of this Code may elect to purchase credited service immediately prior to their retirement date, in any amount up to the value of paid personal leave referenced in subsection (g) by means of a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer from a city approved 457(b) deferred compensation plan (other than the plan provided for in section 2-106). A participant electing such a trustee-to-trustee transfer must contribute the value of paid personal leave that will be subject to the trustee-to-trustee transfer into the participant's account under the 457 plan, up to the maximum contribution allowed under the terms of the 457 plan with respect to the 457 plan year. If a participant has already contributed the maximum permissible amount to the 457 plan with respect to that 457 plan year, or if the contribution of paid personal leave causes the participant to reach the maximum contribution limit under the 457 plan, then amounts previously credited to the participant's account under the 457 plan may be included in the trustee-to-trustee transfer to the extent necessary to purchase the amount of service credit elected by the participant. 
Credited service purchased under this subsection (h) shall be determined according to the same actuarial factors that are applied for purposes of subsection (g). The total combined amount of credited service purchased by any member under subsection (g) and subsection (h) shall not exceed the maximum amount of service credit that would be allowed to be purchased under subsection (g). This purchase of credited service may not be used in meeting the eligibility requirements of section 31-52 or section 31-53. If and only if retroactive adoption of this ordinance is approved by the Internal Revenue Service in response to a voluntary compliance submission or similar ruling request, this subsection (h) shall become effective as of July 1, 2003 or such other date as is specified by the Internal Revenue Service. 
(i)  Effective for limitation years beginning on and after July 1, 1998, any provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding and subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth, pursuant to the provisions of IRC section 415(n)(3), if a vested member elects to exchange paid personal leave for credited service under this section 31-35 of the fund, such exchange, combined with any prior paid personal leave exchanges shall be limited to five (5) years of credited service to the extent such credited service constitutes "nonqualified service credit," as defined in IRC section 415(n)(3)(C). The foregoing language shall not apply to employer contributions not subject to a member's election. In the case of an eligible participant as defined in Section 1526(c) of the Tax Reform Act of 1997, the foregoing limitations shall not be applied to reduce the amount of permissive service credit which may be purchased to an amount less than the amount which was allowed to be purchased under the terms of this plan as in effect on August 5, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 8; Ord. No. 220; Ord. No. 407; Ord. No. 991, § 1; Ord. No. 1681, § 1; Ord. No. 1850, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-14; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 3810; Ord. No. 3821-89; Ord. No. 5155-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5905-03; Ord. No. 6400-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6505-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6685-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6797-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6974-13, § 1; Ord. No. 6989-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7018-13, § 1)  
Sec. 31-36. - Credited service required for vesting. 
Credited service requirements for vested status are as follows: 
(1)  Fifteen (15) years for members whose most recent termination of service is prior to July 1, 1972. 
(2)  Five (5) years for members whose most recent termination of service is on or after July 1, 1972, and before July 1, 1985, but whose service included service prior to July 1, 1977. 
(3)  Ten (10) years for members whose most recent termination of service is on or after July 1, 1972, and before July 1, 1985, but whose service did not include service prior to July 1, 1977. 
(4)  Five (5) years for members whose most recent termination of service is on or after July 1, 1985. 
Regardless of their years of credited service, members shall be fully vested upon fund termination or the complete discontinuance of contributions to the fund. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 3324-85; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-37. - Reinstatement of prior credited service upon reemployment of a non-vested employee. 
(a)  In the case of reemployment, on or after January 1, 1983, of a former non-vested employee whose employment had been previously terminated with a forfeiture of prior credited service, forfeited credited service that was rendered after July 1, 1977, shall be reinstated as of the date of reemployment as an employee if the period of credited service that was forfeited equals or exceeds the elapsed period between the date of such cessation and the date of reemployment. The length of the elapsed period shall be measured in accordance with the provisions of section 31-35. However, no credited service shall be reinstated if the date of reemployment occurred on or after March 1, 2010 (or July 1, 2009 for reemployment by the school board). 
(b)  In the event the period of credited service that was forfeited at the last termination of employment is less than the elapsed period since the most recent date of termination of employment, such credited service shall not be subject to reinstatement in the event of the subsequent reemployment of the former member. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6827-11)  
Sec. 31-38. - Reemployment of a vested, terminated member not receiving retirement benefits. 
Upon reemployment by a participating employer of a vested terminated member not receiving retirement benefits into a position that accrues credited service in the fund, the retirement allowance calculation for the vested terminated employment period shall be calculated using the provisions in effect at the time of termination of the vested terminated employment period. Retirement allowances applicable to subsequent employment periods shall be calculated based on the provisions of the fund in effect at the time of termination of each subsequent employment period. The retirement allowances for subsequent employment periods shall be combined with the retirement allowance for the original employment period, the total of which shall establish the member's retirement allowance. Notwithstanding the above, if the last reemployment period began prior to October 1, 2007, one (1) retirement allowance will be calculated based upon the sum of all credited service earned and the member's average final compensation which shall establish the member's retirement allowance. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6603-09)  
Sec. 31-39. - Reemployment of a retired member receiving retirement benefits. 
Upon reemployment by a participating employer of a retiree into a position that accrues credited service in the fund or in the city's VRS plan under section 31-34, all retirement benefits then being received by the retiree shall cease and shall not resume during any such reemployment period. Upon termination of the reemployment period, a retirement allowance will be calculated as follows: 
(a)  If the last reemployment period began prior to October 1, 2007, one (1) retirement allowance will be calculated based upon the sum of all credited service earned and the member's average final compensation which shall establish the member's revised retirement allowance. 
(b)  If any reemployment period began on or after October 1, 2007, but before March 1, 2010, a retirement allowance for such reemployment period will be calculated based upon the compensation paid and credited service earned during the reemployment period, and this amount shall be combined with the retirement allowance the member was receiving immediately prior to the reemployment period which shall establish the member's revised retirement allowance. 
(c)  If any reemployment period began on or after March 1, 2010, upon termination of the reemployment period, the member's previous retirement allowance under the fund shall resume. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6603-09; Ord. No. 6730-10)  
Sec. 31-40. - Compulsory retirement; credited service as a firefighter or police officer. 
(a)  Compulsory retirement shall be applicable only to members who are firefighters or police officers. The compulsory retirement age for these members shall be age sixty-seven (67). 
(b)  No member shall receive credited service as a firefighter or police officer subsequent to the month such member reaches sixty-seven (67) years of age. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the positions of fire chief and police chief. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 3522-86; Ord. No. 4862-96; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6491-08; Ord. 7278-16, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6491-08, adopted May 27, 2008, changed the title of section 31-40 from "Credited service as a firefighter or police officer" to "Compulsory retirement; credited service as a firefighter or police officer."  
Sec. 31-41. - Purchase of prior service. 
(a)  City employees. Any provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding and subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth, a city employee who has vested in his or her accrued benefit under the fund may purchase credited service at an actuarially determined cost neutral purchase rate, approved from time to time by the board multiplied by his or her annual salary as of the date of purchase as follows: 
(1)  Time employed by the city under a CETA program. 
(2)  No more than ten (10) years of active duty service in the armed forces of the United States of America not otherwise credited under section 31-44, and not otherwise exchanged under section 2-111. 
(3)  Prior credited service with the Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund which was forfeited because of the withdrawal of accumulated contributions. 
(4)  Credited service earned as a regular full-time or equivalent employee with (i) VRS or (ii) the retirement plan of any other political subdivision of Virginia, including this fund, which is not considered in the calculation of a retirement benefit. 
(5)  Credited service with the city during which the employee participated in a city approved IRC section 457 deferred compensation plan, as an alternative to the fund, by transferring assets from the alternative IRC section 457 plan to the fund. 
(6)  Time employed by the Virginia Peninsula Tourism and Conference Bureau, Inc. as a full-time employee. 
(b)  School board employees. Any provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, and subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth, a school board employee who has vested in his or her accrued benefit under the fund may purchase credited service at an actuarially determined cost neutral purchase rate, approved from time to time by the board, multiplied by his or her annual salary as of the date of purchase as follows: 
(1)  Time employed by the school board under a CETA program. 
(2)  No more than ten (10) years of active duty service in the armed forces of the United states of America not otherwise credited pursuant to section 31-44, and not otherwise exchanged pursuant to section 2-111. 
(3)  Prior credited service with the fund which was forfeited because of the withdrawal of accumulated contributions. 
(4)  Credited service earned as a regular full-time or equivalent employee under (i) VRS or (ii) the retirement plan of any other political subdivision of Virginia, including this fund, which is not considered in the calculation of a retirement benefit. 
(5)  Time employed by the Virginia Peninsula Tourism and Conference Bureau, Inc. as a full-time employee. 
(c)  All or a portion of the service specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be purchased, however, in order for VRS participants to purchase credited service under subsection (b), such credited service must have first been purchased under VRS. 
(d)  Any member purchasing credited service with the city by transferring assets from the city approved IRC section 457(b) alternative deferred compensation plan provided for in section 2-106 to the fund shall transfer assets equal to the actuarially determined cost neutral purchase rate, approved from time to time by the board, multiplied by the member's annual salary as of the date of purchase. 
(e)  Payment for service as provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be made by (i) direct trustee-to-trustee transfer from a city approved IRC section 457(b) deferred compensation plan, other than the plan provided for in section 2-106, (ii) in a lump sum, or (iii) by payroll deduction. Only one (1) payroll deduction for this purpose shall be made at any one (1) time. Should the payroll deduction be terminated for any reason prior to purchasing the entire period applied for, the member shall be credited with the portion of such period for which payment has been received. If the payroll deduction is continued beyond the point at which the entire period applied for has been purchased, the member may be credited with such additional time as may otherwise have been eligible for purchase but no more than the entire period eligible for purchase. Any excess payments shall be refunded to the member, or the member's beneficiary, if the member is deceased. Except for excess payments, no payments made hereunder shall be refundable. 
(Ord. No. 4791-95; Ord. No. 5609-01; Ord. No. 5769-02; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7112-14, § 1)  
Sec. 31-42. - Portability of service. 
The board may enter into an agreement with VRS or another political subdivision of the Commonwealth having a defined benefit plan which is not supplemental to VRS, whereby pursuant to the agreement, the board may transfer assets on behalf of a vested member of the fund to VRS or to the defined benefit plan of another political subdivision of the Commonwealth having a benefit plan which is not supplemental to VRS. 
(Ord. No. 5087-97; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. 7278-16, § 1)  
Sec. 31-43. - Limited purchase of certain prior service. 
After a transfer of assets as authorized by section 31-42 of this Code, a member may purchase any non-transferred credited service at two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the actuarially determined cost neutral purchase rate multiplied times their annual salary at the date of purchase for each year to be credited. The purchase of this non-transferred time must be completed within eighteen (18) months from the effective date of the portability agreement between the fund and another plan, or the member's date of hire as an employee, whichever is later. Any such credited service not purchased as provided herein may be purchased by a member pursuant to the provisions of section 31-41 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5093-98; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-44. - Military service. 
Notwithstanding any provision in this article to the contrary, accrual of benefits and credited service in the fund will be provided in accordance with IRC section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. Further, pursuant to IRC section 401(a)(37), and effective for plan years commencing on or after January 1, 2007, the beneficiary of a member who dies while on qualified military service, defined in IRC section 414(u)(5), shall be entitled to any additional benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to a period of qualified military service) provided under the fund in the same manner as if the member had resumed employment with the city and then terminated on account of death. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 3016-83; Ord. No. 4188-91; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6974-13, § 1)  
Secs. 31-45—31-49. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ELIGIBILITY FOR, RECEIPT AND AMOUNTS OF, RETIREMENT BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 31-50. - Benefits on termination. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, any vested member who terminates service as an employee before attaining the minimum retirement age shall have a right to receive a retirement allowance upon reaching the minimum retirement age, computed in accordance with the benefit provisions of the fund in effect at the date of the member's termination of service. Any member who terminates service before having vested shall have no rights to any future benefit payments from the fund unless otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, any other associated benefits as defined in this chapter shall be computed in accordance with the benefit provisions of the fund in effect on the date of the member's termination of service. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 3324-85; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-51. - Application for retirement benefits. 
(a)  Employees who terminate service with a participating employer and are eligible to receive retirement benefits from the fund, must make written application for receipt of benefits on forms prescribed by the city's department of finance. Such application shall not be effective until received and accepted by the city's department of finance. 
(b)  Retirement benefit payments shall begin accruing on the effective date of retirement and shall be payable monthly on the last working day of each month so long as the retiree is eligible to receive such payments. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-52. - Regular retirement. 
(a)  For the period beginning March 1, 2010, only actual service shall be used in calculating credited service for the purpose of determining retirement eligibility. However, all credited service obtained or earned prior to March 1, 2010, shall be included in such calculation. 
(b)  Employees are eligible for regular retirement from service with a participating employer if they are vested in accordance with the provisions of section 31-36 and meet the following minimum retirement eligibility criteria based on age or credited service: 
(1)  Public safety employees: 
a.  Based on credited service—At least twenty-five (25) years of credited service as a public safety employee at any age; or 
b.  Based on age—At least fifty (50) years old with at least five (5) years of credited service as a public safety employee. 
(2)  Other employees: 
a.  Based on credited service—At least thirty (30) years of credited service at any age; or 
b.  Based on age—At least sixty (60) years old with at least five (5) years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 3324-85; Ord. No. 4612-94, § 1; Ord. No. 4732-95; Ord. No. 5905-03; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010, shall be in effect on and after March 1, 2010.  
Sec. 31-53. - Early retirement. 
(a)  For the period beginning March 1, 2010, only actual service shall be used in calculating credited service for the purpose of determining early retirement eligibility. However, all credited service obtained or earned prior to March 1, 2010, shall be included in such calculation. 
(b)  Each member who is not a public safety employee and has completed twenty-five (25) years of credited service, even if before the attainment of the minimum retirement age, may retire at the member's option then or thereafter with a reduced retirement benefit computed in accordance with section 31-54(b). 
(c)  Each member who has completed twenty-five (25) years of credited service which includes at least five (5) years of credited service as a public safety employee, may retire before the attainment of the minimum retirement age with a reduced retirement benefit computed in accordance with section 31-54(b) but only on that portion of credited service that was not earned as a public safety employee. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 3324-85; Ord. No. 4612-94, § 1; Ord. No. 4732-95; Ord. No. 5117-98; Ord. No. 5905-03; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010, shall be in effect on and after March 1, 2010.  
Sec. 31-54. - Retirement allowances. 
(a)  A vested member retiring under the provisions of section 31-52 or section 31-53 shall receive an annual retirement allowance payable for the lifetime of the member, unless the member elects to receive a one time, lump sum payment pursuant to the provisions of section 31-64.2. The annual retirement allowance shall be determined in accordance with this section subject to the limitations contained in subsection (d), and subject to reduction in the event of a withdrawal of member contributions under section 31-68. 
(1)  Subject to section 31-50, members who are not VRS participants accrue a benefit equal to two (2) percent of the member's average final compensation multiplied by their credited service obtained or earned as a non-VRS participant prior to March 1, 2010, and equal to 1.85 percent of the member's average final compensation multiplied by their credited service obtained or earned on and after March 1, 2010, and equal to 1.65 percent of nonpublic safety employee member's average final compensation multiplied by their credited service obtained or earned on and after January 1, 2013. City council members and public safety employee members shall accrue a benefit equal to 1.85 percent of the member's average final compensation multiplied by their credited service obtained or earned on and after January 1, 2013. 
(2)  Subject to section 31-50, members who are VRS participants accrue a benefit equal to 0.30 percent of the member's average final compensation, multiplied by their credited service obtained or earned as a VRS participant prior to March 1, 2010, and equal to 0.15 percent of the member's average final compensation multiplied by their credited service obtained or earned on and after March 1, 2010, but prior to January 1, 2013. On and after January 1, 2013, no additional credited service or benefits shall accrue. Calculation of average final compensation shall be based upon compensation earned prior to January 1, 2013. 
(3)  The annual retirement allowance payable to a member who has earned credited service with a participating employer as both a VRS participant and a non-VRS participant shall be a benefit equal to the total of the allowances determined under this article for each type of service. The annual retirement allowance shall be calculated based on one (1) average final compensation for all periods of service. Notwithstanding the above, if any new period of service began on or after October 1, 2007, the average final compensation for the member shall be separately determined for such period of service. 
(b)  (1)  For each member retiring pursuant to the early retirement provisions of section 31-53, the annual retirement allowance shall be reduced by an amount equal to the lesser of the following: 
a.  One-half (½) of one (1) percent per month for each month that the early retirement precedes the current minimum retirement age; or 
b.  One-half (½) of one (1) percent per month for each month that early retirement precedes the normal thirty-year minimum service requirement. 
(2)  For all such members who have at least five (5) years of credited service as a public safety employee, the reduction shall apply only to credited service time served in positions other than as a public safety employee. 
(c)  The retirement allowance from the city provided for by this section shall be reduced by the amount of any payments made to the retired employee by the participating employer pursuant to the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, §§ 65.2-500, 65.2-501, 65.2-502, 65.2-503, and 65.2-512 of the Code of Virginia. There shall be no reduction in the retirement allowance for payment of medical benefits pursuant to § 65.2-603, or payment of burial expenses pursuant to § 65.2-512B of the Code of Virginia. If the member's payments under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act are adjusted or terminated for refusal to work or to comply with the requirements of § 65.2-603 of the Code of Virginia, the retirement allowance shall be computed as if the member were receiving the compensation to which the member would otherwise be entitled. In addition, the retirement allowance from the city shall also be reduced by the amount of any lump sum settlement of a workers' compensation claim, except such portion of the settlement as is designated for the payment of medical expenses. 
(d)  Except for those members who have elected a lump sum payment under section 31-64.2, in no event shall a member's annual retirement allowance payable from the fund be less than three hundred thirty dollars ($330.00) or more than: 
(1)  Seventy-five (75) percent of the member's average final compensation for members whose effective date of retirement is before January 1, 2013; 
(2)  Seventy-six point eighty-five (76.85) percent of the member's average final compensation for members whose effective date of retirement is on or after January 1, 2013; 
(3)  Seventy-eight point seventy (78.70) percent of the member's average final compensation for members whose effective date of retirement is on or after January 1, 2015; and 
(4)  Eighty (80) percent of the member's average final compensation for members whose effective date of retirement is on or after January 1, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 3821-89; Ord. No. 4007-90; Ord. No. 4115-90; Ord. No. 4718-95; Ord. No. 4790-95, § 1; Ord. No. 4894-96; Ord. No. 4943-96; Ord. No. 4976-96; Ord. No. 5080-97; Ord. No. 5117-98; Ord. No. 5368-99; Ord. No. 5566-01; Ord. No. 5905-03; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6562-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6630-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6766-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6923-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6974-13, § 1; Ord. No. 6989-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7131-14, § 1; Ord. 7278-16, § 1)  
Sec. 31-55. - Post-retirement increases in benefits. 
(a)  Each retirement allowance or benefit being paid to a recipient pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be subject to adjustments. 
(b)  Retirement allowances and benefits paid to a recipient commencing on or after July 1, 2013, shall be subject to an initial adjustment in accordance with the formula set forth in subsection (c) on the July 1 following the first anniversary of the member's effective date of retirement and on July 1 of each year thereafter. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (b), on July 1 of each year beginning on July 1, 2013, retirement allowances and benefits paid to each recipient shall be increased by 0.70 percent for each one (1) percent of the first one (1) percent increase in the United States Average Consumer Price Index (Urban) for all items as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for the most recent calendar year over the corresponding annual average for the immediately preceding calendar year and 0.35 percent for each one (1) percent of increase over the first one (1) percent of increase up to a maximum increase of three and one-half (3½) percent. 
(d)  Post-retirement increases to retirement allowances and benefits paid to each recipient through June 30, 2013, are hereby ratified. 
(e)  Post-retirement increases pursuant to this section 31-55 constitute an ancillary benefit. This section 31-55 may be amended at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 2989-82; Ord. No. 4613-94, § 1; Ord. No. 4894-96; Ord. No. 5080-97; Ord. No. 5566-01; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6923-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6974-13, § 1)  
Sec. 31-56. - Occupational disability retirement for a total and permanent disability. 
(a)  VRS participants are ineligible for the benefits provided by this section. All other members shall be referred to as "eligible members" in this section. 
(b)  Subject to subsection (a) of this section, on and after October 1, 2007, an eligible member in active service who has been determined to be totally and permanently disabled by the Virginia Workers' Compensation Commission from a cause arising out of and in the course of their employment with a participating employer may, upon written application to the board, be retired [eligible] for occupational disability retirement when, as a result of a medical examination or by means of other satisfactory evidence, the board finds that the member is permanently functionally incapacitated from performing any gainful activity and that such condition appears to be permanent. Benefits hereunder shall continue only so long as such incapacity continues based on evidence acceptable to the board. 
(c)  In the event of the retirement of an eligible member for occupational disability on or after January 1, 1983, such eligible member shall receive a disability retirement allowance payable for the lifetime of the eligible member so long as the eligible member remains totally disabled. The amount of the annual allowance shall be two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the eligible member's annual salary at the time the disability began less: 
(1)  The amount of any payments made to the eligible member by the participating employer pursuant to the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, §§ 65.2-500, 65.2-501, 65.2-502, 65.2-503, and 65.2-512 of the Code of Virginia. There shall be no reduction in the retirement allowance for payment of medical benefits pursuant to § 65.2-603 or payment of burial expenses pursuant to § 65.2-512B of the Code of Virginia. If the eligible member's payments under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act are adjusted or terminated for refusal to work or to comply with the requirements of § 65.2-603 of the Code of Virginia, the retirement allowance shall be computed as if the eligible member were receiving the compensation to which the eligible member would otherwise be entitled. In addition, the retirement allowance from the city shall also be reduced by the amount of any lump sum settlement of a workers' compensation claim, except such portion of the settlement as is designated for the payment of medical expenses. 
(2)  One-half (½) of the disability benefit received by the eligible member from the United States Social Security Administration or successor. 
(3)  Compensation received by the eligible member from the city under any applicable rule or order, settlement, contract or other agreement. 
(d)  Should an eligible member die while on occupational disability retirement, benefits shall be computed in accordance with section 31-62. 
(e)  An eligible member applying for disability retirement or retired on disability under this section shall be governed by the rules and regulations promulgated by the board in accordance with section 31-22 and section 31-59. 
(Ord. No. 2990-82; Ord. No. 5042-97; Ord. No. 5076-97; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6630-09, § 1)  
Sec. 31-57. - Nonoccupational disability retirement for a total and permanent disability. 
(a)  VRS participants are ineligible for the benefits provided by this section. All other members shall be referred to as "eligible members" in this section. 
(b)  On or after October 1, 2007, an eligible member in active service who is vested and is not eligible for regular service retirement, and who is totally and permanently disabled from a cause not compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act may, upon written application to the board, be considered for nonoccupational disability retirement when, as a result of a medical examination or by means of other satisfactory evidence, the board finds that the eligible member is functionally incapacitated from performing any gainful activity and that such condition appears to be permanent. Benefits hereunder shall continue only so long as such incapacity continues based on evidence acceptable to the board. 
(c)  In the event of the retirement of an eligible member for nonoccupational disability on or after January 1, 1983, such eligible member shall receive a disability retirement allowance payable monthly for the lifetime of the eligible member so long as the eligible member remains totally disabled. The amount of the annual allowance shall be computed as twenty (20) percent of the eligible member's average final compensation at date of disability retirement for the first five (5) years of the eligible member's credited service at such date plus one (1) percent of such average final compensation for each such year of credited service in excess of five (5). 
(d)  Should an eligible member die while on nonoccupational disability retirement, benefits shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of section 31-61, based on the eligible member's credited service as of the eligible member's date of disability retirement under this section. 
(e)  An eligible member applying for disability retirement or retired on disability under this section shall be governed by the rules and regulations promulgated by the board in accordance with section 31-22 and section 31-59. 
(Ord. No. 2990-82; Ord. No. 5042-97; Ord. No. 5076-97; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-58. - Occupational and nonoccupational partial disability benefits. 
(a)  VRS participants are ineligible for the benefits provided by this section. All other members shall be referred to as "eligible members" in this section. 
(b)  As a result of medical examination or otherwise, if the board determines that an eligible member who has applied for disability retirement under section 31-56 or section 31-57 is not totally and permanently disabled within the meaning of those sections, but determines that the such eligible member is partially disabled to the extent that the eligible member is functionally incapacitated from performing the essential functions of the eligible member's position with the participating employer, and as a result of such partial disability, terminates employment with the participating employer or transfers to a position with the participating employer at a lower salary, the eligible member may be awarded a partial disability benefit. Such benefit shall not be deemed to be a retirement allowance. Benefits hereunder shall continue only so long as such incapacity continues based on evidence acceptable to the board. 
(c)  Based on available medical and other relevant evidence, the board shall determine on a uniform and non-discriminatory basis with respect to similarly situated eligible members the extent of the partial disability. The partial disability benefit shall be a percentage of the allowance that would have been payable had the eligible member qualified for disability retirement under section 31-56 or section 31-57, after deducting from the allowance workers' compensation benefits awarded to the eligible member in the same amount and in the same manner as required by subsection 31-56(c)(1), such percentage being the percentage by which the eligible member is deemed partially disabled. Except as otherwise provided in this section, once the initial disability percentage has been established, it shall not be increased. 
(d)  Additional benefits shall be granted by the board by increasing the initial disability percentage at the rate of two (2) percent per full year of credited service. The total percentage awarded pursuant to this section shall not exceed the lesser of two (2) times the initial disability percentage recommendation or eighty (80) percent. 
(e)  Except as provided in subsection (f) or (g) of this section, disability benefit payments shall begin accruing on the effective date of disability and shall be payable monthly on the last working day of each month so long as the eligible member's partial disability continues, as determined by the board on evidence acceptable to it. 
(f)  In the case of a vested eligible member receiving a partial disability benefit who is not employed by the participating employer, the partial disability benefit will terminate when the eligible member attains the minimum age of retirement and the eligible member's benefit will convert to a service retirement. 
(g)  In the case of an eligible member who is not vested and is receiving a partial occupational disability benefit, the partial occupational disability benefit will terminate when the eligible member attains the minimum age of retirement. 
(h)  Notwithstanding receipt of benefits pursuant to this section, partially disabled eligible members who work for a participating employer during their period of disability shall accrue benefits under this chapter. 
(i)  An eligible member applying for or receiving benefits under this section shall be governed by the rules and regulations promulgated by the board in accordance with section 31-22 and section 31-59. 
(Ord. No. 2990-82; Ord. No. 4706-95; Ord. No. 5076-97; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6630-09, § 1)  
Sec. 31-59. - Annual review of disability recipients; continuation, cessation or adjustment of allowances or benefits. 
(a)  The board, or the disability review committee, may require any recipient of a disability retirement allowance pursuant to section 31-56 or section 31-57 of this Code, or of a partial disability benefit pursuant to section 31-58 of this Code, to undergo medical and functional capacity examinations by a physician or other qualified professional selected by the fund prior to the date on which the recipient attains age sixty (60). Should a recipient refuse to submit to any such examination, the recipient's disability retirement allowance or partial disability benefit shall be discontinued during the continuation of such refusal; and should such refusal continue for one (1) year, all the recipient's rights to any further disability retirement allowance or partial disability benefit payments shall cease. 
(b)  Whenever, as a result of a medical or functional capacity examination of a recipient of a disability retirement allowance as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, or other relevant evidence, the board determines that such recipient is no longer totally and permanently disabled, and is engaged in gainful activity or is able to engage in gainful activity, the disability retirement allowance shall cease. Except as provided in section 31-58(h), the period during which the recipient received a disability retirement allowance shall not be counted as credited service. 
(c)  Whenever a disability retirement allowance is terminated under subsection (b) of this section, but the board determines that the recipient remains partially disabled due to the same disability for which the retirement allowance was initially awarded, to the extent that the recipient is still incapable of performing the essential functions of the recipient's former position with the participating employer and the recipient's earning capacity has been reduced permanently by such partial disability, such recipient shall be awarded a partial disability benefit in place of the terminated disability retirement allowance. Such partial disability benefit shall be governed in every respect by the provisions of section 31-58, as though it had been awarded initially in lieu of a disability retirement allowance and shall commence immediately upon termination of the disability retirement allowance. 
(d)  Whenever, as a result of a medical or functional capacity examination of a recipient of a partial disability benefit as provided in subsection (a) of this section, or other relevant evidence, the board determines that there has been an improvement in the recipient's medical condition related to the same disability for which the partial disability benefit was initially awarded to the extent that the recipient is capable of performing the essential functions of the recipient's former position with the participating employer, the board shall reevaluate such recipient's partial disability benefit. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, the board's decision to grant, deny or terminate a disability retirement allowance or a partial disability benefit need never be based solely on the results of a medical examination. The board may also consider reports of vocational rehabilitation counselors, financial evidence, the testimony of lay and expert witnesses, whether the applicant or recipient is receiving disability benefits under social security or the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act and any other relevant evidence. The recipient shall annually submit a report on the recipient's personal efforts toward rehabilitation, along with a written statement attesting to the fact that there has been no change in the recipient's condition which would result in any adjustment to or cessation of disability benefits, or if changes have occurred, a statement describing any such change. In addition to such annual reporting, or as otherwise required by the board, it shall be the duty of any recipient of a disability retirement allowance or a partial disability benefit to notify the board within thirty (30) days of any material change in the recipient's medical condition, or of any gainful activity in which the recipient becomes engaged. Failure of the recipient to furnish the information required by the board under this subsection in a timely manner or failure of the recipient to cooperate with vocational rehabilitation counselors in order to derive maximum benefit from rehabilitation services offered at the participating employer's expense shall constitute grounds for the board to deny or terminate the disability retirement allowance or to deny or order a reduction or cessation of the partial disability benefit to such recipient. 
(Ord. No. 2990-82; Ord. No. 4706-95; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6923-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7073-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7073-14, § 1, adopted June 24, 2014, shall be in effect on and after June 1, 2014.  
Sec. 31-60. - Occupational employee death benefits. 
(a)  Upon the death of an employee after July 1, 1972, arising out of and in the course of employment with a participating employer from a cause that is or would be compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, the deceased employee's surviving spouse shall be entitled to an annual benefit equal to sixty (60) percent of the employee's final salary, at date of death, payable monthly until death or remarriage of the spouse, whichever first occurs. Should the deceased employee also be survived by a dependent child or children, an additional ten (10) percent of the employee's final salary for each such dependent child shall be paid monthly to each such child until earlier of the dependent child's death or until no longer a dependent child; provided, however, that the aggregate payments provided by this subsection shall be limited to eighty (80) percent of the deceased employee's final salary. 
(b)  If there is no surviving spouse, or if the spouse dies, and there are surviving dependent children of the deceased employee, the benefit which would have been or was payable to the spouse shall be paid to each such dependent child, pro rata, until the earlier of the dependent child's death or until no longer a dependent child. 
(c)  Should the spouse of an employee with a dependent child or children of the deceased employee remarry, then each such dependent child shall be entitled to twenty (20) percent of the final salary of the deceased employee; provided, however, that aggregate payments to such children shall be limited to eighty (80) percent of the deceased employee's final salary, payable until the earlier of the child's death or until no longer a dependent child. 
(d)  The benefits provided for in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall be subject to reduction so that the benefits paid from the fund to the surviving dependents of an employee, together with income from workers' compensation benefits, social security benefits, VRS, and amounts otherwise payable by the participating employer under any applicable law, rule or order, shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of the deceased employee's final salary. 
(e)  In addition to the other benefits provided by this section, there shall be paid to the surviving spouse of the deceased employee or, if none, the beneficiary designated by the deceased member, or if none, the estate of the employee, a lump sum death benefit amount equal to five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) multiplied by the number of full years of credited service of the employee at date of death, subject to a minimum payment of five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) and a maximum of three thousand three hundred dollars ($3,300.00). 
(f)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, the benefits provided for in this section shall be payable to a recipient only as long as the recipient is eligible to receive such benefits based on the provisions of this section and evidence acceptable to the board. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 18; Ord. No. 991, § 1; Ord. No. 1681, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-24; Ord. No. 2297; Ord. No. 2364; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 5042-97; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-61. - Nonoccupational employee death benefits. 
(a)  Upon the death of an employee from any cause not compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, payments shall be made from the fund in accordance with the following provisions of this section. 
(b)  There shall be paid to the surviving spouse of the deceased employee or, if none, the beneficiary designated by the deceased member, or if none, the estate of the employee, a lump sum death benefit amount equal to five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) multiplied by the number of full years of credited service of the employee at date of death, subject to a minimum payment of five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) and a maximum of three thousand three hundred dollars ($3,300.00). 
(c)  If a deceased vested employee is survived by a spouse at the date of such employee's death, there shall be payable to said spouse, until the death or remarriage of that spouse, a benefit equal to fifty (50) percent of the annual retirement allowance to which the member would have been entitled had the deceased employee retired on the date of death. Attainment of the minimum retirement age shall not be a prerequisite for receipt of this retirement benefit and shall not affect the computation thereof. 
(d)  If a deceased vested employee is not survived by a spouse at the date of such employee's death, or the surviving spouse subsequently dies and the deceased vested employee is survived by one (1) or more dependent children, the benefit which would have been or was payable to the surviving spouse under the provisions of subsection (c) above, shall be payable to, or for the benefit of, the surviving dependent child or children, payable until the earlier of the dependent child's death or until no longer a dependent child. If a member is survived by more than one (1) dependent child, and if one (1) or more of them subsequently becomes ineligible to receive a share of the benefit, then the benefit shall be shared equally by the remaining eligible dependent children. Attainment of the minimum retirement age shall not be a prerequisite for receipt of this retirement benefit and shall not affect the computation thereof. 
(e)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the benefits provided for in this section shall be payable to a recipient only as long as the recipient is eligible to receive such benefits based on the provisions of this section and evidence acceptable to the board. 
(f)  In addition, the survivors of any employee who dies on or after January 1, 2007, while performing qualified military service, are entitled to any additional benefits (other than contributions relating to the period of qualified military service, but including vesting service credit for such period and any ancillary life insurance or other survivor benefits) that would have been provided under the fund had the employee resumed employment on the day preceding the employee's death and then terminated employment on account of death. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 19; Ord. No. 991, § 1; Ord. No. 1681, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-25; Ord. No. 2297; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 3680-88, § 1; Ord. No. 3821-89; Ord. No. 4261-91; Ord. No. 4336-92, § 1; Ord. No. 5157-98, § 1; 5830-02; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7132-14)  
Sec. 31-62. - Benefits upon death after retirement. 
(a)  Upon the death of a retiree while receiving a retirement allowance which commenced after November 13, 1972, but prior to May 1, 1987, payments shall be made from the fund in accordance with the following provisions of this subsection: 
(1)  There shall be paid to the surviving spouse of the deceased retiree or, if none, the beneficiary designated by the retiree or, if none, the estate of the retiree a lump sum amount of three thousand three hundred dollars ($3,300.00). 
(2)  If the deceased retiree had twenty (20) or more years of credited service at date of retirement and is survived by a spouse, there shall be payable to said spouse, until the death of the spouse, an allowance equal to fifty (50) percent of the annual retirement allowance which the retiree was eligible to receive immediately prior to death. 
(b)  Upon the death of a retiree while receiving a retirement allowance which commenced on or after May 1, 1987, payments shall be made from the fund in accordance with the following provisions of this subsection: 
(1)  There shall be paid to the surviving spouse of the deceased retiree or, if none, the beneficiary designated by the retiree or, if none, the estate of the retiree a lump sum amount of three thousand three hundred dollars ($3,300.00). 
(2)  If the deceased retiree is survived by a spouse, there shall be payable to said spouse, until the death or remarriage of the spouse, an allowance equal to fifty (50) percent of the annual retirement allowance which the retiree had been receiving immediately prior to death. 
(3)  If the deceased retiree is not survived by a spouse, or the surviving spouse dies, and the deceased retiree is survived by one (1) or more dependent children, then the benefit which would have been or was payable to the surviving spouse under the provisions of subsection (2) above, shall be payable to, or for the benefit of, the surviving dependent children, pro rata. If a deceased retiree is survived by more than one (1) dependent child, and if one (1) or more of them subsequently becomes ineligible to receive a share of the benefit, then the benefit shall be shared equally by the remaining eligible dependent children. 
(4)  Except for the benefits provided under subsections (a)(1) or (b)(1) of this section, the benefits provided for in this section shall be payable to a recipient only as long as the recipient is eligible to receive such benefits based on the provisions of this section and evidence acceptable to the board. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection b(4) above, this section shall not apply to those members who have elected to receive a lump sum pursuant to the provisions of section 31-64.2. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 3680-88, § 1; Ord. No. 3821-89; Ord. No. 4336-92; Ord. No. 5830-02; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. 7278-16, § 1)  
Sec. 31-63. - Benefits upon death of terminated vested member. 
(a)  Following the death of any vested member whose death occurs prior to the member making application for retirement benefits, payments shall be made from the fund in accordance with the following provisions of this section commencing on the first day of the month after a proper application for such benefits is submitted by the eligible beneficiary to the city's department of finance. The benefits provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be based upon the provisions in effect at the deceased member's most recent date of termination of service with a participating employer. 
(b)  If the member is survived by a spouse, there shall be payable to said spouse, until the death or remarriage of the spouse, a benefit equal to fifty (50) percent of the annual retirement benefit to which the member would have been entitled had the member started receiving benefits on the date of attainment of the earliest retirement age. The benefit provided by this subsection shall not commence until such time as the deceased member would have been eligible to retire based on age. 
(c)  If the member is not survived by a spouse, or the surviving spouse dies, and the member is survived by one (1) or more dependent children, then the benefit which would have been or was payable to the surviving spouse under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, shall be payable to, or for the benefit of, the surviving child or children pro-rata. If a member is survived by more than one (1) dependent child, and if one (1) or more of them subsequently becomes ineligible to receive a share of the benefit, then the benefit shall be shared equally by the remaining eligible children. 
(d)  The benefits provided for in this section shall be payable to a recipient only as long as the recipient is eligible to receive such benefits based on the provisions of this section and evidence acceptable to the board. 
(Ord. No. 4008-90; Ord. No. 5830-02; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-64. - Eligible rollover distributions. 
(a)  This section 31-64 applies to distributions after December 31, 1992. A distributee of a lump sum payment under sections 31-60(e), 31-61(b), 31-62(a)(1), 31-62(b)(1), 31-68(e), 31-68(f), and 31-68(g) may elect to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution that is equal to at least two hundred dollars ($200.00) paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. If an eligible rollover distribution is less than two hundred dollars ($200.00), a distributee may not make the election described in the preceding sentence to rollover a portion of the eligible rollover distribution. 
(b)  An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the member's benefit payable to the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: (i) any distribution that is one (1) of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; (ii) any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under IRC section 401(a)(9); (iii) any distribution that is made upon the hardship of the member; and (iv) the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income. 
(c)  An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in IRC section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in IRC section 408(b), an annuity plan described in IRC section 403(a), or a qualified trust described in IRC section 401(a), that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a beneficiary of a death benefit who is not treated by the federal Internal Revenue Code as a surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
Eligible retirement plan also means, effective for distributions on and after January 1, 2002, an individual retirement account described in IRC section 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in IRC section 408(b), an annuity plan described in IRC section 403(a) or a qualified plan that accepts the individual's eligible rollover distribution. Eligible retirement plan shall also mean an annuity contract described in IRC section 403(b) and an eligible plan under IRC section 457 which is maintained by a state, political subdivision of a state, or any agency or instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred into such plan from the fund. 
For distributions made after December 31, 2007, an eligible retirement plan also means a Roth individual retirement account defined in IRC section 408A provided that, for distributions made in plan years prior to 2010, the distributee's modified adjusted gross income does not exceed the limitations in IRC section 408A(d)(3)(A). 
(d)  A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse and the employee's or former employee's spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee under a domestic relations order, as defined in IRC section 414(p), are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse. Effective on and after July 1, 2008, a distributee shall include a member's non-spouse beneficiary, as described in section 31-64(g). 
(e)  A direct rollover is a payment by the fund to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(f)  Each distributee who is entitled to make an eligible rollover distribution, including a non-spouse beneficiary with regard to an inherited IRA described in section 31-64(g), shall be provided a notice that satisfies IRC section 402(f) and that describes the fund's default distribution procedure in the event the member fails to make a rollover election. The notice shall be provided at least thirty (30) days but not more than one hundred eighty (180) days (ninety (90) days for plan years commencing before July 1, 2007), before the annuity commencement date. 
(g)  Effective for distributions made in plan years beginning on or after July 1, 2008, a non-spouse beneficiary who is entitled to receive a lump sum distribution of the deceased member's benefit may elect to make a trustee-to-trustee transfer of all or a portion of such distribution to an individual retirement plan described in IRC section 408(a) or (b) that is established and titled in a manner that identifies it as an inherited IRA with respect to the deceased member and identifies the deceased member and the non-spouse beneficiary, pursuant to the provisions of IRC section 402(c)(11). Notwithstanding the prior sentence, prior to January 1, 2010, a distribution under this section 31-64(g) shall not be subject to the direct rollover requirements of IRC section 401(a)(31), the notice requirements of IRC section 402(f), or mandatory withholding requirements of IRC section 3405(c). 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6562-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6923-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6974-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7132-14)  
Sec. 31-64.1. - Limitations on benefits. 
(a)  Defined benefit limitations. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this article, the maximum annual benefit to which a member is entitled from the fund shall not exceed the application limitations of IRC section 415(b). The limitations of IRC section 415(b) and the final Treasury Regulations promulgated thereunder, as published on April 5, 2007, are hereby incorporated by reference. The limitations shall be applied on a uniform basis with respect to all similarly situated members in a limitation year. 
The maximum benefits provided under the fund shall not exceed the maximum amounts permitted by IRC section 415(b). The amount payable to a member in any limitation year shall not exceed the IRC section 415(b) limit applicable at the annuity commencement date, without regard to the cost-of-living adjustments described in paragraph (3) below. If there is any discrepancy between the provisions of this subsection 31-64.1 and the provisions of IRC section 415, such discrepancy shall be resolved in such a way as to give full effect to the provisions of IRC section 415. 
(2)  If the maximum annual benefit under this article (but for this section) would exceed the limitations of IRC section 415(b), the maximum annual benefit under any other defined benefit plan required to be aggregated with the fund shall be reduced under the other defined benefit plan prior to the reduction of the maximum annual benefit from the fund, in accordance with final Treasury Regulation section 1.415(a)-1(d)(3)(iii). 
(3)  In the event that the annual pension otherwise payable to a member who has retired or terminated employment has been limited by IRC section 415(b) as it existed at the member's retirement or termination date, the member's annual pension shall be adjusted for increases in the cost-of-living, as permitted by final Treasury Regulation section 1.415(d)-1, pursuant to Treasury Regulation section 1.415(a)-1(d)(3)(v), which is incorporated by reference. 
(4)  For purposes of determining a member's maximum benefit, remuneration paid or made available to the member during the limitation year shall include amounts described in IRC section 415(c)(3) and final Treasury Regulation section 1.415(c)-2(a). In addition, post-severance remuneration shall mean post-severance remuneration as defined in final Treasury Regulation section 1.415(c)-2(e)(3)(ii), and any payment that is for accrued bona fide sick, vacation or other leave, but only if the member would have been able to use the leave if employment had continued; payment to an individual who does not currently perform services for the participating employer by reason of qualified military service, to the extent these payments do not exceed the amounts the individual would have received had the individual continued to perform services for the participating employer rather than entering qualified military service; and any payment that is made to a member who is totally and permanently disabled as determined by the Virginia Workers' Compensation Commission, provided salary continuation applies to all members who are permanently and totally disabled for a fixed or determinable period. Further, for limitation years beginning on and after July 1, 2009, (i) an individual who is in qualified military service and receiving a differential wage payment, as defined by IRC section 3401(h)(2), from the city shall be treated as an employee of the city, and (ii) in accordance with IRC section 414(u)(7), the differential wage payment shall be treated as remuneration. 
(b)  Required minimum distributions. 
(1)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the benefit of each member shall commence no later than April 1 of the calendar year following the later of (i) the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½), or (ii) the calendar year in which the member retires. This period shall be known as the member's required beginning date. The fund is intended and believed to be in compliance with a reasonable and good faith interpretation of IRC section 401(a)(9). IRC section 401(a)(9) is incorporated by reference herein. The requirements of this section shall apply to any distribution of a member's retirement allowance and override any distribution option in the fund that is otherwise inconsistent with IRC section 401(a)(9) and take precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the fund. 
(2)  Retirement distributions may only be made over a period not to exceed the life of the member or the joint lives of the member and the member's beneficiary. For this purpose, the form of distribution shall include the death benefits payable under section 31-62. 
(3)  If the distribution of a member's benefit has commenced and the member dies before the member's entire benefit has been distributed to the member, the remaining portion of such benefit shall be distributed at least as rapidly as under the form of distribution in effect at the member's date of death. For this purpose, the form of distribution shall include the death benefits payable under section 31-62. 
(4)  If a member dies before distributions begin, the member's benefit will be distributed in accordance with the following: 
a.  If a benefit is paid to a spouse or dependent child pursuant to section 31-60 (other than subsection (e) thereof), section 31-61 (other than subsection (b) thereof), or section 31-63 (other than subsection (a) thereof), such benefit shall commence no later than December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. The benefit to such spouse or dependent child shall be paid over the period specified in sections 31-60, 31-61, or 31-63, as applicable, which period shall not exceed the life of the spouse or dependent child. 
b.  If the benefit is paid other than as described in subsection a., above, any distribution payable under the terms of this article shall be completed no later than December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member died. 
The benefits payable under the provisions of this article may not be paid in any form which would violate the required distribution requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 7131-14, § 1)  
Sec. 31-64.2. - Lump sums. 
Any member eligible to receive an annual retirement allowance may at the time of retirement, if they meet the terms described below, make an irrevocable election to receive a one (1) time, lump sum payment in lieu of any benefits they, their surviving spouse, their surviving dependent(s), and/or any other beneficiary (including their estate) would otherwise be eligible to receive under this article. This election may be made at the time of retirement and is not available to those already receiving an annual retirement allowance. 
(a)  Any member who would receive a retirement allowance of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) or less per month, may elect, at the time of retirement to receive their benefit in a one-time, lump sum payment. 
(b)  The total amount of the one-time, lump sum payment shall be based upon the value of the retirement allowance plus the death benefit referenced at section 31-62(b)(1) at an actuarially neutral rate as determined by the fund's actuary and approved by the board from time to time and set forth in a schedule to be maintained by the board. For the purposes of this section, an actuarially neutral rate uses actuarial assumptions adopted by the board so that the lump sum payment will have no adverse financial impact to the fund. 
(c)  Upon electing to receive a one-time, lump sum payment, the member shall sign a certification indicating that they acknowledge that they fully understand that the one-time, lump sum payment will be in lieu of any benefits that they, their surviving spouse, their surviving dependent(s), and/or any other beneficiary (including their estate), would otherwise be eligible to receive under this article. 
(d)  The terms of this section do not apply to the provisions of article III of chapter 31. 
(Ord. 7278-16, § 1)  
DIVISION 6. - FUNDING 
 
Sec. 31-65. - Retirement and benefits reserve. 
(a)  All of the assets of the fund shall be held in a retirement and benefits reserve, in which shall be accumulated all assets transferred from any predecessor fund, all contributions made pursuant to this division or any other provision of this article, all receipts from purchases of credited service by members, and to which all income from the invested assets of the fund shall be credited. From this reserve shall be paid the retirement allowances and the other benefits of the fund as provided for in this article, as well as the expenses provided for in section 31-80 and section 31-81. 
(b)  The annual contributions to the reserve shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 6; Ord. No. 991, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-12; Ord. No. 2364; Ord. No. 2379; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-66. - Contributions by members. 
(a)  From January 1, 1983, through December 31, 2012, no contributions to the reserve shall be required or permitted to be made by members, except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(b)  As of the first payroll period commencing after January 1, 2013, all members, other than city council and members who are employees of the school board, shall contribute five (5) percent of such member's compensation (as defined in section 31-25) for each pay period for which the member receives compensation. The participating employer shall deduct from the member's compensation the required contribution by salary reduction pursuant to IRC section 414(h) on a pre-tax basis. Member contributions under this section 31-66 shall be deemed "picked up" by the participating employer and shall be treated as employer contributions for tax purposes. 
(c)  As of the first payroll period commencing after July 1, 2013, all non-VRS members who are employees of the school board shall contribute two (2) percent of such member's compensation (as defined in section 31-25) for each pay period for which the member receives compensation through June 30, 2014. Thereafter, contribution levels for such members shall be determined at the discretion of the school board but shall be increased by no less than one (1) percent for each succeeding fiscal year and such employee contributions shall equal five (5) percent of the member's compensation no later than July 1, 2016. The school board shall deduct from the member's compensation the required contribution by salary reduction pursuant to IRC section 414(h) on a pre-tax basis. Member contributions under this section 31-66 shall be deemed "picked up" by the participating employer and shall be treated as employer contributions for tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6923-12, § 1)  
Sec. 31-67. - Contributions by participating employers. 
(a)  Each participating employer shall contribute to the reserve each year an amount which is determined as a percentage of the annual compensation of the members who are employed by such participating employer. The required contribution rates shall be established in accordance with the following provisions of this section. 
(b)  To compute the required contribution rates for each participating employer, the board shall engage an actuary who shall be a Fellow of the Society of Actuaries and shall be enrolled by the Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries. Using recognized actuarial principles in conjunction with methods and assumptions approved by the board, the actuary, on the basis of actuarial valuations made no less frequently than biennially, shall advise the board as to the contribution rates for each participating employer, expressed as percentages of the compensation of the members, that, when combined with member contributions under section 31-66, are projected to remain sufficient, on a long-term basis, to support the benefits to be paid in the future to members who are or were employed by such participating employer. 
(c)  Based on the most recent actuarial valuation and contribution rate computations made by the actuary pursuant to subsection (b) above, for each fiscal year the board shall certify to the school board the required contribution rates with respect to members employed by the school board and to the city council the required contribution rates with respect to all other members. 
(d)  The school board, with respect to members employed by it, and the city council, with respect to all other members, shall appropriate, and the respective participating employers shall contribute annually to the reserve, the dollar amounts resulting from the application of the certified contribution rates to the annual compensation of the members employed by the respective participating employers. In determining the amount of any contribution, a reasonable approximation to the exactly computed amount may be used. 
(e)  For any year in which the participating employers' aggregate contributions computed as provided in the preceding subsections are insufficient, when combined with the amount then held in the reserve, to provide the benefits payable from the reserve in such year, the participating employers shall make an additional contribution in the amount necessary to overcome the deficit. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 6; Ord. No. 991, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-12; Ord. No. 2364; Ord. No. 2379; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2971-82; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6923-12, § 1)  
Sec. 31-68. - Member contribution account. 
(a)  All member contributions and interest allowances shall be credited to the member contribution account. Member contributions required to be returned to the member or required to be paid in the event of the member's death before retirement shall be paid from the member contribution account. 
(b)  Each member shall have a fully vested right to the balance of his member contribution account at all times without regard to the service requirements of section 31-36. 
(c)  At the end of each payroll period, the participating employer shall transfer to the member contribution account an amount equal to the amount of the employee contribution for such payroll period. 
(d)  Each individual member contribution account shall be credited with interest at the rate specified by the board from time to time on the accumulated member contributions beginning at the end of the fiscal year in which the contribution was made. The board shall have the authority to determine the manner in which the interest is credited to the member contribution account. 
(e)  A member who incurs a separation from service prior to becoming a vested member under section 31-36 shall receive a lump-sum distribution of the balance of his member contribution account as soon as practicable following the date of the member's separation from service. Any distribution made under this section 31-68(e) which the member does not elect to (i) receive directly or (ii) have paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the member in a direct rollover in accordance with section 31-64, shall be made as follows: 
(1)  For member account balances of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, by distribution directly to the member, subject to applicable tax withholdings. 
(2)  For member account balances exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by direct rollover to an individual retirement plan designated by the board. 
(f)  If a vested member dies after separation from service but prior to the date that benefit payments commence under section 31-54, 31-56, or 31-57, the balance of the member contribution account shall be distributed as soon as practicable following the date of the member's death. This distribution shall be made to the member's surviving spouse, or if none, to the member's surviving dependent children, or if none, to the beneficiary designated by the deceased member for purposes of receiving the death benefit under sections 31-60 or 31-61, or if none, to the estate of the deceased member. The survivor benefit payable under section 31-63 shall be reduced such that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to be paid to the beneficiary equals the actuarial equivalent of the benefit payable under section 31-63 (prior to reduction under this section) minus the actuarial equivalent of the balance of the member contribution account at the time of distribution to the beneficiary. 
(g)  A vested member may make an irrevocable election, at any time after separation from service but prior to the date that benefit payments commence under sections 31-54, 31-56, or 31-57, to receive a distribution of the balance of his member contribution account in a single lump-sum payment. If such an election is made, the benefit payable under sections 31-54, 31-56, or 31-57, as applicable, shall be reduced such that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to be paid to the member equals the actuarial equivalent of the benefit payable under sections 31-54, 31-56, or 31-57, as applicable (prior to reduction under this section), minus the actuarial equivalent of the balance of the member contribution account at the time of distribution to the member. 
(h)  The member contribution account exists solely as a recordkeeping entry and does not grant any member a right or interest in any specific assets of the plan. Member contributions may be mingled with employer contributions and other funds maintained by the plan. 
(Ord. No. 6923-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7018-13, § 1)  
Sec. 31-69. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 31-70. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  The fund shall be administered as an irrevocable trust for the exclusive benefit of the members and their beneficiaries by a board of nine (9) trustees. 
(1)  Four (4) trustees with the following qualifications shall be appointed by city council: 
a.  Each appointee shall be a resident of the city and shall remain a resident of the city throughout the appointee's term of office; 
b.  No appointee shall be a city employee or member of the fund. 
(2)  Five (5) trustees shall be member representatives elected by employee members, namely, (i) one trustee elected by and representing the firefighter and police officer members, (ii) one trustee elected by and representing the waterworks employee members, (iii) one trustee elected by and representing the employee members of the department of public works, (iv) one trustee elected by and representing the employee members of the school board, and (v) one trustee elected at large by and representing all other unrepresented employee members. 
(b)  In the occupational group herein listed as firefighters and police officers, the trustee shall be elected alternately from each department. The police officer members and firefighter members shall have the right to vote in all elections for the trustee of this occupational group. 
(c)  Every employee trustee shall be actively employed within the group the employee represents, in addition to being a member of the fund. 
(d)  The term of office for appointed trustees shall be two (2) years. The term of office for elected trustees shall be five (5) years. Terms of office for all trustees shall be based upon the calendar year so that each trustee's term of office shall begin on January 1st, subsequent to appointment or election, and end on December 31st, two (2) or five (5) years later, as appropriate. 
(e)  In case of a vacancy occurring in an appointed trustee position, the city council shall appoint a successor for the unexpired term of the office so vacated; in case of a vacancy occurring in an elected trustee position more than six (6) months prior to the end of the normal term of such trustee, such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by way of a special election to be held among the occupational group of employee members represented by such trustee. Such special election shall be called by the board no later than the next monthly meeting following the notification that a vacancy does or will exist. 
(f)  The board shall prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of the annual election of trustees. 
(g)  In the case of any trustee being absent from three (3) meetings in one (1) calendar year, such trustee may be removed from the board by city council and replaced in the manner prescribed by this article for filling vacancies. 
(h)  The appointed trustees of the board shall be entitled to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month as compensation for services rendered. 
All other trustees shall serve without compensation. All trustees shall be reimbursed for any expense incurred in connection with service as trustees of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 2960-82; Ord. No. 3207-84; Ord. No. 3268-84; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7018-13, § 1)  
Sec. 31-71. - Board to administer fund; powers and duties. 
(a)  The fund shall be administered by the board of trustees, whose powers and duties include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Maintaining records of all of its proceedings and making such records available for inspection by the public in accordance with law. 
(2)  Incurring expenditures as it deems necessary for the efficient administration of the fund. The board, subject to applicable rules and regulations, may provide funds for, or contract for, actuarial, medical, professional and other support personnel as may be required for the proper operation of the fund. 
(3)  Causing an actuarial investigation to be made of all the experience under the fund at least once in each four-year period. The board shall also cause actuarial gain/loss analyses to be made in conjunction with each actuarial valuation of the fund. Pursuant to such investigations and analyses, the board shall periodically revise the actuarial assumptions used in the computation of participating employer contribution rates. 
(4)  Causing an actuarial valuation to be made of the assets and liabilities of the fund with respect to each participating employer. Pursuant to the results of such valuations, the board shall prepare a statement as to the participating employer contribution rates applicable to each participating employer. 
(5)  Publishing the results of each actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities. 
(6)  Publishing annual financial statements of the fund or annual reports in accordance with law. 
(7)  Promulgating regulations and procedures and making determinations necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(8)  Purchasing insurance to insure against losses suffered by the fund if any member of the board or of any advisory committee breaches any standard of care required by law. 
(9)  Adopting rules and policies that bring the fund into and kept in compliance with applicable laws or regulations. 
(b)  Neither the board nor the various committee members shall incur any liability for any losses suffered by the fund if properly administered under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The board shall elect a chairman and a vice chairman from within its membership at its annual January meeting who will serve in that capacity until December 31st of that calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-72. - Supplemental plan provisions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article may be supplemented periodically by one (1) or more written documents which shall be referred to as supplemental plan provisions, which shall constitute a part of the regulations for the operation of the fund. The board is authorized to adopt such supplemental plan provisions as are required to maintain the fund as a qualified governmental plan under applicable federal and state laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder, as the same may be amended periodically. A current copy of all supplemental plan provisions adopted by the board shall be maintained by the board and be available to all members upon request. 
(b)  The board is a public body pursuant to the Virginia Freedom of Information Act and is subject to the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 29; Code 1961, § 32-35; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 5092-98; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-73. - Changes or errors in records resulting in erroneous calculations or payments. 
(a)  If any change or error in calculations or records results in any recipient receiving payments either more or less than they would have been entitled to receive from the fund had the calculations or records been correct, the board shall correct the error and adjust subsequent payments. 
(b)  If the board determines that a recipient has been erroneously underpaid by the fund, the fund shall pay the recipient an amount equal to the difference between what was paid and what should have been paid. 
(c)  If the board determines that a recipient has been erroneously overpaid, such recipient shall repay the erroneous overpayment to the fund. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (c), if a recipient has been overpaid through no fault of his and could not reasonably have been expected to detect the error, the board may recommend waiver of any or all repayment, and if waiver is recommended by the board, the city manager may disapprove the recommendation, or waive all or part of any repayment. 
(e)  If an erroneous calculation or estimate provided by a participating employer results in a recipient of early retirement benefits not meeting the credited service requirements of section 31-53, through no fault of his own and the recipient could not reasonably have been expected to detect the error, the board may authorize the participating employer or the recipient to purchase up to three (3) months service credit necessary for the recipient to qualify for early retirement. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7112-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7387-17)  
Sec. 31-74. - Division of pensions in the department of finance. 
(a)  For the purposes of administering the fund in accordance with the terms of this article and to execute the orders and directions of the board and the committee on investments, there is hereby created, in the city's department of finance, a division of pensions. 
(b)  The director of finance shall be the administrative head of this division, which shall be subject to all the laws, rules and regulations governing all departments, divisions and bureaus of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 25; Code 1961, § 32-31; Ord. No. 2297; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-75. - Duties of the director of finance as secretary of board. 
The city's director of finance shall be ex officio secretary of the board and shall be in charge of the books, records, accounts, files and all papers and documents belonging to the board, other than those in the possession or under the control of the city treasurer; shall record all payments made to the fund and deposit funds with the city treasurer; shall, together with the city treasurer, sign checks for payment of sums due from the fund in accordance with authorization of the board; and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to such director by the board. A corporate surety bond acceptable to the board shall be furnished by the secretary of the board in such amount as the board may determine. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 25; Code 1961, § 32-31; Ord. No. 2297; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-76. - Advisors to the board. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be legal advisor to the board. 
(b)  The director of the city's department of internal audit shall be an advisor to the board. 
(c)  One (1) retired member of the fund may be appointed by the city council for a two-year term to be an advisor to the board. There shall be no limitation on terms of service as a retired member advisor. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 25; Code 1961, § 32-31; Ord. No. 2297; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 3266-84; Ord. No. 4489-93; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-77. - Custodian of fund. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall be ex officio treasurer of the fund and shall be the official custodian of all cash and securities belonging to the fund, which shall be maintained in a special irrevocable trust fund for the account of the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund. The treasurer shall receive all money and securities for the account of the fund and shall, together with the director of finance, sign checks for payments by the fund in accordance with authorization of the board. A corporate surety bond acceptable to the board shall be furnished by the treasurer, in such amount as the board shall determine. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, in the alternative the board may, at its option, select a professional custodian and trustee for any part or all of its funds and securities and have such securities registered in the custodian's nominee name. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-78. - Deposit of funds. 
Assets of the fund shall be deposited in an account or accounts established pursuant to section 31-77 for the account of the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund and shall be subject to the laws and regulations applicable to trusts maintained in conjunction with plans satisfying the requirements of IRC section 401(a) and exempt from tax under IRC section 501(a). Once deposited into the fund's account, such assets may not be used for or diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of members or their beneficiaries and other purposes allowed by law at least until all liabilities arising hereunder have been satisfied, at which time such funds shall revert to the city. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 22; Code 1961, § 32-28; Ord. No. 2297; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-79. - Investment of reserves. 
(a)  The board shall have full power, in its sole discretion, to invest and reinvest all funds and property of the fund pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The board is hereby delegated the power and authority to enter into an agreement with one (1) or more persons or qualified institutions under which the investment responsibilities of the board shall be delegated to such person or institution. Such agreement shall be executed by the chairman of the board. 
(c)  The reserve of the fund shall be invested only in: 
(1)  Interest-bearing bonds or other obligations of the United States or the state; 
(2)  General obligation bonds and revenue bonds, and other debt, of the state or of any political subdivision within the state; 
(3)  Corporate bonds rated "A" or higher by two (2) out of three (3) nationally known security rating concerns, provided, however, that no more than five (5) percent of the fund may be invested in corporate bonds rated less than "A" but not less than "BB"; 
(4)  Federally insured mortgages and mortgage pass throughs on a to-be-announced (TBA) basis as long as funds are set aside to purchase the mortgage on settlement date so as not to leverage the fund; 
(5)  Equities in both the public and private markets; 
(6)  Certificates of deposit; 
(7)  Guaranteed investment contracts; 
(8)  Real estate; and 
(9)  Standing timber and timber rights. 
The investments in equities, excluding equities in real estate investment trusts, shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the market value of the assets of the fund as reported on a calendar quarterly basis. To the extent such percentage limitation is exceeded as of the end of any quarter, the board shall take such action as may be necessary to reduce the equity allocation to the required percentage as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 23; Ord. No. 1151, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-29; Ord. No. 2297; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 3325-85; Ord. No. 3821-89; Ord. No. 4408-92; Ord. No. 5004-97; Ord. No. 5077-97; Ord. No. 6093-05; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7073-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7073-14, § 1, adopted June 24, 2014, shall be in effect on and after June 1, 2014.  
Sec. 31-80. - Committee on investments; consultants for investments. 
(a)  The board shall nominate, for the approval of the city council, a committee on investments, consisting of seven (7) members, one (1) of whom shall be the city manager or an employee of the city designated by the city manager, and two (2) of whom shall be members of the board. The remaining four (4) members need not necessarily be members of the board but shall preferably be persons with financial, real estate, or investment backgrounds. The function of this committee shall be to make recommendations to the board for the investments of the reserve or the sale of the securities of the fund. The board shall not make any investment nor sell any securities of the fund unless recommended in writing by the committee on investments. 
(b)  The city manager or designee member of the committee and the two (2) committee members from the board shall be appointed annually. For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2011, two (2) of the four (4) remaining committee members shall be appointed for a one-year term, and two (2) committee members shall be appointed for a two-year term. Thereafter, the appointments of these four (4) committee members shall be for two-year terms. 
(c)  Members of the committee on investments who are not city employees, officers or officials shall receive compensation in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each month in which the committee has met; city employees, officers or officials shall serve without compensation. All members of the committee shall be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while serving as members of the committee. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the alternative, the board may, at its option, select one (1) or more consultants for portfolio management for the purposes of making investments of the reserve and/or sales of the securities of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 24; Ord. No. 2148, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-30; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 3267-84; Ord. No. 3523-86; Ord. No. 4836-95; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6546-08; Ord. No. 6717-10)  
Sec. 31-81. - Payment of costs and administration. 
All costs and expenses incurred in the administration of the fund shall be paid by the fund from the assets of the fund, and no part of such expenses shall be charged to or paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-82. - Records and accounts; annual audit. 
Proper and adequate records and accounts shall be established and maintained which will give full effect to the requirements of this article. An annual audit of the books, accounts and records of the fund shall be made by the director of the city's department of internal audit or a certified public accountant. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 27; Code 1961, § 32-33; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-83. - Annual report. 
As of the close of each fiscal year, the board shall cause an annual report to be prepared for inclusion in the city's comprehensive annual financial report for submission to the city council, showing the assets and liabilities of the fund at the end of such year and the income and expenditures for the year and other data pertinent to the operation of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 51, § 28; Ord. No. 991, § 1; Code 1961, § 32-34; Ord. No. 2709-80; Ord. No. 4408-92; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Sec. 31-84. - Right to amend or terminate. 
Subject to section 31-21(b), the city council retains the right to amend or terminate the benefits provided under this article at any time for any reason in any manner not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1)  
Secs. 31-85—31-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYEES' POST-RETIREMENT HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS FUND[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6696-10, §§ 2—4, adopted and effective June 22, 2010, provides that: Any post-retirement medical and dental benefits, and life insurance, for retirees of the Newport News Public School System shall be governed by the policies and procedures of the Newport News School Board.   Pursuant to Newport News School Board Resolution No. 09-11, as amended, (adopted May 19, 2009) the School Board established an other post-employment benefits ("OPEB") trust in accordance with Virginia law in order to accumulate and invest assets to fund such benefits. The amendments to the City Code which delete reference to OPEB benefits for School Board employees will be accompanied by actions which transfer an actuarial determined portion of the post-retirement fund to the School Board which will deposit such funds in the School Board's separate fund. That amount is based on the July 1, 2009 actuarial valuation of the post-retirement fund in the amount of $1,627,570.   Effective July 1, 2009, School Board participation in, and contribution to, the post-retirement fund ceased. 
 
DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION; PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 31-90. - Created; title; operative date. 
An employees' post-retirement plan and trust is hereby created, which shall be known as the City of Newport News Employees' Post-Retirement Health and Welfare Benefits Fund, and shall be operative as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, at which time contributions to the fund shall begin. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-91. - Statement of purpose; amendments. 
(a)  The purpose of the fund is to provide an orderly means whereby qualified city retirees as defined in section 31-95 may receive post-retirement benefits as are provided by ordinance, thus effecting economy and efficiency in the administration of such benefits. 
(b)  No amendments to any provision of this article shall be enacted by the city council unless and until such amendment shall have been studied by the board of trustees of the fund and the board's recommendations shall have been received by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Secs. 31-92—31-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 31-95. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases, wherever used in this article shall have the meanings attributed to them in article II of this chapter unless a different meaning is provided in this section or clearly indicated by the context: 
Board means the board of trustees provided for in section 31-70 to administer the fund provided for in this article. 
City employee means an employee of the city, an employee of an elected official of the city, and an elected official of the city, who is a member of the retirement fund as provided in article II of this chapter. 
City retiree means a retiree of the city, a retiree of an elected official of the city, and a retired elected official of the city, who is a member of the retirement fund as provided in Article II of this chapter. 
Committee on investments means the committee provided for in section 31-80 which shall also administer the investment of the fund provided for in this article. 
Credited service means a member's credited service as defined in article II of this chapter. 
Experience rate means a process of determining the premium rate for a group risk, wholly on the basis of that group's experience. 
Fund means the City of Newport News Employees' Post-Retirement Health and Welfare Benefits Fund, and also referred to as the post-retirement fund. 
Medicare plan means an approach to supplement Medicare in which medical expenses for eligible members under Medicare are provided on the same basis as for active employees, except for reduction of Medicare benefits. 
Member means a retiree who is included as a member of the fund pursuant to this article. 
Participating employer means the city, and the elected officials of the city as defined in article II of this chapter. 
Reserve fund means the post-retirement benefits reserve fund provided for in this article. 
Year means the city's fiscal year unless otherwise clearly intended by the context within which the word is used. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Secs. 31-96—31-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MEMBERSHIP 
 
Sec. 31-100. - Membership generally. 
The membership of the post-retirement fund shall include only those city retirees as are provided for in article II of this chapter, to the extent and in such a manner as this article provides for such retirees. Membership in the post-retirement fund shall be closed to employees of the city and employees of an elected official, who are hired or rehired on or after March 1, 2010. Membership in the post-retirement fund shall also be closed to elected officials who are not members of the retirement fund on March 1, 2010. Vested terminated members under article II shall not be considered or eligible to become members with respect to the benefits provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Secs. 31-101—31-109. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY RETIREES' POST-RETIREMENT MEDICAL BENEFITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010, which amends §§ 31-110—31-112, and adds § 31-313, shall be in effect on and after March 1, 2010. 
 
Sec. 31-110. - General provisions. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2000, the fund will experience rate medical plans for city retirees based on the actual cost of providing city sponsored post-retirement medical benefits to the city retirees. City sponsored post-retirement medical benefits offered to city retirees until eligible to receive both Part "A" and Part "B" Medicare coverage shall include only the following types of coverages: (i) single, (ii) single and one minor, (iii) single and spouse, and (iv) family. 
(b)  Upon becoming eligible to receive both Part "A" and Part "B" Medicare coverage, city retirees and spouses shall obtain both Part "A" and Part "B" Medicare coverage, and their post-retirement medical benefits shall then consist of the Medicare plan. 
(c)  City retirees may continue only the medical plan coverages, if any, in effect for them as of the effective date of their retirement. After retirement, coverage levels may not be increased by a retiree. Coverage levels may be decreased at the option of a retiree or in accordance with the provisions of the city's post-retirement medical plan. Once decreased, coverage levels may not subsequently be increased. 
(d)  The spouse of a deceased city retiree who is eligible to receive a monthly spousal annuity under article II of this chapter may elect to continue medical coverage through the fund at the level existing on the date of the retiree's death. Such coverage may not be increased by the surviving spouse, but may be decreased at the option of the surviving spouse or in accordance with the provisions of the city's post-retirement health plan. 
(e)  A dependent child of a deceased city retiree who is receiving a monthly annuity under article II of this chapter may elect to continue medical coverage through the fund at the level existing on the date of the retiree's death. Such coverage may not be increased by a dependent child, but may be decreased at the option of a dependent child or in accordance with the provisions of the city's post-retirement health plan. 
(f)  A member who is receiving an occupational or a non-occupational partial disability benefit pursuant to the provisions of section 31-58 of this chapter may continue medical coverage through the fund at the level existing on the effective date of the partial disability. Such coverage may not be 
increased by the member, but may be decreased at the member's option or in accordance with the provisions of the city's post-retirement health plan. 
(g)  Post-retirement medical insurance premiums are due and payable in advance on the first city business day of each month. To the extent a recipient's monthly benefit payment under article II of this chapter is sufficient to pay the required insurance premiums, such premiums shall be deducted from the recipients' benefit payment. To the extent a recipient's monthly benefit payment is not sufficient to pay the required insurance premiums, the recipient shall be responsible for remitting the deficiency prior to the next premium due date. If the premium payment or any deficiency payment is not received by the city's department of finance within thirty (30) days after notice is given to the insured, coverage will be terminated with no right of reinstatement. An election of coverage under this article shall be deemed to be an agreement to have retirement or disability benefits reduced to cover the premium as provided in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-111. - Fund's contribution. 
(a)  The fund shall contribute toward a member's city sponsored post-retirement medical insurance premiums only in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  On and after January 1, 2000, the fund shall pay seventy-five (75) percent of the cost of a member's medical insurance premiums, based on the city sponsored post-retirement medical insurance plan elected by that member at retirement, through June 30, 2005. 
(c)  On June 30, 2005, the dollar amount of the fund's contribution provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall be capped at the amount in effect on June 30, 2005, and this amount shall constitute the amount upon which future contributions by the fund shall be calculated. Notwithstanding the above, the dollar amount of the fund's contribution may exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the cost of a member's medical insurance premiums, provided that the fund's contribution does not exceed the capped dollar amount. 
(d)  The fund shall not contribute towards the city sponsored post-retirement medical insurance premiums for any employee of the city, employee of an elected official, or elected official, hired, rehired, or elected on or after March 1, 2010. However, such persons may continue only the medical plan coverage, if any, in effect for them as of the date of their retirement by paying one hundred (100) percent of the premium, and subject to the provisions of section 31-110. For purposes of this subsection, the term "city retiree" in section 31-110 means an employee of the city, an employee of an elected official, and an elected official, with at least five (5) years of actual service immediately prior to retirement. 
(e)  On January 1, 2013, and on January 1 of each year thereafter, the amount of contribution which the fund shall pay toward a member's medical insurance premiums required by the city sponsored post-retirement medical insurance plans shall be increased by 0.70 percent for the first one (1) percent increase, or part thereof, in the United States Average Consumer Price Index (Urban) for all items as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for the most recent calendar year over the corresponding annual average for the immediately preceding calendar year for the previous calendar year (the CPI), and 0.35 percent for each additional one (1) percent increase, or part thereof, in the CPI for the previous calendar year; however the increase in the contribution shall not exceed a maximum increase of three and one-half (3½) percent in any one (1) calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6923-12, § 1; Ord. 7278-16, § 1)  
Sec. 31-112. - Funds's contribution schedule. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2000, all qualified city employees who have retired, or are eligible to retire based on age or service before July 1, 2005, shall be entitled to receive full benefit of the fund's contribution upon retirement as post-retirement medical benefits. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2000, all qualified city employees who do not satisfy the criteria provided in subsection (a) shall be entitled upon retirement to receive contributions from the fund toward their medical insurance premiums required by the city sponsored medical insurance plan in accordance with the following schedule: 
Years of Credited 

Service 	Percentage of Fund's Contribution 
Less than 10 	0 
10—11 	5 
12 	10 
13 	15 
14 	20 
15 	25 
16 	31 
17 	37 
18 	43 
19 	49 
20 	55 
21 	64 
22 	73 
23 	82 
24 	91 
25 or greater 	100 
 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1; Ord. 7278-16, § 1)  
Sec. 31-113. - Health reimbursement arrangement. 
(a)  A health reimbursement arrangement shall be provided for the benefit of the following persons and shall be in lieu of membership in the post-retirement fund: 
(1)  All full-time employees hired or rehired by the city on or after March 1, 2010; 
(2)  All full-time employees hired or rehired by an elected official on or after March 1, 2010; 
(3)  All elected officials, but excluding members of city council, who are elected on or after March 1, 2010 who are not members of the retirement fund as set forth in section 31-30(c)(1); and 
(4)  Any member of the retirement fund as of February 28, 2010 who elects to terminate his membership in the retirement fund and become a member of VRS pursuant to section 31-34(c). 
(b)  The health reimbursement arrangement shall be described in the administrative policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-114. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CITY RETIREES' POST-RETIREMENT DENTAL BENEFITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010, which amends §§ 31-115—31-117, shall be in effect on and after March 1, 2010. 
 
Sec. 31-115. - General provisions. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2000, the fund will experience rate dental plans for city retirees based on the actual cost of providing post-retirement dental benefits to the city retirees. Dental plans offered to city retirees will include only the following types of coverages: (i) single, (ii) single plus one, and (iii) family. 
(b)  City retirees may continue only the dental plan coverages, if any, in effect for them as of the effective date of their retirement. After retirement, coverage levels may not be increased by a retiree. Coverage levels may be decreased at the option of a retiree or in accordance with the provisions of the city's post-retirement dental plan. Once decreased, coverage levels may not subsequently be increased. 
(c)  The spouse of a deceased city retiree who is eligible to receive a monthly spousal annuity under article II of this chapter may continue dental coverage through the fund. Such coverage may not be increased by the surviving spouse, but may be decreased at the option of the surviving spouse or in accordance with the provisions of the city's post-retirement dental plan. 
(d)  A dependent child of a deceased city retiree who is receiving a monthly annuity under article II of this chapter may elect to continue dental coverage through the fund at the level existing on the date of the retiree's death. Such coverage may not be increased by a dependent child, but may be decreased at the option of a dependent child or in accordance with the provisions of the city's post-retirement dental plan. 
(e)  A member who is receiving an occupational or a non-occupational partial disability benefit pursuant to the provisions of section 31-58 of this chapter may continue dental coverage through the fund at the level existing on the effective date of the partial disability. Such coverage may not be increased by the member, but may be decreased at the member's option or in accordance with the provisions of the city's post-retirement dental plan. 
(f)  Post-retirement dental insurance premiums are due and payable in advance on the first city business day of each month. To the extent a recipient's monthly retirement or disability benefit payment under article II is sufficient to pay the required insurance premiums, such premiums shall be deducted from the retiree's benefit payment. To the extent a recipient's monthly benefit payment is not sufficient to pay the required insurance premiums, the recipient shall be responsible for remitting the deficiency prior to the next premium due date. If the premium payment or any deficiency payment is not received by the city's department of finance within thirty (30) days after notice is given to the insured, coverage will be terminated with no right of reinstatement. An election of coverage under this article shall be deemed to be an agreement to have retirement or disability benefits reduced to cover premiums as provided in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-116. - Fund's contribution. 
(a)  The fund shall contribute toward a member's city sponsored post-retirement dental insurance premiums only in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2000, the fund shall pay seventy-five (75) percent of the cost of a member's dental insurance premiums, based on the city sponsored post-retirement dental insurance plan elected by that member at retirement, through June 30, 2005. 
(c)  On June 30, 2005, the dollar amount of the fund's contribution provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall be capped at the amount in effect on June 30, 2005, and this amount shall constitute the amount upon which future contributions by the fund shall be calculated. Notwithstanding the above, the dollar amount of the fund's contribution may exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the cost of a member's medical insurance premiums, provided that the fund's contribution does not exceed the capped dollar amount. 
(d)  The fund shall not contribute towards the city sponsored post-retirement dental insurance premiums for any employee of the city, employee of an elected official, or elected official, hired, rehired, or elected on or after March 1, 2010. However, such persons may continue only the dental plan coverage, if any, in effect for them as of the date of their retirement by paying one hundred (100) percent of the premium, and subject to the provisions of section 31-110. For purposes of this subsection, the term "city retiree" in section 31-110 means an employee of the city, an employee of an elected official, and an elected official with at least five (5) years of actual service immediately prior to retirement. 
(e)  On January 1, 2013, and on January 1 of each year thereafter, the amount of contribution which the fund shall pay toward a member's dental insurance premiums required by the city sponsored post-retirement dental insurance plan shall be increased by 0.70 percent for the first one (1) percent increase, or part thereof, in the United States Average Consumer Price Index (Urban) for all items as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor for the most recent calendar year over the corresponding annual average for the immediately preceding calendar year for the previous calendar year (the CPI), and 0.35 percent for each additional one (1) percent increase, or part thereof, in the CPI for the previous calendar year; however the increase in the contribution shall not exceed a maximum increase of three and one-half (3½) percent in any one (1) calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6923-12, § 1; Ord. 7278-16, § 1)  
Sec. 31-117. - Fund's contribution schedule. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2000, all retirees who were insured for dental coverage and city employees who were eligible to retire based on age or service before July 1, 2005, shall be entitled to receive full benefit of the fund's contribution upon retirement as post-retirement dental benefits. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2000, all qualified city employees who do not satisfy the criteria provided in subsection 31-117(a) shall be entitled to receive contributions from the fund toward their dental insurance premiums in accordance with the following schedule: 
Years of Credited 

Service 	Percentage of Fund's Contribution 
Less than 10 	0 
10—11 	5 
12 	10 
13 	15 
14 	20 
15 	25 
16 	31 
17 	37 
18 	43 
19 	49 
20 	55 
21 	64 
22 	73 
23 	82 
24 	91 
25 or greater 	100 
 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6658-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1; Ord. 7278-16, § 1)  
Secs. 31-118—31-124. - Reserved. 
Note— See editor's note at Div. 6.  
DIVISION 6. - CITY RETIREES' POST-RETIREMENT LIFE INSURANCE BENEFITS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1, adopted June 22, 2010, repealed former Div. 6, §§ 31-120—31-122, which pertained to school board retirees' post-retirement medical and dental benefits, and derived from Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1. Subsequently, former Divs. 7—9 were renumbered as Divs. 6—8. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 31-125. - Payment schedule. 
Effective January 1, 2000, the fund shall contribute one hundred (100) percent of the cost of the premiums for city sponsored life insurance coverage for city retirees in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-126. - Retiree coverage. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2000, all active city employees who carry the city sponsored life insurance coverage and who are eligible to retire either with age or service before July 1, 2005, shall be eligible to continue life insurance coverage equal to one-half (½) their salary at retirement. 
(b)  All city employees who continue the city sponsored life insurance coverage and who are not eligible to retire based on age or service before July 1, 2005, will initially have life insurance coverage equal to one-half (½) their salary in life insurance coverage upon retirement, which coverage shall then decrease twenty (20) percent per year, however such coverage shall not be reduced below ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Secs. 31-127—31-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - FUNDING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— See editor's note at Div. 6. 
 
Sec. 31-130. - Post-retirement benefits reserve. 
(a)  All of the assets of the fund shall be held in a post-retirement health and welfare benefits reserve fund, in which shall be accumulated all assets transferred from any predecessor fund and all contributions made pursuant to this division or any other provision of this article, and to which all income from the invested assets of the fund shall be credited. From this reserve shall be paid the post-retirement allowances and the other benefits of the fund as provided for in this article, as well as the necessary administrative expenses. 
(b)  The annual contributions to the reserve shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-131. - Contributions by employees or retirees. 
No other contribution to the reserve fund shall be required or permitted to be made by employees or retirees except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-132. - Contributions by participating employers. 
(a)  Each participating employer shall contribute to the reserve each year an amount which is computed as a percentage of the annual compensation of their then current employees. The required contribution rates shall be established in accordance with the following provisions of this section. 
(b)  To compute the required contribution rates for each participating employer, the board shall engage an actuary who shall be a Fellow of the Society of Actuaries. Using recognized actuarial principles in conjunction with methods and assumptions approved by the board, the actuary, on the basis of actuarial valuations made no less frequently than biennially, shall advise the board as to the contribution rates for each participating employer, expressed as percentages of the compensation of the employees, that are likely to remain sufficient, on a long-term basis, to support the benefits to be paid in the future to employees who are or were employed by such participating employer. 
(c)  Based on the most recent actuarial valuation and contribution rate computations made by the actuary pursuant to subsection (b) above, for each year the board shall certify to the city council the required contribution rates with respect to all covered employees. 
(d)  For any year in which the participating employers' aggregate contributions computed as provided in the preceding subsections are insufficient, when combined with the amount then held in the reserve, to provide the benefits payable from the reserve in such year, the participating employers shall make an additional contribution in the amount necessary to overcome the insufficiency. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Secs. 31-133, 31-134. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - ADMINISTRATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Note— See editor's note at Div. 6. 
 
Sec. 31-135. - Administration generally. 
(a)  The fund shall be administered as a separate and distinct irrevocable trust for the exclusive post-retirement benefit of the participating city retirees by the board. 
(b)  Although administered by the board which also administers the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund, the fund shall exist as a separate and distinct fund, existing in its own right pursuant to the provisions of this article, and as such, the board's administration of the fund carries with it a separate and distinct fiduciary duty to the fund and its members. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the fund shall be administered in compliance with the continuation coverage and portability provisions of 42 U.S.C. Section 300 et seq., commonly known as COBRA (Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985, as amended). 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-136. - Board of trustees. 
The Board of Trustees of the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund shall administer the City of Newport News Employees' Post-Retirement Health and Welfare Benefits Fund for the exclusive benefit of its members in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-137. - Supplemental plan provisions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article may be supplemented periodically by one (1) or more written documents which shall be referred to as the supplemental plan provisions, which shall constitute a part of the regulations for the operation of the fund. The board is authorized to adopt such supplemental plan provisions as are required to maintain the fund as a qualified governmental plan under applicable federal and state laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder, as the same may be amended periodically. A current copy of all supplemental plan provisions adopted by the board shall be maintained by the board and be available to all members upon request. 
(b)  The board is a public body pursuant to the Virginia Freedom of Information Act and is subject to the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-138. - Day-to-day administration by the department of finance. 
For the purposes of administering the fund in accordance with the terms of this article and to execute the orders and directions of the board and the committee on investments, the fund shall be administered by the city's department of finance, division of pensions, or its successor. The city's director of finance shall be the administrative head of this division, which shall be subject to all the laws, rules and regulations governing all departments, divisions and bureaus of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-139. - Duties of director of finance as secretary of board. 
The city's director of finance shall be ex officio secretary of the board and shall be in charge of the books, records, accounts, files and all papers and documents belonging to the board, other than those in the possession or under the control of the city treasurer; shall record all payments made to the fund and deposit funds with the city treasurer; shall, together with the city treasurer, sign checks for payment of sums due by the fund in accordance with authorization of the board; and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to such director by the board. A corporate surety bond acceptable to the board shall be furnished by the secretary of the board in such amount as the board may determine. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-140. - Board advisors. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be legal advisor to the board. 
(b)  The director of the city's department of internal audit shall be an advisor to the board. 
(c)  One (1) retired member of the fund may be appointed by the city council for a two-year term to be an advisor to the board. There shall be no limitation on terms of service as a retired member advisor. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-141. - Reserved.  
Sec. 31-142. - Custodian of fund. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall be ex officio treasurer of the fund and shall be the official custodian of all cash and securities belonging to the fund, which shall be maintained in a special irrevocable trust fund for the account of the fund. The treasurer shall receive all moneys and securities for the account of the fund and shall, together with the director of finance, sign checks for payments by the fund in accordance with authorization of the board. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, and in the alternative, the board may, at its option, select a professional custodian for any part or all of its funds and securities, and have such securities registered in such custodian's nominee's name. 
(c)  A corporate surety bond acceptable to the board shall be furnished by the treasurer and professional custodian in such amounts as the board shall determine. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-143. - Powers and duties of the board in administering the fund. 
(a)  The fund shall be administered by the board, whose powers and duties include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Maintaining records of all of its proceedings and making such records available for inspection by the public in accordance with law. 
(2)  Incurring expenditures as it deems necessary for the efficient administration of the fund. The board, subject to applicable rules and regulations, may provide funds for, or contract for, actuarial, medical, professional and other support personnel as may be required for the proper operation of the fund. 
(3)  In addition to biennial valuations called for in section 31-132(b), causing an actuarial investigation to be made of all the experience under the fund at least once in each five-year period and at such other times as required by the board. The board shall also cause actuarial gain/loss analyses to be made in conjunction with each actuarial valuation of the fund. Pursuant to such investigations and analyses, the board shall periodically revise the actuarial assumptions used in the computation of participating employer contribution rates. 
(4)  Causing an annual actuarial valuation to be made of the assets and liabilities of the fund with respect to each participating employer. Pursuant to the results of such valuations, the board shall prepare a statement as to the participating employer contribution rates applicable to each participating employer. 
(5)  Publishing the results of each actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities. 
(6)  Publishing annual financial statements of the fund or annual reports in accordance with law. 
(7)  Promulgating regulations and procedures and making determinations necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(8)  Purchasing insurance to insure against losses suffered by the fund if any member of the board or of any advisory committee breaches any standard of care required by law. 
(9)  Adopting rules and policies that bring the fund into and kept in compliance with applicable laws or regulations. 
(b)  Neither the board nor the various committee members shall incur any liability for any losses suffered by the fund if properly administered under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-144. - Investment of reserves. 
(a)  The board shall have full power, in its sole discretion, to invest and reinvest all funds and property of the fund pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The board is hereby delegated with the power and authority to enter into an agreement with one (1) or more persons or qualified institutions under which the investment responsibilities of the board shall be delegated to such person or institution. Such agreement shall be executed by the chairman of the board. 
(c)  The reserve of the fund may be invested only in: 
(1)  Interest-bearing bonds or other obligations of the United States or the state; 
(2)  General obligation bonds and revenue bonds of the state or of any political subdivision within the state; 
(3)  Corporate bonds rated "A" or higher by two (2) out of three (3) nationally known security rating concerns, provided, however, that no more than one (1) percent of the fund may be invested in corporate bonds rated less than "A" but not less than "BB"; 
(4)  Federally insured mortgages and mortgage passthroughs on a to-be-announced (TBA) basis as long as funds are set aside to purchase the mortgage on settlement date so as not to leverage the fund; 
(5)  Equities; 
(6)  Certificates of deposit; 
(7)  Guaranteed investment contracts; 
(8)  Real estate; and 
(9)  Standing timber and timber rights. 
The investments in equities, excluding equities in real estate investment trusts, shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the market value of the assets of the fund as reported on a calendar quarterly basis. To the extent such percentage limitation is exceeded as of the end of any quarter, the board shall take such action as may be necessary to reduce the equity allocation to the required percentage as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6327-07; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7387-17; Ord. No. 7519-18, § 1)  
Sec. 31-145. - Committee on investments; consultants for investments. 
(a)  The committee on investments shall make recommendations to the board for the investments of the reserve or the sale of the securities of the fund. The board shall not make any invest-ment nor sell any securities of the fund unless recommended in writing by the committee on investments. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the alternative, the board may, at its option, select one (1) or more consultants for portfolio manage ment for the purposes of making investments of the reserve and/or sales of the securities of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-146. - Payment of costs and administration. 
All costs and expenses incurred in the administration of the fund shall be paid by the fund from the assets of the fund, and no part of such expenses shall be charged to or paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-147. - Records and accounts; annual audit. 
Proper and adequate records and accounts shall be established and maintained which will give full effect to the requirements of this article. An annual audit of the books, accounts and records of the fund shall be made by the director of the city's department of internal audit or a certified public accountant. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-148. - Annual report. 
As of the close of each fiscal year, the board shall cause an annual report to be prepared for inclusion in the city's comprehensive annual financial report for submission to the city council, showing the assets and liabilities of the fund at the end of such year and the income and expenditures for the year and other data pertinent to the operation of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 5431-00; Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
Sec. 31-149. - Right to amend or terminate. 
Subject to section 31-91(b), the city council retains the right to amend or terminate the benefits provided under this article at any time for any reason in any manner not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 6434-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6696-10, § 1)  
ARTICLE IV. - LINE OF DUTY ACT  
DIVISION 1. - ADOPTION; PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 31-150. - Created; title; operative date. 
A line of duty act plan and trust is hereby created, which shall be known as the City of Newport News Line of Duty Act Benefits Fund, and shall be operative as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, at which time contributions to the fund shall begin. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-151. - Statement of purpose; amendments. 
(a)  The purpose of the fund is to provide an orderly means whereby disabled persons, eligible spouses, eligible dependents, and beneficiaries as defined in the Virginia Line of Duty Act, Code of Virginia § 9.1-400 et seq. (1950) as amended, may receive such benefits as are provided by the Virginia Line of Duty Act. 
(b)  No amendments to any provision of this article shall be enacted by the city council unless and until such amendment shall have been studied by the board of trustees of the fund and the board's recommendations shall have been received by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Secs. 31-152—31-154. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 31-155. - Definitions. 
The terms used in the article shall be given the meaning assigned to them in Code of Virginia § 9.1-400 (1950) as amended. 
Board means the board of trustees provided for in section 31-70 which shall administer the fund provided for in this article. 
Fund means the City of Newport News Line of Duty Act Benefits Fund. 
Virginia Line of Duty Act means the Line of Duty Act found in the Code of Virginia, § 9.1-400 et seq., 1950 as amended. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Secs. 31-156—31-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MEMBERSHIP 
 
Sec. 31-161. - Membership generally. 
The membership of the Line of Duty Act fund shall include only those, who by virtue of their employment with the City of Newport News, Virginia or the sheriff of the City of Newport News, Virginia, and their eligible spouses, dependents or beneficiaries, are provided for in the Virginia Line of Duty Act, to the extent and in such a manner as the Virginia Line of Duty Act provides for such persons. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Secs. 31-162—31-164. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - LINE OF DUTY ACT BENEFITS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7551-19, adopted May 14, 2019, added ch. 31, art. IV, § 31-162 and § 31-163 to the Code; however, said provisions have been renumbered as § 31-165 and § 31-166 at the editor's discretion, for purposes of maintaining Code format and for allowing future expansion of the Code. 
 
Sec. 31-165. - General provisions. 
Disabled persons, eligible spouses and eligible dependents shall receive such benefits as required by the Virginia Line of Duty Act. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-166. - Fund's contribution. 
The fund shall contribute toward a member's Line of Duty Act benefits in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Line of Duty Act. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Secs. 31-167, 31-168. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DEATH BENEFIT 
 
Sec. 31-169. - General provisions. 
The fund shall make a one-time payment, as a death benefit, to the beneficiary of a deceased person pursuant to the provisions of the Virginia Line of Duty Act. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Secs. 31-170—31-176. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - FUNDING 
 
Sec. 31-177. - Line of duty act benefits reserve. 
(a)  All of the assets of the fund shall be held in the Line of Duty Act reserve fund, in which shall be accumulated all assets transferred from any predecessor fund and all contributions made pursuant to this division or any other provision of this article, and to which all income from the invested assets of the fund shall be credited. From this reserve shall be paid benefits of the fund as provided for in this article, as well as the necessary administrative expenses. 
(b)  The annual contributions to the reserve shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Secs. 31-178—31-193. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - ADMINISTRATION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7551-19, adopted May 14, 2019, added ch. 31, art. IV, §§ 31-194—31-199 and §§ 31-201—31-208 to the Code; however, said provisions have been renumbered as §§ 31-194—31-207 at the editor's discretion, for purposes of maintaining Code format. 
 
Sec. 31-194. - Administration generally. 
(a)  The fund shall be administered as a separate and distinct irrevocable trust for the exclusive benefit of its members by the board which also administers the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund. 
(b)  Although administered by the board which also administers the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund, the fund shall exist as a separate and distinct fund, existing in its own right pursuant to the provisions of this article, and as such, the board's administration of the fund carries with it a separate and distinct fiduciary duty to the fund and its members. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the fund shall be administered in compliance with the continuation coverage and portability provisions of 42 U.S.C. section 300 et seq., commonly known as COBRA (Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985, as amended). 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-195. - Board of trustees. 
The board of trustees of the City of Newport News Employees' Retirement Fund shall administer the City of Newport News Line of Duty Act Benefits Fund for the exclusive benefit of its members in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-196. - Supplemental plan provisions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article may be supplemented periodically by one (1) or more written documents which shall be referred to as the supplemental plan provisions, which shall constitute a part of the regulations for the operation of the fund. The board is authorized to adopt such supplemental plan provisions as are required to maintain the fund as a qualified governmental plan under applicable federal and state laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder, as the same may be amended periodically. A current copy of all supplemental plan provisions adopted by the board shall be maintained by the board and be available to all members upon request. 
(b)  The board is a public body pursuant to the Virginia Freedom of Information Act and is subject to the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-197. - Day-to-day administration by the department of finance. 
For the purposes of administering the fund in accordance with the terms of this article and to execute the orders and directions of the board and the committee on investments, the fund shall be administered by the city's department of finance, division of pensions, or its successor. The city's director of finance shall be the administrative head of this division, which shall be subject to all the laws, rules and regulations governing all departments, divisions and bureaus of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-198. - Duties of director of finance as secretary of board. 
The city's director of finance shall be an ex officio secretary of the board and shall be in charge of the books, records, accounts, files and all papers and documents belonging to the board, other than those in the possession or under the control of the city treasurer; shall record all payments made to the fund and deposit funds with the city treasurer; shall, together with the city treasurer, sign checks for payment of sums due by the fund in accordance with authorization of the board; and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to such director by the board. A corporate surety bond acceptable to the board shall be furnished by the secretary of the board in such amount as the board may determine. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-199. - Board advisors. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be legal advisor to the board. 
(b)  The director of the city's department of internal audit shall be an advisor to the board. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-200. - Custodian of fund. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall be an ex officio treasurer of the fund and shall be the official custodian of all cash and securities belonging to the fund, which shall be maintained in a special irrevocable trust fund for the account of the fund. The treasurer shall receive all moneys and securities for the account of the fund and shall, together with the director of finance, sign checks for payments by the fund in accordance with authorization of the board. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, and in the alternative, the board may, at its option, select a professional custodian for any part or all of its funds and securities, and have such securities registered in such custodian's nominee's name. 
(c)  A corporate surety bond acceptable to the board shall be furnished by the treasurer and professional custodian in such amounts as the board shall determine. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-201. - Powers and duties of the board in administering the fund. 
(a)  The fund shall be administered by the board, whose powers and duties include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Maintaining records of all of its proceedings and making such records available for inspection by the public in accordance with law. 
(2)  Incurring expenditures as it deems necessary for the efficient administration of the fund. The board, subject to applicable rules and regulations, may provide funds for, or contract for, actuarial, medical, professional and other support personnel as may be required for the proper operation of the fund. 
(3)  Causing an actuarial investigation to be made of all the experience under the fund at least once in each five-year period and at such other times as required by the board. The board shall also cause actuarial gain/loss analyses to be made in conjunction with each actuarial valuation of the fund. Pursuant to such investigations and analyses, the board shall periodically revise the actuarial assumptions. 
(4)  Causing an annual actuarial valuation to be made of the assets and liabilities of the fund. 
(5)  Publishing the results of each actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities. 
(6)  Publishing annual financial statements of the fund or annual reports in accordance with law. 
(7)  Promulgating regulations and procedures and making determinations necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(8)  Purchasing insurance to insure against losses suffered by the fund if any member of the board or of any advisory committee breaches any standard of care required by law. 
(9)  Adopting rules and policies that bring the fund into and kept in compliance with applicable laws or regulations. 
(b)  Neither the board nor the various committee members shall incur any liability for any losses suffered by the fund if properly administered under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-202. - Investment of reserves. 
(a)  The board shall have full power, in its sole discretion, to invest and reinvest all funds and property of the fund pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The board is hereby delegated with the power and authority to enter into an agreement with one (1) or more persons or qualified institutions under which the investment responsibilities of the board shall be delegated to such person or institution. Such agreement shall be executed by the chairman of the board. 
(c)  The reserve of the fund may be invested only in: 
(1)  Interest-bearing bonds or other obligations of the United States or the state; 
(2)  General obligation bonds and revenue bonds of the state or of any political subdivision within the state; 
(3)  Corporate bonds rated "A" or higher by two (2) out of three (3) nationally known security rating concerns, provided, however, that no more than one (1) percent of the fund may be invested in corporate bonds rated less than "A" but not less than "BB"; 
(4)  Federally insured mortgages and mortgage passthroughs on a to-be-announced (TBA) basis as long as funds are set aside to purchase the mortgage on settlement date so as not to leverage the fund; 
(5)  Equities; 
(6)  Certificates of deposit; 
(7)  Guaranteed investment contracts; 
(8)  Real estate; and 
(9)  Standing timber and timber rights. 
The investments in equities, excluding equities in real estate investment trusts, shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the market value of the assets of the fund as reported on a calendar quarterly basis. To the extent such percentage limitation is exceeded as of the end of any quarter, the board shall take such action as may be necessary to reduce the equity allocation to the required percentage as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-203. - Committee on investments; consultants for investments. 
(a)  The committee on investments shall make recommendations to the board for the investments of the reserve or the sale of the securities of the fund. The board shall not make any investment nor sell any securities of the fund unless recommended in writing by the committee on investments. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the alternative, the board may, at its option, select one (1) or more consultants for portfolio management for the purposes of making investments of the reserve and/or sales of the securities of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-204. - Payment of costs and administration. 
All costs and expenses incurred in the administration of the fund shall be paid by the fund from the assets of the fund, and no part of such expenses shall be charged to or paid by the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will comply with the Virginia Line of Duty Act, as required, through the fund or by other means. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-205. - Records and accounts; annual audit. 
Proper and adequate records and accounts shall be established and maintained which will give full effect to the requirements of this article. An annual audit of the books, accounts and records of the fund shall be made by the director of the city's department of internal audit or a certified public accountant. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-206. - Annual report. 
As of the close of each fiscal year, the board shall cause an annual report to be prepared for inclusion in the city's comprehensive annual financial report for submission to the city council, showing the assets and liabilities of the fund at the end of such year and the income and expenditures for the year and other data pertinent to the operation of the fund. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Sec. 31-207. - Right to amend or terminate. 
Subject to section 31-151(b), the city council retains the right to amend or terminate the benefits provided under this article at any time for any reason in any manner not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 7551-19)  
Chapter 32 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Police protection at teenage dance clubs, § 5-24; intimidating or impeding law-enforcement officers, § 28-6; membership of police officers in employees retirement fund, § 31-30. 
State Law reference— Police and public order, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1700 et seq.; general powers and duties of local police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1704. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Police department generally. 
(a)  There is hereby established a police department, which shall consist of the chief of police, to be appointed by the city manager, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(b)  The chief of police shall be the head of the police department and shall, under the supervision of the city manager, have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions and other units of the department. 
(c)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to appoint auxiliary police officers as he deems necessary, not to exceed sixty (60) in number. The chief of police, with approval of the city manager, shall establish rules, regulations, standards and qualifications concerning the operation of the auxiliary police officers, their uniforms, arms, other equipment and training. 
(Ord. No. 2897-82) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to create departments, § 4.02(B).  
Sec. 32-2. - Impersonation. 
Any person who shall falsely assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties and privileges incident to the office of sheriff, police officer or other peace officer, or who shall falsely assume or pretend to be any such officer, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 29; Ord. No. 2178; Code 1961, § 25-29) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174.  
Sec. 32-3. - Employment of off-duty officers. 
Police officers may engage in off-duty employment subject to rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of police. In establishing such rules and regulations, the chief of police shall not permit officers to engage in off-duty occupations that may place officers in situations which will create real or potential conflicts between the duties of the two (2) occupations. However, nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting them from taking off-duty jobs that may require the use of their police power. 
(Ord. No. 3735-88)  
Sec. 32-4. - Charges for certain records and services. 
(a)  Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the police department is authorized to furnish photostatic copies of accident reports, offense reports, photographs of motor vehicle accidents and other photographs and to make record checks and reports (local record only) and take fingerprints of individuals on request. 
(b)  For the above services, a fee shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  Photostatic copy of accident report .....$10.00 
(2)  Photostatic copy of offense report .....10.00 
(3)  Criminal history check by name (with copy) (local record only) .....10.00 
(4)  Fingerprinting of individuals (when voluntarily requested by any person for purposes other than criminal violations): 
a.  For the first card .....10.00 
b.  For each successive card .....5.00 
(5)  Photographs, each print .....10.00 
(c)  For special conservator of the peace applicants, a fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be charged for background investigations performed by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 4685-95; Ord. No. 5486-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6152-05; Ord. No. 6985-13, § 1; Ord. 7287-16, § 1)  
Sec. 32-5. - Newport News Police Foundation. 
The city manager is authorized to accept, on behalf of the city and for use by and in support of the Newport News Police Department, any and all funds, services and equipment donated by the Newport News Police Foundation. 
(Ord. No. 7208-15, § 1)  
Secs. 32-6—32-12. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY IN CUSTODY OF POLICE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 32-13. - Exceptions from article. 
Nothing in this article shall be held to require the chief of police to take possession of or to make disposition of any lost or stolen property, the disposition or possession of which is otherwise provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-142; Ord. No. 3365-85) 
Cross reference— Weapons, Ch. 43.  
Sec. 32-14. - Duty of officers to deliver property, or report it, to chief. 
It shall be the duty of all officers and members of the police department, into whose possession any property seized or taken shall come, to deliver the same at once to the chief of police or the chief's designated officer, unless it is wanted for immediate use as evidence in any case and, in that event, a report and inventory of the same shall be forwarded at once to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-140)  
Sec. 32-15. - Record to be kept by chief. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep, or cause to be kept, a record of all property which may be seized or otherwise taken possession of by the police department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-141)  
Sec. 32-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4769-95, adopted Aug. 8, 1995, repealed § 32-16, which pertained to storage fees on recovered property. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 32-17—32-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 32-21. - Certification to purchasing agent. 
If property seized or taken possession of by the police department of the city is not claimed by the rightful owner thereof and possession surrendered to such owner within sixty (60) days from the date of the final disposition of the court proceedings in connection with which such property was seized or otherwise taken possession of, or, in case there are no court proceedings, then if such property so seized or taken possession of shall not be claimed by the rightful owner thereof and possession surrendered to such owner within sixty (60) days from the date of such seizure or taking by the police, the chief of police shall, except as otherwise provided in this article, within one (1) year, certify to the city's director of purchasing a list of such property, showing a description of such property, the date of seizure or taking possession thereof, that the listed property is not necessary to any court action and that no person has claimed ownership thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-135; Ord. No. 6001-04)  
Sec. 32-21.1. - Unclaimed property deemed to be of use to the city and other public agencies. 
Any unclaimed property which the chief of police or his designee deems to be of use to the city or another public agency may be retained by the city and assigned to any department, office or agency of the city or transferred to another public agency which can use the said property upon written authorization of the chief of police or his designee after the passage of sixty (60) days from the date of the final disposition of the court proceedings in connection with which such property was seized or taken possession of; or, in case there are no court proceedings, it may be so retained after sixty (60) days from the date of such seizure or taking, all conditioned upon the failure of the rightful owner, if any, to claim said property within the stated time periods. 
(Ord. No. 3117-84; Ord. No. 4271-91)  
Sec. 32-22. - Publication and posting of description of property and notice of sale. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a certified list referred to in section 32-21, the city's director of purchasing shall publish or cause to be published once a week, for two (2) successive weeks, in a newspaper published or having general circulation in the city, a description of the property in question, with the date of seizure or the taking possession thereof, and shall give notice that if such property is not claimed by the rightful owner thereof within ten (10) days from the date of such second publishing, such property will be sold at public auction at such place as the city's director of purchas-ing may direct and in such a manner as to expose to the inspection of bidders all property so offered for sale. 
(b)  In addition to the publication of notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the city's director of purchasing shall post or cause to be posted, in at least three (3) public places in the city, a copy of the notice published in the newspaper, and shall make a record of the date when such publication and the posting of notices are made. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to such perishable or bulky property as is provided for in section 32-24. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-136; Ord. No. 6001-04)  
Sec. 32-23. - Sale generally. 
If, within ten (10) days from the date of publication and posting, as referred to in section 32-22, no claim for the property described in such notice has been made by the rightful owner thereof, the city's director of purchasing shall proceed to sell such property at public auction. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-137; Ord. No. 6001-04)  
Sec. 32-23.1. - Guns. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, all guns remaining unclaimed in the custody of the police department on the day specified in the notice published in accord with section 32-22 may be confiscated for use by the department, or may be exchanged for more suitable police weapons or supplies for use by the department, or may be destroyed, whichever to the chief of police may seem proper. The disposition determination by the chief of police shall be in writing. In addition, a detailed record shall be maintained by the chief of police regarding the manner in which such unclaimed guns were utilized, exchanged or destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 3369-85) 
Cross reference— Carrying concealed weapons; when lawful to carry, § 43-2.  
Sec. 32-24. - Procedure in case of perishable, bulky, etc., property. 
If any property seized or taken possession of by the police department is of a perishable nature or so bulky or of such nature as to make it dangerous or inadvisable to retain possession thereof for the length of time specified in section 32-21, upon a certificate of such fact by the chief of police setting forth the reasons why such property should not be retained for the period fixed before selling same, the city's director of purchasing shall cause such property to be advertised forthwith, one (1) time, in a newspaper published or having general circulation in the city, and shall sell such property at public auction at any time after three (3) days shall have elapsed from the date of such publication. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-138; Ord. No. 6001-04)  
Sec. 32-25. - Disposition of proceeds of sale. 
The proceeds of any sale made as provided in this article shall be paid into the city treasury and credited to the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1; Code 1961, § 2-139)  
Sec. 32-26. - Disposal of property of no value. 
Any property seized or taken possession of by the police department which, in the opinion of the chief of police or his designee, has no value, shall be disposed of in the same manner as any waste product after the passage of sixty (60) days from the date of the final disposition of the court proceedings in connection with which such property was seized or otherwise taken possession of; or, in case there are no court proceedings, it may be so disposed of within sixty (60) days of such seizure or possession, all conditioned upon the failure of the rightful owner, if any, to claim said property within the stated time frames. 
(Ord. No. 3117-84)  
Sec. 32-27. - Unclaimed bicycles, electric power-assisted bicycles, mopeds, and electric personal assistive mobility devices. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 32-21 above, any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped which has been in the possession of the police department, unclaimed, for more than thirty (30) days may be sold at public auction or donated to a charitable organization. The police department shall comply with the provisions of sections 32-22 and 32-23 prior to any such sale or donation. 
(b)  If requested by the finder at the time of the delivery of the item to the police department, any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped found and delivered to the police department by a private person which thereafter remains unclaimed for more than thirty (30) days after the final date of publication required herein shall be given to the finder, provided the location and description of the bicycle or moped shall have been published at least once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a "charitable organization" means a charitable institution or association located within the city limits, or outside the city limits if such institution or association provides services to residents of the city; provided, however, that such institution or association shall not be controlled in whole or in part by any church or sectarian society. The words "sectarian society" shall not be construed to mean a nondenominational Young Men's Christian Association, a nondenominational Young Women's Christian Association, Habitat for Humanity, or the Salvation Army. 
(Ord. No. 7115-14, § 1)  
Secs. 32-28—32-41. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4203-91, adopted June 11, 1991, amended Art. III to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. III, §§ 32-42—32-50, pertained to security alarm systems connected to the police department and derived from Ord. No. 2285, §§ 30-1—30-7 and Ord. No. 2704-80. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of Ord. No. 4203-91. 
 
Sec. 32-42. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
False alarm means any security alarm signal communicated, directly or indirectly, to the emergency communications center which is not generated by actual or threatened criminal activity requiring immediate police response. False alarms include negligently or accidentally activated signals; signals which are the result of faulty, malfunctioning or improperly installed or maintained equipment; signals which are purposely activated to summon the police in nonemergency situations; and alarm signals for which the actual cause is not determined. False alarms shall not include signals activated by unusually severe weather conditions or other causes which are identified and determined by the chief of police to be beyond the control of the user. 
Nonemergency situation means any set of circumstances not involving perceived, actual or threatened criminal activity that constitutes an immediate danger to life or property. 
Security alarm system means any device or system which transmits a signal visibly, audibly, electronically, mechanically or by any combination of these methods, directly or indirectly, to the emergency communications center which indicates unlawful entry or other criminal activity at a premises requiring an immediate police response to the scene. 
User means the occupant of any premises equipped with a security alarm system or the owner of such premises if they are unoccupied. 
(Ord. No. 4203-91, § 1)  
Sec. 32-43. - Duty of users to instruct personnel as to proper operation. 
Security alarm users shall instruct employees and others who may have occasion to activate an alarm that the alarm system shall be activated only in emergency situations requiring an immediate police response. Alarm users shall also instruct appropriate employees in the operation of the security alarm system, including deactivation and resetting of the alarm. 
(Ord. No. 4203-91, § 1)  
Sec. 32-44. - Names of persons familiar with system, etc., to be posted on premises; duty of such persons to respond to police request. 
Security alarm system users shall post on the premises, in a conspicuous place visible from outside the premises, a sticker or other sign indicating the telephone numbers of at least two (2) responsible persons who are capable of deactivating and resetting the alarm system and of assisting the police in securing the premises, if necessary, and who may be notified by the police to respond to the scene. Such person or persons shall respond to the scene within one (1) hour after being requested to do so by the police. 
(Ord. No. 4203-91, § 1)  
Sec. 32-45. - Maintenance. 
Security alarm users shall be responsible for seeing that alarm systems are maintained in good working order and that defects which could cause false alarms are promptly repaired. 
(Ord. No. 4203-91, § 1)  
Sec. 32-46. - Prerecorded telephone messages to public safety services. 
No person shall use or operate, attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise operate any device or combination of devices that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic means, initiate an intracity or intercity call and deliver a prere corded message to any telephone number assigned to public safety services in the City of Newport News. 
(Ord. No. 4203-91, § 1)  
Sec. 32-47. - Deliberate false alarms. 
(a)  Any person who deliberately and without just cause activates a security alarm system to summon the police in a nonemergency situation shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the periodic testing of security alarm systems, when sufficient advance notice is given to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 4203-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4906-96)  
Sec. 32-48. - False alarms prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any user to send a false alarm. 
(b)  For each false alarm after three (3) false alarms originating from the same premises within a ninety-day period, there is hereby imposed a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such false alarm. In no event shall a fee of more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day be charged for false alarms originating from the same premises. 
(c)  The chief of police shall bill each user responsible for the false alarm the appropriate amount of penalty as set forth above. All such penalties shall be paid within thirty (30) days of billing. Any civil penalty assessed pursuant to subsection (b) above shall be forwarded by the chief of police to the city treasurer for collection. The city treasurer is authorized and directed to employ all appropriate means to collect such civil penalties. 
(Ord. No. 4203-91, § 1; Ord. No. 6201-06, § 1)  
Sec. 32-49. - Exceptions. 
The civil penalty set forth in this article shall not apply to any premises equipped with a security alarm system used, owned or occupied by the United States government or any of its agencies or instrumentalities or to the Commonwealth of Virginia, its agencies or political subdivisions, but all the other provisions of this article, including the termination of service, shall apply to them. 
(Ord. No. 4203-91, § 1)  
Secs. 32-50—32-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REMOVAL OR REPAIR OF BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES HARBORING A BAWDY PLACE 
 
Sec. 32-60. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Affidavit means the affidavit prepared by the city in accordance with section 32-61 hereof. 
Bawdy place means the same as that term is defined in § 18.2-347 of the Code of Virginia. 
Corrective action means the taking of steps which are reasonably expected to be effective to abate a bawdy place on real property, such as removal, repair or securing of any building, wall or other structure. 
Owner means the record owner of real property. 
Property means real property. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1)  
Sec. 32-61. - Affidavit and notice requirements. 
In addition to enforcement procedures established elsewhere, the chief of police or his designee is authorized to undertake corrective action with respect to a bawdy place on real property in accordance with the procedures described herein. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall execute an affidavit, citing § 15.2-908.1 of the Code of Virginia, and this article, and affirming that: (i) a bawdy place exists on the property and in the manner described therein; (ii) that the city has used due diligence without effect to abate the bawdy place; and (iii) that the bawdy place constitutes a present threat to the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall send a notice to the owner of the property, to be sent by regular mail to the last address listed for the owner on the city's assessment records for the property, together with a copy of the affidavit. The notice shall advise the owner that: (i) the owner has up to thirty (30) days from the date thereof to undertake corrective action to abate the bawdy place described in the affidavit; and (ii) that if requested to do so, the city will assist the owner in determining and coordinating the appropriate corrective action to abate the bawdy place described in the affidavit. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1)  
Sec. 32-62. - Failure to take corrective action. 
If no corrective action is undertaken within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice from the city as provided for in section 32-61, the chief of police or his designee shall send by regular mail an additional notice to the owner of the property, at the address stated in the assessment records of the city, stating the date on which the city may commence corrective action to abate the bawdy place on the property, which date shall be no earlier than fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing of this notice. This notice shall also reasonably describe the corrective action contemplated to be taken by the city. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner shall have a right, upon reasonable notice to the city provided no later than fifteen (15) days from date of the notice from the city pursuant to this section, to seek equitable relief before a court of competent jurisdiction, which shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to the city. The city shall initiate no corrective action while a proper petition for relief is pending before such court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1)  
Sec. 32-63. - Assessment of costs. 
If the city undertakes corrective action with respect to the property after complying with the notice provisions of this article, the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected by the city in the same manner as taxes and levies are collected. Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Articles 3 (§ 58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (§ 58.1-3965 et seq.) of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1)  
Sec. 32-64. - Corrective action by owner. 
If the owner of such property takes timely corrective action pursuant to this article, the city shall deem the bawdy place abated, shall close the proceeding without any charge or costs to the owner and shall promptly provide written notice to the owner that the proceeding has been terminated satisfactorily. The closing of a proceeding shall not bar the city from initiating a subsequent proceeding if the bawdy place recurs. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1)  
Sec. 32-65. - Abridgement of rights. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge or waive any rights or remedies of an owner of property at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1)  
Secs. 32-66—32-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - REMOVAL OR REPAIR OF BUILDINGS OR OTHER STRUCTURES HARBORING ILLEGAL DRUG ACTIVITY 
 
Sec. 32-70. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Affidavit means the affidavit sworn to under oath prepared by the city in accordance with section 32-71 hereof. 
Commercial sex acts means any specific activities that would constitute a criminal act under Article 3 (section 18.2-344 et seq.) of Chapter 8 of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia, or a substantially similar local ordinance if a criminal charge were to be filed against the individual perpetrator of such criminal activity. 
Controlled substance means illegally obtained controlled substances or marijuana, as defined in section 54.1-3401 of the Code of Virginia. 
Corrective action means (i) taking specific actions with respect to the buildings or structures on property that are reasonably expected to abate criminal blight on such real property, including the removal, repair or securing of any building, wall or other structure, or (ii) changing specific policies, practices, and procedures of the real property owner that are reasonably expected to abate criminal blight on real property. A local law-enforcement official shall prepare an affidavit on behalf of the city that states specific actions to be taken on the part of the real property owner that the city determines are necessary to abate the identified criminal blight on such real property and that do not impose an undue financial burden on the owner. 
Criminal blight means a condition existing on real property that endangers the public health or safety of residents of the city and is caused by (i) the regular presence on the property of persons under the influence of controlled substances; (ii) the regular use of the property for the purpose of illegally possessing, manufacturing or distributing controlled substances; (iii) the regular use of the property for the purpose of engaging in commercial sex acts; or (iv) repeated acts of the malicious discharge of a firearm within any building or dwelling that would constitute a criminal act under section 18.2-279 of the Code of Virginia or a substantially similar local ordinance if a criminal charge were to be filed against the individual perpetrator of such criminal activity. 
Law-enforcement official means the chief of police or his designee. The law-enforcement official shall coordinate with the building or fire code official for the city as otherwise provided under applicable laws and regulations. 
Owner means the record owner of real property. 
Property means real property. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7483-18, § 1)  
Sec. 32-71. - Affidavit and notice requirements. 
In addition to enforcement procedures established elsewhere, the city may require the owner of real property to undertake corrective action, or the city may undertake correction action, with respect to criminal blight on real property in accordance with the procedures described herein. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designee shall execute an affidavit, citing section 15.2-907 of the Code of Virginia, and this article, and affirming that (i) criminal blight exists on the property in the manner described therein; (ii) that the city has used due diligence without effect to abate the criminal blight; and (iii) that the criminal blight constitutes a present threat to the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  The chief of police or his designee shall send a notice to the owner of the property, to be sent by (i) certified mail, return receipt requested; (ii) hand delivery; or (iii) overnight delivery by a commercial service or the United States Postal Service, to the last address listed for the owner on the city's assessment records for the property, together with a copy of the affidavit. The notice shall advise the owner that (a) the owner has up to thirty (30) days from the date thereof to undertake corrective action to abate the criminal blight described in the affidavit and (b) that if requested to do so, the city will assist the owner in determining and coordinating the appropriate corrective action to abate the criminal blight described in the affidavit. If the owner notifies the city in writing within the thirty (30) day period that additional time to complete the corrective action is needed, the city shall allow the owner an extension for an additional thirty (30) day period to take such corrective action. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7483-18, § 1)  
Sec. 32-72. - Failure to take corrective action. 
If no corrective action is undertaken within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice from the city, or during the extension if such extension is granted by the city, as provided for in section 32-71, the chief of police or his designee shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, an additional notice to the owner of the property, at the address stated in the assessment records of the city, stating (i) the date on which the city may commence corrective action to abate the criminal blight on the property or (ii) the date on which the city may commence legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a court order to require that the owner take such corrective action or, if the owner does not take corrective action, a court order to revoke the certificate of occupancy for such property, which date shall be no earlier than fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing of this notice. This notice shall also reasonably describe the corrective action contemplated to be taken by the city. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner shall have a right, upon reasonable notice to the city, to seek judicial relief and the city shall initiate no corrective action while a proper petition for relief is pending before such court of competent jurisdiction. A criminal blight proceeding shall be a civil proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction in the Commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7483-18, § 1)  
Sec. 32-73. - Assessment of costs. 
If the city undertakes the corrective action with respect to the property after complying with the notice provisions found herein, the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected by the city in the same manner as taxes and levies are collected. Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and that remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local real estate taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Articles 3 (section 58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (section 58.1-3965 et seq.) of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7483-18, § 1)  
Sec. 32-74. - Corrective action by owner. 
If the owner of real property takes timely corrective action pursuant to this article, the city shall deem the criminal blight abated and shall close the proceeding without any charge or costs to the owner and shall promptly provide written notice to the owner that the proceeding has been terminated satisfactorily. The closing of a proceeding shall not bar the city from initiating a subsequent proceeding if the criminal blight recurs. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7483-18, § 1)  
Sec. 32-75. - Abridgement of rights. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, diminish, limit, or waive any rights or remedies of an owner of property at law or any permits or nonconforming rights the owner may have under Chapter 22 (section 15.2-2200 et seq.) of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia or under a local ordinance. If an owner in good faith takes corrective action, and despite having taken such action, the specific criminal blight identified in the affidavit persists, such owner shall be deemed in compliance with this article. Further, if a tenant in a rental dwelling unit, or a tenant on a manufactured home lot, is the cause of criminal blight on such property and the owner in good faith initiates legal action and pursues the same by requesting a final order by a court of competent jurisdiction against such tenant to remedy such noncompliance or to terminate the tenancy, such owner shall be deemed in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 6710-10, § 1; Ord. No. 7483-18, § 1)  
Chapter 33 - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Responsibilities of department of public works relative to sewers, § 2-387; responsibilities of department of engineering relative to sewers, § 2-671; toilet facilities for barbershops and beauty parlors, § 9-4; building regulations, Ch. 13; toilet facilities in food establishments, § 17-21; sewer system for mobile home parks, § 25-41; sidewalk vaults not to interfere with sewers, § 38-126; toilet facilities for public swimming pools, § 39-46; water supply, Ch. 42; required storm and sanitary sewer improvements in subdivisions, App. B, §§ 9-03, 9-04. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish, maintain and operate sewage disposal systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122; septic tanks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157; health regulations pertaining to sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 33-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 33-2. - Construction standards for sewers—When located on private property. 
Sewers or sewer systems located on privately owned premises shall be constructed in accordance with the plumbing code; provided, that, whenever such sewers or sewer systems are to be accepted by the city as part of the public sewer system, the construction standards specified by the department of engineering shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-117; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1) 
Cross reference— Building code adopted, § 13-23.  
Sec. 33-3. - Same—When located on city property. 
Sewers or sewer systems located on property owned by the city or upon which the city has obtained an easement for the purpose of sewer construction or maintenance shall be constructed according to the standards specified by the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-118; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 33-4. - Plumbing fixtures installed below level of street in which sewer is located. 
Wherever plumbing fixtures are installed below the crown of the street in which is located the public sewer to which such fixtures are connected, a backwater valve of a type acceptable under the plumbing code shall be installed. In addition, any certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of the building code relating to any premises where such plumbing fixtures are installed shall, upon acceptance by the owner of such premises, constitute an acknowledgement that the city, having accepted the installation as in compliance with the plumbing code, makes no warranty or assurance in any manner whatsoever that the premises are in any way protected from any damage that may be caused by any flood or high water condition that may exist on public streets, where such condition could render such fixtures inoperable. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-119) 
Cross reference— Building code adopted, § 13-23.  
Sec. 33-5. - Availability of sewage disposal facilities prerequisite to issuance of building permit. 
In order to preserve the public health, no permit shall be issued by the codes compliance administrator for the erection or construction of any building upon any lot fronting on any public or private street or passageway in which it is impossible to construct a gravity sanitary sewer system which will carry off the sewage from such building, or where it is impossible to install an individual sewage disposal system meeting the requirements of the rules and regulations of the state department of health governing septic tank systems, unless the owner of such lot can show, to the satisfaction of the codes compliance administrator, that proper sanitary facilities for sewage disposal can and will be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-111)  
Sec. 33-6. - Unlawful disposal of sewage. 
(a)  No person shall permit the discharge of any sewage or offensive or waste liquid onto a street or other public place or onto any open ground within the city. Where no city sewer is provided, such wastewater shall be disposed of in a septic tank disposal system meeting the requirements of Article VI of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall, within the limits of the city, deposit any human excreta upon the ground or in any place accessible to animals or flies. 
(c)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 257, §§ 10, 11; Code 1961, §§ 21-9, 21-10; Ord. No. 5083-97)  
Secs. 33-7—33-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Connection of swimming pool outlet drain to sanitary sewer prohibited, § 39-10. 
 
Sec. 33-17. - When required. 
(a)  The owner of any dwelling or other building in which human beings live or congregate shall, whenever a trunk line or lateral sewer line is available, connect such dwelling or building with such trunk or lateral line sewer, subject to the provisions of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to empty any sewage or sewage system into any well, septic tank or open stream or waterway in the city, when a public trunk or lateral line sewer is or shall become reasonably available for connecting to the same; provided, that any properly functioning individual sewage disposal system may continue in use to serve occupied buildings where a public trunk or lateral line sewer is available until such time that such individual sewage disposal system becomes inadequate, abandoned, unsanitary or in need of repair. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "reasonably available" shall mean that a public sewer connection can be made by installation of a building sewer, not to exceed two hundred (200) feet in length on a straight line or two hundred fifty (250) feet in length, if such installation must be made to circumvent an obstacle of a permanent nature. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy, lease or rent any premises not connected to a sewer line as required by this section, and each day of occupancy of any such premises shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-116; Ord. No. 2499-78, § 1; Ord. No. 4965-96)  
Sec. 33-18. - Permit; to be made by qualified person. 
(a)  No person shall connect any property with the sewer system without first obtaining a permit to do so from the division of codes compliance. The owner of the property or such owner's authorized agent desiring such permit shall make application therefor at the division of codes compliance. 
(b)  Such permit shall authorize connection to a public sewer system; provided, that such connection shall be made by a person qualified to do so under the provisions of Article VI of Chapter 13 of this Code and that a plumbing permit shall first have been issued to such person. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-113; Ord. No. 2499-78, § 1)  
Sec. 33-19. - Charges. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Assessed shall mean the process to impose taxes or assessments upon abutting property owners for construction of sanitary sewers within the city as authorized by Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(2)  Corner lot shall mean a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection, the shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot. 
(3)  Frontage shall mean that portion of any real property abutting directly on a public right-of-way. 
(b)  Connection charge. A connection charge for connection with sewers shall be paid to the city for each lot or parcel of land to be served by such sewers as follows: 
(1)  For single-family units when the lot or parcel of land has not been assessed, the charge shall be three thousand five hundred thirty-one dollars ($3,531.00) plus a fee of one thousand four hundred eleven dollars ($1,411.00) for the installation of a lateral. If a lateral had been previously installed to serve the property, no installation fee shall be paid at the time of connection. 
(2)  For other than single-family units when the lot or parcel of land has not been assessed, the charge shall be computed by multiplying the actual frontage of the lot or parcel of land by sixty dollars and twenty cents ($60.20) and adding thereto the applicable charge specified in (b)(4) of this section. 
(3)  When the lot or parcel of land has been assessed, the charge shall be that specified in (b)(4) of this section. 
a.  Single-family—If a lot or parcel of land which has been assessed is subdivided to create additional single-family lots or parcels, the charge for each lot or parcel not already connected to the sewer system shall be in accordance with (b)(1) of this section. 
b.  Other than single-family—If a lot or parcel of land which has been assessed is subdivided to create additional lots or parcels for development of other than single-family units, the charge for each lot or parcel not already connected to the sewer system shall be computed by multiplying the actual frontage of the lot or parcel of land by nine dollars and fifty-five cents ($9.55) and adding thereto the applicable charge specified in (b)(4) of this section. It is the council's intent to recognize in this subsection that there is but a single assessment for a subdividable parcel. A single lateral, hereafter termed the "primary lateral," is provided to parcels in sewer projects, although other laterals may be constructed if the property owner pays for the cost of materials and labor for such laterals. A connection fee shall therefore be paid for each new parcel created by subsequent subdivision of a parcel other than the parcel served, or capable of being served, by the "primary lateral." 
(4)  Flat rate charges shall be based on the following: 
a.  For a single-family unit when the lot or parcel has been assessed, a charge according to the following shall be paid: 
1.  Three hundred fifty-one dollars ($351.00) if paid in a single payment within the first twelve (12) months after the sewer involved was certified for connection. This reduced rate shall be available only to those property owners who obtain a building or plumbing permit within the first twelve (12) months after the sewer is certified for connection and connect within the time period specified in this section. 
2.  Seven hundred five dollars ($705.00) if not paid as provided in 1. immediately above. 
b.  For property other than single-family, a charge based on the following shall be paid: 
1.  For each multifamily unit: Four hundred ninety-four dollars ($494.00) per family unit. 
2.  For sewers serving commercial units: Seven hundred five dollars ($705.00) for the first lateral exiting the structure plus four hundred ninety-four dollars ($494.00) for each additional lateral. 
3.  For sewers serving parcels zoned Light Industrial District (M1) or Heavy Industrial District (M2): Seven hundred five dollars ($705.00). 
4.  For sewers serving mobile home parks: Four hundred ninety-four dollars ($494.00) per mobile home site. 
5.  For sewers serving hotels and/or similar establishments: Four hundred ninety-four dollars ($494.00) per unit. 
(c)  Subdivision lots. For sewers installed by a developer in accordance with the subdivision regulations, no charge shall be paid to the city under this section for those lots served by the sewer and for which the subdivision connection fee was paid by such developer, except as provided in (b)(3) of this section. 
(d)  Corner lots. For corner lots, the shortest side abutting a public street plus one-half (½) of the intersection arc distance shall be used in determining the frontage charge under this section, provided sixty (60) feet shall be the minimum distance used. 
(e)  Lots with no public street frontage. For lots which do not abut any public street, the shortest side of the lot shall be used in determining the frontage charge under this section, provided that sixty (60) feet shall be the minimum distance used. 
(f)  Other requests. When a sewer connection lateral larger than four (4) inches in diameter or an additional lateral is desired, the applicant for the permit required by this article shall pay the cost of labor and materials necessary to construct the same but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(g)  Unusual cases. The city manager or his designee is authorized to make adjustments to the charges set forth in this section in instances where unusual property frontages exist. If the individual requesting a sewer connection establishes, to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee, that the total frontage of his property does not represent frontage on developable property, the city manager or his designee may then reduce the frontage upon which the charge is based to that which represents frontage on developable property (but not to a figure which is less than sixty (60) feet). 
(h)  When charge due. The charge for connecting to the public sewer as herein set out shall be paid to the city as follows: 
(1)  For connections involving single-family units when the lot or parcel has not been assessed requested pursuant to (b)(1) and (b)(3)a., the charge shall be paid prior to the time application is made to the department of codes compliance for the building permit or the plumbing permit, whichever applies to the specific request. If the connection is not completed and approved by the plumbing inspector within the time specified by the pertinent permit, the charge less five hundred dollars ($500.00), to cover administrative costs associated with processing the application and the refund, shall be refunded to the applicant upon request. If the lateral was installed, the charge for the same shall not be refunded; however, if the lateral was not installed, the charge for the same shall be refunded to the applicant upon request. Any subsequent request for a sewer connection at the address involved shall follow the application process that is in effect at the time of such request. 
(2)  For existing buildings other than single-family that has not been assessed, the connection charge shall be paid prior to the time application is made to the department of codes compliance for the plumbing permit; provided, however, that in the case of properties that have been assessed, the plumbing permit shall be obtained within the first twelve (12) months after the sewer involved is certified for connection. If the connection is not completed and approved by the plumbing inspector within ninety (90) days after issuance of the plumbing permit, the charge less five hundred dollars ($500.00), if applicable, to cover administrative costs associated with processing the application and the refund, shall be retained with the reminder refunded to the applicant upon request. If the lateral was installed, the charge for the same shall not be refunded; however, if the lateral was not installed, the charge for the same shall be refunded to the applicant upon request. 
(3)  For new construction, the connection charge shall be paid prior to the time application is made to the department of codes compliance for the building permit; provided, however, that in the case of properties that have been assessed, the building permit shall be obtained within the first twelve (12) months after the sewer involved is certified for connection. If the connection to the public sewer is not completed and approved by the plumbing inspector within twelve (12) months after issuance of the building permit, the charge, less five hundred dollars ($500.00), if applicable, to cover administrative costs associated with processing the application and the refund, shall be retained with the remainder refunded to the applicant upon request. If the lateral was installed, the charge for the same shall not be refunded; however, if the lateral was not installed, the charge for the same shall be refunded to the applicant upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-115; Ord. No. 2499-78, § 1; Ord. No. 2703-80; Ord. No. 2743-81; Ord. No. 3149-84; Ord. No. 3195-84; Ord. No. 3370-85; Ord. No. 3371-85; Ord. No.4208-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4355-92, § 1; Ord. No. 4458-93; Ord. No. 4787-95; Ord. No. 5012-97; Ord. No. 5304-99; Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6244-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6364-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6497-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6584-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6862-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6965-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7170-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7269-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7373-17, § 1; Ord. No. 7459-18, § 1; Ord. No. 7548-19, § 1; Ord. No. 7620-20, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7269-16, § 2, adopted May 10, 2016, effective July 1, 2016, provides that the increase in fees set forth in this ordinance shall not apply to any sewer extension project for which an authorizing ordinance has been adopted as of the date of adoption of this ordinance.  
Sec. 33-20. - Designation of position of lateral. 
Upon the issuance of a permit required by section 33-18, the director of engineering shall, upon request, designate the position of the sewer lateral in the street, as shown by the records in the office of the department of engineering, for the making of the connection in question. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-114; Ord. No. 2499-78, § 1; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Secs. 33-21—33-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 33-31. - Definitions. 
The definitions set out in section 33-47 shall apply in the interpretation and application of this article.  
Sec. 33-32. - Imposed. 
All users of the city's sewerage system shall be required to pay a user charge in order for the city to recover its operation and maintenance expenses, including the cost of materials and equipment replacement, for the sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-170]; Ord. No. 4201-91, § 1)  
Sec. 33-33. - Rate. 
The sewer user charge for all users of the city's sewerage system shall be at the rate of three dollars and thirty-seven cents (3.37) for each one hundred (100) cubic feet, or fraction thereof, of metered water consumption, per month. In addition, there shall be a flat charge per month, or portion thereof based upon the water meter size as set forth below: 
Meter Size 	Rate 
5/8" 	$ 5.00 
3/4" 	$ 6.80 
1" 	$ 11.19 
1 ½" 	$ 18.23 
2" 	$ 26.45 
3" 	$ 35.62 
4" 	$ 45.14 
6" 	$ 54.92 
8" 	$ 64.80 
10" 	$ 74.72 
 
A portion of the sewer user charge includes extraordinary engineering fees, operating costs and infrastructure costs imposed by the Regional Consent Order of the State Water Control Board for the purpose of minimization of sanitary sewer overflows. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-170]; Ord. No. 2487-78; Ord. No. 2760-81; Ord. No. 2916-82, § 1; Ord. No. 3581-87, § 1; Ord. No. 3727-88, § 1; Ord. No. 3876-89; Ord. No. 4055-90, § 1; Ord. No. 4201-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4351-92, § 1; Ord. No. 4461-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4609-94, § 1; Ord. No. 4729-95, § 1; Ord. No. 4917-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5022-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5137-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5280-99; Ord. No. 5466-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5623-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5791-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5935-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6026-04, § 1; Ord. No. 6121-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6242-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6361-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6483-08; Ord. No. 6583-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6872-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6964-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7057-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7169-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7268-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7371-17; Ord. No. 7458-18, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7268-16, § 2, adopted May 10, 2016, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2016.  
Sec. 33-34. - Determination of billing. 
The method of determining the quantity for billing the charges prescribed by this article shall be through use of the individual water meter. In cases where it can be positively demonstrated that a certain percentage of the metered water is not discharged to the sewerage system, the billing shall be based on the percentage of metered water which actually enters the sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-170])  
Sec. 33-35. - Discontinuance of water service for failure to pay. 
When any bill for charges prescribed by this article remains unpaid twenty-one (21) days after the billing date, such bill shall be deemed delinquent and water service may be discontinued, unless such bill is paid prior to the commencement of any action by an employee or agent of the city in connection with cutting off or discontinuing such service. After water service has been discontinued, it shall not be restored until all bills and a service charge of five dollars ($5.00) have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-170])  
Sec. 33-36. - Previous balance to be paid prior to new service or transfer of service. 
In the event that any person applies for sewer service while owing a balance for sewer service previously furnished, regardless of the length of time the same has been owing, sewer service shall not be furnished until all amounts in connection with past sewer services furnished, as provided for in this article, have been paid in full. In the event that a customer moves from one (1) location to another and desires sewer service at the new location, all amounts owed in connection with sewer service at the old location must be paid in full before sewer service shall be furnished at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-170])  
Secs. 33-37—33-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER USE STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - SEWER USE PROVISIONS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 33-47. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
City. The City of Newport News or any authorized department or person acting in its behalf. 
B.O.D. (biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standards laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius (68 degrees Fahrenheit) expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). Measurement shall be as set forth in standard methods. 
Building sewer. A sewage drain pipe extending from five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall to a sewer. 
C.O.D. (chemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen required to chemically oxidize material in a waste by dichromate acid solution expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). Measurement shall be as set forth in standard methods. 
Chlorine demand. The difference between the amount of chlorine added to water, sewage or industrial wastes and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a twenty-minute contact period at room temperature. 
Cooling water. The water discharged from any system of condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other sources. It shall contain no polluting substances which would produce B.O.D. or suspended solids in excess of ten (10) mg/l by weight, or toxic substances as limited elsewhere herein. 
Garbage. Any putrescible animal and vegetable wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Hampton Roads Sanitation District. A body corporate and politic, created by virtue of Chapter 407 of the Acts of Assembly of 1940 of Virginia, and the acts amendatory thereof. 
Industrial wastes. Liquid or other wastes resulting from any processes of industry, manufacture, trade or business or from the development of any natural resource. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). The same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio. The milligram per liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Normal sewage. Sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes which, when analyzed, show by weight the following characteristics: 
(1)  B.O.D.: Two thousand three hundred (2,300) pounds per million gallons (280 milligrams per liter) or less. 
(2)  Chlorine demand: Two hundred eight (208) pounds per million gallons (25 milligrams per liter) or less. 
(3)  Suspended solids: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds per million gallons (315 milligrams per liter) or less. 
(4)  C.O.D.: Two thousand nine hundred twenty (2,920) pounds per million gallons (400 milligrams per liter) or less. 
Other wastes. Refuse such as garbage (shredded and unshredded), wood, egg shells, coffee grounds, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, cinder, ashes and all other discarded matter not normally present in sewage or industrial wastes. 
Permittee. A person to whom a permit has been issued under this article by the city. 
Person. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group contributing directly or indirectly to the city's sewerage system. 
pH. The negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter. It indicates the intensity of acidity and alkalinity of the pH scale running from 0.0 to 14.0. A pH value of 7.0, the mid-point of the scale, represents neutrality. Values below 7.0 represent acid conditions. Values above 7.0 represent alkaline conditions. 
Receiving waters. A natural watercourse or body of water into which treated or untreated sewage is discharged. 
Sewage. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. The admixture of sewage as above defined with industrial wastes or other wastes shall also be considered sewage within the meaning of this definition. 
Sewage treatment plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewer. Pipe or conduit carrying sewage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
Sewerage system. Includes all facilities for collection and pumping of sewage. 
Slug. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal operation. 
Standard methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Stormwater. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
Suspended solids. Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. Measurement shall be as set forth in standard methods. 
To discharge. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Toxic substances. Any substances, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which, when discharged to a sewer in sufficient quantities tend to interfere with any sewage treatment process, tend to constitute a hazard to human beings or animals, or tend to impair the designated uses of the classified receiving waters upon discharge from the sewage treatment plant, and pumping station overflows, or other appurtenances of the city's sewerage system. 
Unpolluted waters. Waters which do not contain any of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenols or other substances imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic and poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; or noxious or odorous gases. Unpolluted waters shall contain no more than ten thousand (10,000) mg/l by weight of dissolved solids, of which no more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) mg/l shall be as chloride, with permissible volume subject to review by the city, and no more than ten (10) mg/l each of suspended solids and B.O.D. The color shall not exceed fifty (50) units. Measurement shall be as set forth in standard methods. 
User charge. The charge made to those persons who discharge sewage into the city's sewerage system. 
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-148]; Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1, adopted March 9, 2010, shall be in effect on and after May 1, 2010.  
Sec. 33-48. - Enforcement of article generally; indemnification of city for losses resulting from violations. 
(a)  The city attorney may maintain an action or proceeding in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with this article or to restrain, by injunction, any violation of this article. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty prescribed for a violation of this article, the city may seek indemnification for losses it suffers as damages to any persons or property as a result of any violation of this article. 
(c)  Additional remedies regarding fats, oils and grease are addressed in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-172, 10-173]; Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1, adopted March 9, 2010, shall be in effect on and after May 1, 2010.  
Sec. 33-49. - General limitations on use. 
(a)  Disposal into the city's sewerage system of any pollutant by any person is unlawful, except in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 and any more stringent state and local standards. 
(b)  The use of the city's sewerage system shall be strictly limited and restricted to receiving and accepting the sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes generated on, or discharged from, real property lying within the boundaries of the city; provided, however, that this restriction shall not be applicable where an agreement has been consummated with an adjacent governmental jurisdiction to accept sewage generated from property within that adjacent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Sewage, industrial wastes and other wastes will be accepted into the city's sewerage system at points of connection and under conditions approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-149]; Ord. No. 4189-91) 
Cross reference— Connection of swimming pool outlet drain to sanitary sewer prohibited, § 39-10.  
Sec. 33-50. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge into sewers waste of a nature or in quantities prohibited by the statutes or regulations of the Hampton Roads Sanitation District ("HRSD"). 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city's sewerage system any of the following materials, substances or waste: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to sewers, structures, equipment or personnel. 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances, in quantities or of such size or state, which may impair the hydraulic capacity, may cause maintenance difficulties or may interfere with the proper operation of the city's sewerage system, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, feathers, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(4)  The discharge of storm or unpolluted water by specifically excluding the connection of the following to the sanitary sewerage system: 
a.  Perforated manhole covers in areas of potential flooding. 
b.  Roof leader connections. 
c.  Foundation, yard and areaway drain connections. 
d.  Basement drain connections. 
e.  Residential, industrial and commercial cooling water connections. 
f.  Sump pump connections. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city's sewerage system the following described materials, substances, waters or wastes, if it appears likely, in the judgment of the city, that such wastes may have deleterious effect upon the city's sewerage system, sewage treatment or other processes, equipment or receiving waters, or may otherwise endanger life, limb, property or constitute a public nuisance. 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit [sixty-five and one-half degrees Celsius (65.5;deg;C)]. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, oils, or grease (FOG), whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit [zero degrees Celsius and sixty-five and one-half degrees Celsius (0;deg;C and 65.5;deg;C)]. Such discharges are addressed in division 2 of this article. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of garbage grinders equipped with a motor of three-fourths (¾) horsepower, or greater, shall be subject to the review and approval of the city. (Not more than thirty (30) percent of ground garbage, on the dry basis, shall pass a No. 40 U.S. Standard sieve.) 
(4)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0. 
(6)  Materials which exert or cause unusual concentration of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
(7)  Waters or wastes which exert or cause unusual volume of flow or concentration constituting slugs. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing excessive discoloration, phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city to meet the requirements of regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment plant processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of wastes enumerated in this subsection, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction, sewage treatment plant processes and capacity, degree of treatability and other pertinent factors. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city's sewerage system any waters or waste containing toxic, poisonous or other solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity in the judgment of the city, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to have a deleterious effect upon the city's sewerage system, sewage treatment and other processes, equipment or receiving waters, or to endanger life, limb or property or to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-152—10-155]; Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1, adopted March 9, 2010, shall be in effect on and after May 1, 2010.  
Sec. 33-51. - Authority of city to reject or require pretreatment, flow control and/or additional payment for certain wastes. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the city's sewerage system, which waters and wastes, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon said sewerage system, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or may otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, or may exceed the concentration limits prescribed for normal sewage, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the discharge of the waters or wastes to the sewerage system; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the sewerage system; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling the waters or wastes not covered by existing charges. 
(b)  The discharge of waters or wastes requiring pretreatment, flow control or additional payment will not be permitted into the city's sewerage system without previous approval by permit, as prescribed under this article, unless the requirement for a permit is waived by the city or a permit has been obtained previously from the Hampton Roads Sanitation District. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-150])  
Sec. 33-52. - Permit for certain wastes—When required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, directly or indirectly, into the city's sewerage system, sewage combined with industrial wastes or other wastes, the characteristics of which require a permit under subsection (b) of this section or exceed the concentration limits prescribed for normal sewage under section 33-47, except under the issuance of a permit therefor by the city and upon such terms and conditions as may be established by the city in the issuance of such a permit, unless the requirement for a permit is waived by the city or a permit has been obtained previously from the Hampton Roads Sanitation District. 
(b)  The following are some of the industries the wastes from which require approval by permit before discharge into the sewerage system: Tanning; metal pickling; metal plating; galvanizing; pulp and paper making; brewing; distilling; public laundering; laundering; laundromat; dry cleaning; car wash; automobile service station or garage; soap making; glue manufacturing; meat and poultry packing; food processing; wool scouring; bleaching and dyeing; munitions manufacturing; oil refining; wool washing; rubber production; salt works; chemical manufacturing; pharmaceutical manufacturing; slaughtering; dairy; dairy products; sugar refining; fat rendering; manufacture of syrups, jam or jelly; cotton textile manufacture or processing; or any industry producing wastes which may have or may create the aforesaid deleterious effect, hazards, nuisances or added cost. The process or processes employed in the pretreatment and control, if required, of such wastes shall in each case be satisfactory to and shall have the approval by permit of the city as set forth under this article, unless the requirement for a permit is waived by the city, or a permit has been obtained previously from the Hampton Roads Sanitation District. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-151, 10-156])  
Sec. 33-53. - Same—Application. 
All applicants for a permit to discharge sewage combined with industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's sewerage system shall file with the city an application as a prerequisite for the consideration of such a permit. The following is a partial list of information to be furnished by the applicant: 
(1)  Plot of the property showing accurately all sewers, drains and building sewers. 
(2)  A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes produced or expected to be produced at said property or premises, including a description of the character of each waste, the daily volume and maximum rates of discharge and representative analyses. 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who will be responsible for the performance of the work to be covered by the permit and the name and address of the person or firm who will be responsible for operating the facilities in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-157])  
Sec. 33-54. - Same—Terms and conditions. 
The following terms may be imposed by the city in the issuance of the permit required by this article: 
(1)  A limitation upon the characteristics and volume of wastes and the rate of flow permitted from the premises. 
(2)  The installation and maintenance by the permittee, at his own expense, of: Facilities or equipment for intermittent or continuous measurement of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes discharged; detention tanks or other facilities or equipment for reducing the maximum rates of discharge; pretreatment and flow-control facilities; suitable control or sampling manholes; and grease, oil and sand interceptors, separators or traps. 
(3)  The submission to and approval by the city of plans and specifications for any of the facilities or equipment required to be installed and maintained by the permittee. 
(4)  Maintenance of appropriate records of all measurements made by the permittee of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes. 
(5)  The submission to the city of periodic reports setting forth adequate data upon which the acceptability of the sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes may be determined subsequent to the commencement of operation of any pretreatment or flow-control facilities. 
(6)  Participation in the city's industrial cost recovery system. 
(7)  Such other terms and conditions as may be necessary to protect the city's sewerage system and to carry out the intent and provisions of this article. 
(8)  Revocation or suspension of the permit upon any violation by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-158])  
Sec. 33-55. - Control manholes. 
When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes, or wastes exceeding the concentration limits prescribed for normal sewage, shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer as are necessary to facilitate observation, testing, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-160])  
Sec. 33-56. - Sampling and testing, etc., of wastes. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to take samples and tests as may be necessary or to require such samples and tests to be taken as may be necessary to determine the nature and concentration of sewage and industrial wastes, and shall have the right to reassess its determination by taking samples and tests at any time or by periodic rechecks without notice to the person discharging such wastes. 
(b)  Samples shall be taken and flow measurements made normally at the control manhole or manholes. In the event that the requirement for a control manhole or manholes has been specifically waived, the samples shall be taken at a point or points to be selected by the city. 
(c)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of standard methods and shall be made upon samples taken at the control manhole or, in the event that no control manhole has been required, upon samples taken at the nearest suitable point. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the city's sewerage system and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-159, 10-161])  
Sec. 33-57. - Right of entry to enforce article. 
(a)  The city or its representatives may enter upon private lands for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. While performing the necessary work on private lands referred to in this section, the city, or its duly authorized representatives, shall observe all safety rules established by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(b)  Refusal to permit the entry upon private lands required to perform the necessary work referred to above shall be unlawful. 
(c)  Where a company or premises has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into said company or premises, such company or premises shall either make the necessary arrangements with their security guards to allow the city's employees immediate access to the locations necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, or the company or premises shall install, outside the premises or security limits, suitable control manholes, approved by the city, which will at all times be accessible to city employees. 
(Ord. No. 2405, § 2[10-162])  
Sec. 33-58. - Disconnection of sources of storm or unpolluted waters required. 
When it is determined that storm or unpolluted waters are being discharged into the sanitary sewerage system in violation of section 33-50(b)(4), it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real property from which the discharge is being made or on which a connection is made to the sewer system to disconnect any such sources of storm or unpolluted waters and properly dispose of same. 
(Ord. No. 3080-83)  
DIVISION 2. - FATS, OILS, AND GREASE (FOG)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1, adopted March 9, 2010, added Div. 2, §§ 33-59—33-67, and shall be in effect on and after May 1, 2010. 
 
Sec. 33-59. - Purpose and applicability. 
The purpose of this division is to aid in preventing the introduction and accumulation of fats, oils, and grease into the city's sanitary sewer system that may contribute to sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions. Food service establishments, grease haulers and other industrial or commercial establishments generating or collecting wastewater containing fats, oils, and grease are subject to this division. This division regulates such users by requiring that grease control devices and other approved strategies be installed, implemented and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this division and other applicable requirements of the city. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all food service establishments within the city and to all grease haulers providing service to any such food service establishment. 
(Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1)  
Sec. 33-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brown grease shall mean floatable fats, oils, grease and settled solids produced during food preparation that are recovered from grease control devices. 
Enforcement response plan shall mean a system that sets forth the process and procedures for enforcement of this section by the city. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) shall mean material, either liquid or solid, composed of fats, oils or grease from animal or vegetable sources. Examples of FOG include, but are not limited to, kitchen cooking grease, vegetable oil, bacon grease and organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations at 40 CFR Part 136, as may be amended from time to time. FOG may be referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
Food service establishment (FSE) shall mean any commercial, industrial, institutional, or food processing facility discharging kitchen or food preparation wastewaters including, but not limited to, restaurants, commercial kitchens, caterers, motels, hotels, cafeterias, correctional facilities, prisons or jails, cafeterias, care institutions, hospitals, schools, bars and churches. Any establishment engaged in preparing, serving or otherwise making food available for consumption by the public shall be included. Such establishments use one (1) or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling, boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbequing, and other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. "Hot," for the purposes of this definition, means in excess of the limits referred to in section 33-50(c)(1) above. 
Grease control device (GCD) shall mean a device used to collect, contain, or remove food waste and grease from the wastewater while allowing the remaining wastewater to be discharged to the city's sanitary sewer system by gravity. Devices include grease interceptors, grease traps, automatic grease removal devices or other devices approved by the director of public works, or his designee. 
Grease hauler shall mean a contractor who collects the contents of a grease interceptor or trap and transports it to an approved recycling or disposal facility. A grease hauler may also provide other services related to grease interceptor maintenance for a FSE. 
Grease interceptor shall mean a structure or device, usually located underground and outside a FSE, designed to collect, separate and contain food waste and grease while allowing the wastewater to be discharged to the city's sanitary sewer system by gravity. 
Grease removal device shall mean an active, automatic device that separates and removes FOG from effluent discharge and that cleans itself of accumulated FOG at least once every twenty-four (24) hours utilizing electromechanical apparatus. 
Grease trap shall mean a device typically located indoors and under the sink or in the floor, designed for separating and containing grease prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer system. Such devices are typically passive (gravity fed) and compact with removable baffles. 
Renderable FOG container shall mean a closed, leak-proof container for the collection and storage of yellow grease. 
Yellow grease shall mean FOG used in food preparation that have not been in contact or contaminated with other sources such as water, wastewater or solid waste. An example of yellow grease is fryer oil, which can be recycled into products such as animal feed, cosmetics and alternative fuel. Yellow grease is also referred to as renderable FOG. 
(Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1)  
Sec. 33-61. - Registration requirements. 
All FSEs shall be required to register with the city their GCDs. Registrations shall be on forms provided by the department of public works or their designee to ensure that such devices are properly sized and maintained, as well as to facilitate inspection in accordance with the requirements established by the department of public works. 
(1)  Existing FSEs shall register all GCDs within ninety (90) days of the adoption of this ordinance. New establishments shall register when setting up their water and sewer service or prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  All grease haulers, owners, or employees servicing GCDs for FSEs within the city shall be required to obtain a certification to service GCDs from the Hampton Roads FOG regionally-approved training program provided by the Hampton Roads Planning District Commission ("HRPDC"). 
(3)  All grease haulers shall obtain the required permits, certifications and or approvals from the facility in which waste will be disposed of. Grease haulers discharging to a HRSD treatment plant shall be approved through the HRSD Indirect Wastewater Discharge Permit. All grease haulers must keep full records of each individual customer from whom they receive FOG, the volume received from each individual customer and the location and owner of the place of disposal. These records must be kept for three (3) years and be made available to the director of public works or his/her designee upon request. 
(4)  FSEs shall employ at least two (2) employees at all times who have successfully completed the Hampton Roads FOG regionally-approved Best Management Practices training program provided by the HRPDC to manage for the FSE the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1)  
Sec. 33-62. - Discharge limits. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged from any FSE any wastewater with FOG in concentrations or quantities that will damage the sewers or sanitary sewer system, as determined by Section 301 D. of the Hampton Roads Sanitation District's Industrial Wastewater Discharge Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1)  
Sec. 33-63. - Grease control devices. 
(a)  Requirements. All FSEs shall have one (1) or more GCDs meeting all applicable requirements of the International Plumbing Code or its successors. The GCDs shall be designed in accordance with the Hampton Roads Regional Technical Standards Sizing of Grease Control Devices. 
(1)  New establishments. Except as provided in subdivision (a)(2), FSEs shall be required to install, operate, and maintain a GCD in compliance with the requirements contained in this division. GCDs shall be installed and registered prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Existing establishments. Existing FSEs in operation as of the effective date of this division shall be allowed to operate and maintain their existing GCDs, provided such GCDs are in proper operating condition and not found to be contributing FOG to the sanitary sewer system. If its GCD is determined to be contributing FOG, an existing FSE shall comply with the requirements of this section. Existing FSEs without GCDs shall be allowed to operate without retrofitting as long as they are using the Hampton Roads FOG regionally-approved Best Management Practices and are not found to be contributing FOG to the sanitary sewer system. If the FSE without a GCD is determined to be contributing FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or to necessitate increased maintenance of the sanitary sewer system, an existing FSE shall comply with the requirements of this section. Existing FSEs that are renovated or expanded shall install a GCD meeting the requirements of this division. GCDs shall be installed, inspected and registered as a condition of final approval of such renovation or expansion. 
(3)  Retrofit. Any existing FSE may be required to install or upgrade a GCD if such FSE is contributing FOG to the sanitary sewer system, as determined by the locality or HRSD. Such devices shall be registered with the locality within thirty (30) days of installation. 
(b)  Installation of grease control devices. GCDs shall be installed by a plumber licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Every GCD shall be installed and connected so that it may be readily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted food waste and grease at any time. 
(c)  Maintenance of grease control devices. 
(1)  All GCDs shall be maintained at the owner's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating material, wastewater and settled solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the grease interceptor or private sewer line or into any portion of the city's or HRSD's sanitary sewer system is prohibited. 
(2)  Grease interceptors shall be pumped out completely when the total accumulation of FOG, including floating solids and settled solids, reaches twenty-five (25) percent of the overall liquid volume. At no time shall a GCD be cleaned less frequently than once every three (3) months unless allowed by the director of public works for good cause shown. Approval will be granted on a case-by-case basis upon submittal of a request by the FSE, documenting reasons for the proposed frequency variance. 
(3)  Grease traps and grease removal devices shall be opened, inspected and completely cleaned of food solids and FOG a minimum of once per week, unless otherwise allowed by the director of public works or his designee for good cause shown. Approval will be granted on a case-by-case basis upon submittal of a request by the FSE documenting reasons for the proposed frequency variance. In no event shall the content of food solids and FOG exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the overall liquid depth of the device. 
(4)  The director of public works or his designee may establish a more frequent cleaning schedule if the FSE is found to be contributing FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or to necessitate increased maintenance of the sanitary sewer system. 
(d)  Use of additives. The use of additives by FSEs including, but not limited to, products that contain solvents, emulsifiers, surfactants, caustics, acids, enzymes or bacteria are prohibited for use as grease management control; provided, however, that additives may be used to clean the FSE drain lines so long as the usage of such additives will not cause FOG to be discharged from the grease control device to the sanitary sewer system. The use of additives shall not be substituted for the maintenance procedures required by this section. 
(e)  Waste disposal. 
(1)  Waste removed from a grease trap shall be disposed of in the solid waste disposal system or by a grease hauler permitted by HRSD. 
(2)  Waste removed from a grease interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such wastes. No materials removed from interceptors shall be returned to any grease interceptor, private sewer line or into any portion of the city's sanitary sewer system or storm system or to any sanitary sewer system owned and operated by the HRSD. 
(3)  FSEs shall dispose of yellow grease in a renderable FOG container, where contents will not be discharged to the environment. Yellow grease shall not be poured or discharged into the city's or HRSD's sanitary sewer system or storm system. 
(f)  Inspection of grease control devices. The director of public works or his designee shall have the right of entry into any FSE, during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspections, observation, measurements, sampling, testing or records review of the sanitary sewer system and GCDs installed in such building or premise to ensure that the FSE is in compliance with this division. The owner or occupant may accompany the director or his designee. Operational changes, maintenance and repairs required by the director or his designee shall be implemented as noted in the written notice received by the FSE. 
(g)  Record keeping. 
(1)  FSEs shall retain and make available for inspection and copying records of all cleaning and maintenance for the previous three (3) years for all GCDs. FSE employee certifications shall be from the Hampton Roads FOG regionally-approved Best Management Practices training program provided by HRPDC. Cleaning and maintenance records shall include, at a minimum, the dates of cleaning/maintenance records, the names and business addresses of the company or person performing each cleaning/maintenance and the volume of waste removed in each cleaning. Such records shall be kept on site and shall be made immediately available to any employee of the department of public works upon request. 
(2)  FSEs shall retain and make available for inspection and copying records of yellow grease disposal for the previous three (3) years. Yellow grease disposal logs shall include, at a minimum, the dates of disposal, name and business address of the company or person performing the disposal and the volume of yellow grease removed in each cleaning. Such records shall be kept on site and shall be made immediately available to any employee of department of public works upon request. 
(3)  Failure to comply with any of these items will result in the FSE paying to the city a fifty dollars ($50.00) reinspection fee. 
(Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1)  
Sec. 33-64. - Grease hauler requirements. 
(a)  Any person collecting, pumping or hauling waste from GCDs located within the municipal boundaries of the city shall be certified by the Hampton Roads FOG regionally-approved training program provided by the HRPDC. 
(b)  The grease hauler shall notify the wastewater department at (757)269-2756 within twenty-four (24) hours of any sanitary sewer overflow that is required to be reported to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality happening within the City of Newport News. 
(c)  Grease haulers shall retain and make available for inspection and copying, all records related to grease interceptor pumping and waste disposal from businesses located in the city's wastewater service area. Records shall include waste manifests that, at a minimum, include time, date and volume of waste removed from the device and the time, date, volume and destination of the waste disposed. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. The city may require additional record keeping and reporting, as necessary, to ensure compliance with the terms of this division. 
(Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1)  
Sec. 33-65. - Fees. 
Fees provided for in this division are separate and distinct from all other fees chargeable by the city. Fees applicable to this division are: FSE re-inspection fees shall be in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall be due upon invoice by the city. Such fees may be added to the FSE's public service bill 
(Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1)  
Sec. 33-66. - Compliance. 
The city may require existing FSEs to retrofit any noncompliant or nonexisting GCD and appurtenances as noted in the written notice received by the FSE. 
(Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1)  
Sec. 33-67. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who negligently or intentionally commits any of the acts prohibited by this ordinance shall be liable to the city for all costs of containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the sanitary sewer system, as well as the costs of any damages or regulatory fines, that are proximately caused by such violations. 
(b)  Any person who negligently or intentionally commits any of the acts prohibited by this division shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. The court assessing such fines may, at its discretion, order such fines to be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
(c)  Enforcement will be in accordance with the associated FOG Enforcement Response Plan. The city may terminate water and/or sewer services for continuing violations of this division. 
(d)  In addition to any other remedy for the violation of this division, the city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this ordinance, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or in equity, shall be no defense to any such action. 
(e)  The remedies set forth in this section are cumulative, not exclusive; and it may not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one (1) or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Ord. No. 6670-10, § 1)  
ARTICLE V. - POSTPONEMENT OF PAYMENT OF SEWER ASSESSMENTS FOR CERTAIN PROPERTY OWNERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1, adopted May 27, 2003, amended Art. V, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 33-68—33-78. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. V pertained to postponement of payment of sewer assessments by elderly property owners. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Exemption or deferral of real estate taxes for elderly and disabled persons, § 40-46 et seq. 
 
Sec. 33-68. - Postponement authorized; lien continued. 
Pursuant to authority granted to the City of Newport News by § 15.2-2407, Virginia State Code, postponement of payment of sanitary sewer assessments is provided for qualified property owners who are not less than sixty-five (65) years of age or who are permanently and totally disabled meeting certain conditions until the sale of the property or the death of the last eligible owner, provided such property owners are eligible and granted approval for such postponement according to the terms of this article. Property owners who are sixty-five (65) years of age or older and are permanently and totally disabled may apply for postponement under either or both situations. Persons qualifying for postponement are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary financial burden in relation to their income and net worth, however nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any property owner from paying the sewer assessment, plus any applicable and accrued interest, at any time. 
(1)  Postponement periods are limited to one (1) year (from July 1 through June 30 of the following year, unless nullified for any reason during such period) for each application that is approved according to the provisions of this article, however under no circumstances shall any combination of postponements affecting any single property for any one (1) or more persons exceed a total of ten (10) years. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer assessments shall constitute a lien upon the properties to which they apply without regard to any postponement that may be approved according to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1)  
Sec. 33-69. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Affidavit. The sanitary sewer assessment postponement affidavit provided for in this article. 
Commissioner. The Commissioner of the Revenue, City of Newport News. 
Dwelling. The full-time residence of the person or persons claiming eligibility for postponement under this article. 
Elderly. Persons who are at least sixty-five (65) years of age. 
Income. Gross income from all sources, without regard to whether a tax return is actually filed. Income shall not include life insurance benefits or receipts from borrowing or other debt. 
Net worth. Financial net worth of a person's assets after allowable deductions and exclusions have been made according to the provisions of this article. 
Permanently and totally disabled. Unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity that can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life, provided that such condition is certified according to the provisions of this article. 
Postponement. The act taken by the city, as provided by this article, to authorize a delay by any person in paying the sanitary sewer assessment. 
Taxable year. The fiscal year, from July 1 until June 30 of the following year, for which a postponement is authorized under this article. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6462-08, § 1)  
Sec. 33-70. - Administration. 
The postponement of payment of sanitary sewer assessments shall be administered by the commissioner of the revenue, under the guidance of the city manager and according to the provisions of this article. The commissioner is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations in conformance with the provisions of this article, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for postponement as specified in this article. The commissioner may require the production of verifiable proof of age, certification(s) of disability, certified tax returns, and asset appraisal reports along with expense/debt documents to establish income or net worth. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6462-08, § 1)  
Sec. 33-71. - Eligibility requirements. 
Postponement of payments for sanitary sewer assessments under this article shall be granted to persons meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The head of the household occupying the property that is subject to a sanitary sewer assessment and owning title or partial title thereto shall not be less than sixty-five (65) years of age or shall be permanently and totally disabled regardless of his or her age at the time application for postponement is made. 
(2)  Subject to subsection (4) of this section, the total combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by (i) owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence and (ii) owners' relatives who live in the dwelling in the year application is made, as determined by the commissioner, shall not exceed the greater of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or the income limits annually published by the department of housing and urban development for qualifying for federal housing assistance pursuant to section 235 of the National Housing Act (12 USC § 1715z). Total combined income shall include all income and money received from all sources of the owner and the owner's relatives living in the dwelling for which the postponement is claimed; provided that the following shall be excluded, as permitted by the Virginia State Code, § 58.1-3211: 
a.  Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income of each relative who is not the spouse of an owner living in the dwelling and who does not qualify for the exemption provided by subdivision (4) of this section; and, 
b.  Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income, from whatever source, shall be excluded from the income of any owner who is permanently and totally disabled. 
(3)  Subject to subsection (4) of this section, the total combined financial net worth, including the present value of all equitable interests, as of December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year, of the owners, and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the fair market value of the dwelling and the land, not exceeding one (1) acre, upon which it is situated shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). Furnishings, including furniture, household appliances, and other items typically used in a home, are excluded from the calculation, as permitted by the Virginia State Code, § 58.1-3211.2. 
(4)  Notwithstanding subsection (2) and (3) of this section, if a person qualifies for a postponement under this article, and if the person can prove by clear and convincing evidence that the person's physical or mental health has deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home, or other facility for physical or mental care is to have a relative move in and provide care for the person, and if a relative does then move in for that purpose, then none of the income of the relative or of the relative's spouse shall be counted toward the income limit, provided the owner of the residence has not transferred assets in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) without adequate consideration within a three-year period prior to or after the relative moves into such residence. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6281-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6462-08, § 1)  
Sec. 33-72. - Sole dwelling. 
The fact that persons who are otherwise qualified for postponement pursuant to this article reside in hospitals, nursing homes, or other facilities for physical or mental care for extended periods of time shall not be construed to mean that the property for which postponement is sought does not continue to be the sole dwelling of such person during such extended periods of other residence so long as such property is not used by or leased to others for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1)  
Sec. 33-73. - Surviving spouse. 
A change in ownership of the pertinent property to a spouse which results solely from the death of the qualifying individual shall not be cause, of itself, to immediately nullify a postponement when such surviving spouse was originally party to the approved postponement. Such widow or widower shall be accorded an opportunity to make application for postponement in her or his own right within six (6) months after the death of the eligible owner or upon the next relevant application date, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1)  
Sec. 33-74. - Application. 
Annually, and not later than June 30 of each calendar year, a person claiming a postponement of payment of a sanitary sewer assessment shall file an application therefor with the commissioner. The application shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner, the names of the related persons occupying the property for which the postponement is claimed, their total gross combined income and their total combined financial net worth. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6462-08, § 1)  
Sec. 33-75. - Affidavit; certificate of disability. 
(1)  Annually, as part of the application for postponement, the person or persons claiming postponement of payments regarding a sanitary sewer assessment shall file a postponement affidavit with the commissioner. Failure to file a properly complete affidavit with the application shall disqualify any otherwise qualified applicant, except as provided in this article for a surviving spouse. 
(2)  The affidavit required by this section shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner, the names of the related persons occupying the dwelling for which postponement is claimed, their total gross combined income and their total combined financial net worth. The affidavit shall indicate whether the claimant is applying under the age criterion, the disability criterion, or both. 
(3)  If the age criterion is claimed, the applicant must provide a document or documents, as required by and acceptable to the commissioner, verifying that he or she is sixty-five (65) years old or older at the time of application. 
(4)  If the disabled criterion is claimed, whether or not the claimant is sixty-five (65) years old or older, the affidavit shall have attached thereto a certification by the social security administration, veterans administration, or the railroad retirement board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two (2) medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth of Virginia, to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled as defined in this article. The affidavit of at least one (1) of such doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of such person by such doctor. The affidavit of one (1) of such doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6462-08, § 1)  
Sec. 33-76. - Recording of postponement action. 
If, after audit and investigation, the commissioner determines that the applicant is qualified for a postponement under this article, the commissioner may approve the application and notify the applicant, and shall provide a copy of the approved application to the city treasurer, who shall cause the records of the sanitary sewer assessments to be annotated accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1  
Sec. 33-77. - Subsequent change in income, etc. 
Changes with respect to total gross combined income, total combined financial net worth, and/or ownership of the property subject to postponement or other factors occurring after a postponement is granted under this article shall be reported to the commissioner. Any such changes that become contrary to or violate any provision of this article shall nullify the postponement, and the commissioner shall notify the city treasurer of the same. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6462-08, § 1)  
Sec. 33-78. - Payment of postponed assessments. 
The entire balance of any sanitary sewer assessment that has been approved for postponement pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be paid, without interest, to the city treasurer by the vendor upon the sale of the property upon which the assessment is placed or, except as provided in this article for surviving spouses, from the estate of the decedent within one (1) year after the death of the last owner thereof who qualified for postponement under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5934-03, § 1)  
Secs. 33-79—33-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SEPTIC TANK SYSTEMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Connection of swimming pool outlet drain to septic tank prohibited, § 39-10. 
 
Sec. 33-86. - Permit for installation or repair. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or repair, have installed or repaired, allow to be installed or repaired, or to contract to install or repair a septic tank system for another person before the owner of the property on which such system is to be installed or repaired, or such owner's authorized agent, obtains a permit therefor in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state board of health. Such permit may be applied for at the department of public health. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid at the time of such application. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-120; Ord. No. 2825-81) 
Cross reference— Plumbing permit fees, § 13-29(b).  
Sec. 33-87. - Design and construction specifications; prohibited discharges. 
(a)  Septic tank systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of part III, Septic Tank Systems, of the rules and regulations of the state board of health; provided, that the use of metal septic tanks is prohibited. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be maintained on file with the codes compliance administrator and the health director. 
(b)  Septic tank systems shall be designed to receive all sanitary sewage, including laundry waste, from the building. Drainage from basement floors, footings or roofs shall not enter any such system. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 10-123, 10-124)  
Sec. 33-88. - Separate systems required for duplex dwellings. 
For two-family dwellings, a separate septic tank system shall be installed for each dwelling unit therein. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-122)  
Sec. 33-89. - Manholes not required for certain tanks. 
Where removable slab covers are provided on septic tanks, manholes are not required. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-125)  
Sec. 33-90. - Prerequisites to covering or use. 
No part of any septic tank system shall be covered or put into use until completed, inspected and approved by the department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-121)  
Sec. 33-91. - Registration, license and bond of cleaners. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of cleaning any septic tank system, until such person has registered with the codes compliance administrator, has obtained a license pursuant to Chapter 23 of this Code and has given a bond acceptable to the city, in the penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) issued by a bonding company licensed to do business in the state and payable to the city. The conditions of such bond shall be to indemnify and save harmless the city from all loss, damage, expense or cost by reason of any claim, suit or action instituted against the city or its agents or employees on account or in consequence of neglect on the part of the principal obligor in carrying out the act of cleaning a septic tank system. Such bond shall further be conditioned that any and all sludge and material removed from such system shall be disposed of in accordance with section 33-92 and that all registered septic tank system cleaners shall notify the department of public health, on or before the fifteenth day of each month, of the addresses of the systems pumped during the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-126; Ord. No. 4965-96)  
Sec. 33-91.1. - Pump out and reserve fields. 
All on-site septic tank systems or other sanitary disposal systems not requiring a Virginia Pollution Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit shall be (i) pumped out at least once every five (5) years and (ii) for new construction, a reserve sewage disposal site with a capacity of at least equal to that of the primary sewage disposal site shall be provided. The requirement for a reserve sewage disposal site contained in (ii) shall not apply to any lot or parcel created prior to the effective date of this section, if the area of such lot or parcel is not sufficient to accommodate a reserve sewage disposal site, as determined by the department of public health. Building or construction of any impervious surface shall be prohibited on the area of all sewage disposal sites or on an on-site sewage treatment system which operates under a permit issued by the department of environmental quality, until the structure is served by a public sewer. A recordkeeping system to monitor compliance with these requirements shall be initiated and maintained by the department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 4668-94)  
Sec. 33-92. - Disposition of sludge and material removed from system. 
Any person who claims any septic tank system shall dispose of the sludge and material removed from such system by depositing such sludge and material into a sewage treatment plant designated by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-127)  
Sec. 33-93. - Abandonment of septic tanks, cesspools, etc. 
All septic tanks, cesspools, manholes and open wells, whether in use or not, shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary manner. After December 31, 1996, when a building is disconnected from an existing septic tank system and connected to a sanitary sewer system, the disconnected septic tank shall be pumped empty of all sludge and other material by a licensed contractor after which a hole shall be punched in the bottom of the tank to promote stabilization, the tank shall be filled with sand or other clean fill material and the top of the tank shall be crushed. 
(Ord. No. 2528-79; Ord. No. 2538-79; Ord. No. 4965-96)  
Chapter 33.01 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertising in sight of public highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-351 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 33.01-1. - Findings, purposes and intent; interpretation. 
(a)  Signs obstruct views, distract motorists, displace alternative uses for land, and pose other problems that legitimately call for regulation. The purpose of this article is to regulate the size, color, illumination, movement, materials, location, height and condition of all signs placed on private property for exterior observation, thus ensuring the protection of property values, the character of the various neighborhoods, the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community, protection against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas, and the safety and welfare of pedestrians and wheeled traffic, while providing convenience to citizens and encouraging economic development. This article allows adequate communication through signage while encouraging aesthetic quality in the design, location, size and purpose of all signs. This article shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the First Amendment guarantee of free speech. If any provision of this article is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such finding shall not affect the validity of other provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision. 
(b)  A sign placed on land or on a building for the purpose of identification, protection or directing persons to a use conducted therein shall be deemed to be an integral but accessory and subordinate part of the principal use of land or building. Therefore, the intent of this article is to establish limitations on signs in order to ensure they are appropriate to the land, building or use to which they are appurtenant and are adequate for their intended purpose while balancing the individual and community interest identified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  These regulations are intended to promote signs that are compatible with the use of the property to which they are appurtenant, landscape and architecture of surrounding buildings, are legible and appropriate to the activity to which they pertain, are not distracting to motorists, and are constructed and maintained in a structurally sound and attractive condition. 
(d)  These regulations distinguish between portions of the city designed for primarily vehicular access and portions of the city designed for primarily pedestrian access. 
(e)  These regulations do not regulate every form and instance of visual speech that may be displayed anywhere within the jurisdictional limits of the city. Rather, they are intended to regulate those forms and instances that are most likely to meaningfully affect one (1) or more of the purposes set forth above. 
(f)  These regulations do not entirely eliminate all of the harms that may be created by the installation and display of signs. Rather, they strike an appropriate balance that preserves ample channels of communication by means of visual display while still reducing and mitigating the extent of the harms caused by signs. 
(Ord. No. 7494-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7494-18, adopted Sept. 11, 2018, repealed the former § 33.01-1, and enacted a new § 33.01-1 as set out herein. The former § 33.01-1 pertained to purposes and derived from Ord. No. 4308-92.  
Sec. 33.01-2. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33.01-3. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean: 
Animated sign. A sign utilizing any form of movement, including, without limitation, animation, revolution, vertical or horizontal motion, whether electrical, mechanical, wind-blown, or through change in lighting. 
Awning. A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of nonrigid material on a supporting framework (compare "canopy"). 
Awning sign. A sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against the surface of an awning. 
Banner sign. A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing framework. 
Building sign. A sign physically inscribed upon, affixed to or supported by a building including, without limitation, awning signs, canopy signs, nameplate signs, projecting signs and wall signs, but excluding window signs. 
Business/office directories. A nonadvertising sign, attached to a wall or mounted on a pole, that lists the building occupants. 
Canopy. A permanent, roof-like structure of rigid materials either supported by and extending from a building or freestanding, including marquees and porte cocheres (drive-under canopies). 
Canopy sign. A sign attached to or displayed on a canopy. 
Commercial/industrial uses. The uses that are set out in all zoning districts, except residential districts, as adopted in the Zoning Ordinance. Home occupations, which are an accessory use to main residential uses, are not to be considered commercial/industrial uses. 
Community facility. A non-commercial facility which provides a public service, or selected semi-public uses customarily associated with residential communities (e.g., a neighborhood association recreational facility) which offer services of an educational, recreational or religious nature. 
Developed site. An area of improved property that independently meets all requirements of the site plan ordinance. This definition includes entire shopping centers, malls, office complexes, etc., or such portions thereof, which independently meet all such requirements. This term shall be interpreted to include premises which met all requirements of the site plan ordinance at the time such premises were developed or were improved prior to the adoption of the site plan ordinance. 
Directional sign. A sign giving directional instructions, but containing no advertising copy, (e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs). 
Dwelling unit. A single residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for living, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Dwelling, detached single-family. A building containing one (1) dwelling unit, surrounded by a yard. Manufactured homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents or other forms of temporary or portable housing are not included within this definition. 
Dwelling, multiple-family. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is served by a common outside entrance. 
Dwelling, attached single-family. A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units sharing at least sixteen (16) horizontal feet of a wall, ceiling or floor area between such units with each unit having its own front and rear or side access to the outside. 
Dwelling, two-family. A building containing two (2) dwelling units, entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is or is not on a separate lot. 
Electronic display signs. A sign containing light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs, plasma display screens or other illumination devices, or a series of vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at intervals, that are used to change the messages, intensity of light or colors displayed by such sign. 
Festoons. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pennants, pinwheels, or similar devices. 
Flashing light. A device which contains an intermittent or sequential light source used primarily to attract attention. Such a device is deemed to be a sign. 
Flashing sign. A sign utilizing lighting effects simulating motion. 
Foot candle. A unit of illuminance equivalent to one (1) lumen per square foot. 
Freestanding sign. A sign supported upon the ground by poles, braces or other structures and not structurally supported by any building or canopy. 
Frontage, building. The length or width of each side of a building which side either fronts a public right-of-way or provides public access into the building. 
Frontage, store. An individual store's or business' portion of building frontage. 
Frontage, street. The length of the property line of a developed site along the public street(s) on which it borders. 
Ground sign. A freestanding sign not greater than six (6) feet in height. 
Height (of a freestanding sign). The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign structure to the top of the curb (or edge of pavement where no curb exists) at that point of the immediately adjacent street where direct access to the developed site served by the sign is provided. 
Illegal sign. A sign which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
Maintenance. For the purposes of this chapter, the cleaning, painting, repair and/or replacement of parts of a sign and/or the sign structure. 
Marquee sign. A sign attached to and made a part of a marquee structure with changeable, fixed or both types of lettering in use. 
Marquee structure. A permanent structure projecting beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building's wall and generally designed and constructed to provide protection against the weather. 
Monument sign. A sign affixed to a structure built at grade, in which the sign and the structure are an integral part of one another; not a pole sign. 
Neon sign. A sign containing exposed tubes filled with light-emitting gas. 
Nameplate. A sign giving only the name, address and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants and which is not internally illuminated. 
Nit. A unit of illuminative brightness. 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign which was lawfully erected in compliance with applicable regulations of the city and maintained prior to the effective date of this chapter and which fails to conform to current standards and restrictions of this chapter. 
Owner. The holder of title in fee simple; and/or any person, group of persons, company, association or corporation in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. For the purposes of this chapter, the owner of premises on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign unless acts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the zoning administrator, (e.g., a sign leased from a sign company). 
Point of purchase display. Advertising of a retail item displayed on the product or the product's dispenser. Vehicles used for the delivery of products shall not be deemed to be a product dispenser. 
Pole sign. A sign that is mounted on one (1) or more freestanding poles. 
Portable sign. A freestanding sign that is trailer mounted, or otherwise designed to be relocated, or is constructed on a chassis or carriage with permanent or removable wheels, and has an area not exceeding sixty (60) square feet on each of two (2) parallel sides. 
Premises. An area of single or contiguous lots under common ownership along with any building(s) or structure(s) occupying it. 
Projecting sign. A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to a wall or suspended from a pedestrian protection overhang. (See wall sign.) 
Readerboard. A sign structure on which copy, graphics, etc. can be changed manually in the field or automatically through mechanical or electrical means. 
Residential subdivision sign. A freestanding permanent sign not more than thirty-two (32) square feet in area constituting an entrance to a residential subdivision. 
Revolving sign. A sign in which the sign itself or any portion thereof moves in a revolving or similar manner. Such motion does not refer to methods of changing copy. 
Setback. The minimum required distance from a specified property line of the developed site or premises upon which a sign is located to that part of the sign structure closest to said property line. 
Sign. A structure, wall or other object, or such portion thereof, used for the display of any information or message, including, without limitation, any device, structure, fixture or placard using graphics, symbols and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product, goods, services, activity or entertainment; provided, however, that this definition shall not include works of art or temporary holiday decorations that do not convey a commercial message. (See also "flashing light.") 
Sign regulations. The provisions of this chapter 33.01. 
Temporary sign. A sign not intended for permanent use to be displayed and removed within a limited period of time and neither permanently installed in the ground nor permanently affixed to a building or structure permanently installed in the ground. 
Townhouse. See dwelling, townhouse. 
Vehicular sign. A sign attached or painted on a bus, car, truck or trailer. 
Wall sign. A sign painted on, or attached to, and erected parallel to the face of an outside wall of a building, and not projecting more than eighteen (18) inches from the wall. 
Window sign. A sign which is 
(1)  Physically affixed to a building window or 
(2)  Legible from any vehicular public right-of-way through a building window. 
For purposes of this chapter, any sign (including illuminated signs) located inside a building and otherwise legible from any vehicular public right-of-way shall be deemed not to be a "window sign" if such sign 
(1)  Is less than six (6) square feet in area; and 
(2)  Is located at least ten (10) feet away from such window(s) through which it is viewed. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 7070-14; Ord. No. 7494-18)  
Sec. 33.01-4. - Generally. 
(a)  For convenience, some regulations contained in this chapter refer to zoning district designations as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance for the city, although this chapter shall not be construed, nor is it intended to be, a part of the city's Zoning Ordinance. 
Placement and physical dimensions of signs are regulated primarily by the length of street frontage and/or length of building frontage. 
(b)  This chapter shall regulate signs which are legible from any vehicular public right-of-way. It shall not regulate official traffic or other municipal signs; signs concerning public safety or public hazards; the copy and message of permitted signs; signs not legible from a public right-of-way; window displays of merchandise; point of purchase displays; scoreboards on athletic fields; flags of any nation, government, or noncommercial organizations; gravestones; commemorative plaques; the display of street numbers; signs attached to or displayed on vehicles operated on public streets; or any display or construction not defined herein as a sign. 
(c)  Within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the right-of-way of any highway within the City of Newport News classified as a part of the interstate or federal-aid primary highways, no sign shall be erected except in conformance with Title 33.2, Chapter 12, Code of Virginia, entitled, "Outdoor Advertising in Sight of Public Highways." No city sign permit and/or building permit shall be issued until such time as written evidence of state approval is presented to the appropriate city official; and provided further, that all applicable requirements of the sign regulations are met. 
(d)  Regulations governing signs permitted in the Hilton Village Historic District are intended to be applied in the context of the special nature of the historic district and consistent with the authority granted to the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board in Article XXVI of the Zoning Ordinance. Signs permitted in the Historic District shall be as otherwise permitted by this chapter, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Signs that do not require sign permits or require prior review and approval by the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board are as follows: 
a.  Those permitted in section 33.01-06(b)(1). 
b.  Window signs for commercial/industrial uses, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Such signs shall be displayed only on the ground floor of buildings. 
2.  Such signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of each individual window opening (determined individually and not collectively); provided, however, that each such sign(s) shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
3.  Such signs shall not be illuminated in whole or in part. 
4.  Such signs shall be compatible with the Hilton Village architecture as established by the guidelines and standards adopted by the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board. 
(2)  Signs subject to prior review and issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board shall be those signs otherwise permitted by this chapter and not regulated by subsection (1) immediately above. Such signs shall be approved by the board where they are found to be compatible with the Hilton Village architecture. 
(3)  Placement of freestanding signs within the historic district shall be regulated by the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board in compliance with the current approved design guidelines for the Hilton Village Commercial area. 
(e)  Signs permitted in the C3 Regional Business District shall be permitted as outlined in this Chapter, except sign design shall be reviewed and approved as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance Sections 45-2208 and 45-2209. 
(f)  Signs permitted in the Lower Jefferson Avenue Urban Corridor Overlay District shall be permitted as outlined in this Chapter and Section 45-3161.1, Signs, of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(g)  Signs permitted in the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District shall be permitted as outlined in this Chapter and Section 45-3168, Signs, of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(h)  Signs permitted in the Oyster Point Urban Core Overlay District shall be permitted as outlined in this chapter and pursuant to the Declaration of Protective Covenants and Restrictions for the Oyster Point Urban Core Parcel/Oyster Point Town Center and City Center at Oyster Point Urban Design Guidelines adopted by the Economic Development Authority of the City of Newport News. 
(i)  Any and all owners of premises on which a sign or the structure of a former sign is erected or displayed shall have joint and several responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (See "owner".) 
(j)  In order to determine whether sign copy is legible, the director of codes compliance or his designee shall rely upon the most current edition of the book entitled Street Graphics and the Law by Ewald and Mandelker, published by the American Planning Association. 
(k)  For determining compliance with these regulations, the area of a sign is defined as the area of a rectangle, triangle, circle or combinations thereof that will enclose the sign, including background. The area of a sign shall include the spaces between all letters of a word and all words of a name, phrase or message. Supports, braces and other structural elements shall not be included unless they are designed as an integral part of the sign for the purpose of illustration, attraction or unique identification (e.g., a trademark design). Double-faced signs shall be considered a single sign, provided that the faces are parallel or are not separated by an angle greater than fifteen (15) degrees and are part of the same structure. If one face contains a larger sign area than the other, the larger face shall be used in calculating the sign area. 
(l)  Canopy sign(s) shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Canopy frontage, whether the canopy is attached to a building or freestanding, shall not be included when computing building frontage for the purpose of determining permitted building sign area for a developed site. 
(2)  All or any portion of permitted building sign area not used on a building sign may be used for signs which are displayed on signs either affixed to, supported by, painted on or otherwise made a part of a canopy face. 
(3)  Canopy signs shall not extend above or below such canopy face nor exceed in total twenty-five (25) percent of the area of each such canopy face on which such sign(s) is (are) located. 
(m)  For the purposes of construing the provisions of this chapter, the term "may" shall be interpreted as being permissive and the term "shall" shall be interpreted as being mandatory. Use of the term "may" shall specifically not be interpreted to limit or eliminate options made available to sign users in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 5125-98; Ord. No. 7494-18)  
Sec. 33.01-5. - Sign permit required; fee. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, enlarge, alter or display any sign covered by Article I until a sign permit therefor has been issued by the department of codes compliance. No permit is required for the nonstructural maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on a painted or printed sign or readerboard, provided such sign has a permit or meets the provisions of section 33.01-9. No permits shall be required for signs permitted in section 33.01-6(b)(1). Signs permitted pursuant to section 33.01-7 shall require permits as prescribed therein. 
(b)  A permit fee shall be paid for the erection, alteration or repair of any sign for which a permit is required in an amount equal to two (2) percent of the current value of all service, labor, materials and equipment used in connection therewith; provided, however, the minimum fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and a maximum fee shall be two hundred fifty-two dollars and fifty cents ($252.50). 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 5469-00, § 1)  
Sec. 33.01-6. - Permitted signs; number, sign area, height and placement. 
(a)  The provisions of this section govern signs permitted to be displayed within the city and also prescribe their number, sign area, height and placement; however, all electronic signs shall be governed by the provisions of section 33.01-6.1. 
(b)  Residential uses shall be permitted the following signage: 
(1)  Detached single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and single- family attached dwellings: Refer to section 33.01-7(5). 
(2)  Dwelling, multiple-family: 
a.  Freestanding sign(s) shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Three (3) freestanding signs are permitted for each premises used for a multiple-family dwelling facility with frontage on one (1) or more public streets subject to the limitations imposed by the other provisions of this subsection (2). 
2.  One (1) square foot of sign area shall be permitted per linear foot of public street frontage, provided the cumulative area for all freestanding signs for the facility shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. 
3.  There shall be a minimum separation between all such signs measured along the frontage of the public street of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
4.  Front yard setback: Signs shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet from the paved portion of the adjacent street, provided that in all cases signs shall be set back to at least the front property line. 
5.  The side yard and rear yard setbacks shall each be twenty-five (25) feet. 
6.  Maximum sign height shall be ten (10) feet. 
b.  If no freestanding signs are erected for a multiple-family dwelling facility, such facility may erect a building sign or signs, the total area of which shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
(c)  Community facilities in residential districts shall be permitted the following signage: 
(1)  Freestanding sign(s) shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Three (3) freestanding signs are permitted for each developed site used for a community facility with frontage on one (1) or more public streets subject to the limitations imposed by the other provisions of this subsection (1). 
b.  One (1) square foot of sign area shall be permitted per linear foot of public street frontage, provided the cumulative area for all freestanding signs for the facility shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. 
c.  There shall be a minimum separation between all such signs measured along the frontage of the public street of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
d.  Front yard setback: Signs shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet from the paved portion of the adjacent street, provided that in all cases signs shall be set back to at least the front property line. 
e.  The side yard and rear yard setbacks shall each be twenty-five (25) feet. 
f.  Maximum sign height shall be ten (10) feet. 
(2)  If no freestanding signs are erected for a community facility, such facility may erect a building sign or signs, the total area of which shall not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet. 
(d)  Community facilities in commercial/industrial districts shall be permitted the following signage: 
The regulations for commercial/industrial uses shall apply to community facilities in commercial/industrial districts. 
(e)  Commercial/industrial uses shall be permitted the following signage: 
(1)  Freestanding sign(s) shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  One (1) freestanding sign is permitted for each developed site with frontage on one (1) or more public streets. For developed sites with more than one hundred fifty (150) feet of public street frontage, one (1) additional freestanding sign, is allowed. 
b.  Fifty one hundredths (.50) square feet of sign area shall be permitted per linear foot of public street frontage, provided the area for any one (1) freestanding signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet per sign. 
c.  There shall be a minimum separation between all such signs measured along the frontage of the public street of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
d.  No freestanding sign shall exceed an area of one hundred (100) square feet. 
e.  Except as otherwise permitted in section 33.01-4.d.(3), no freestanding or ground sign shall be erected closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the side and rear boundary defined for that developed site. 
f.  Front yard setback: Signs shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet from the paved portion of the adjacent street, provided that in all cases signs shall be set back to at least the front property line. 
g.  Maximum sign height shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
h.  Reserved. 
(2)  Building sign(s) shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Building sign area on each building frontage shall be limited to one (1) square foot of sign area per linear foot of that building frontage. A building with more than one (1) building frontage shall not combine nor transfer the sign area permitted any such "front"; each such "front" shall be limited to one (1) square foot of sign area per its separate linear frontage. 
b.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. immediately above, sign area not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet shall be permitted when store or building frontage is less than thirty-two (32) linear feet. 
c.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections a. and b. immediately above, sign area permitted for freestanding signs, but not used on such signs, may be added to the permitted building sign area. 
(3)  Except as otherwise permitted in section 33.01-4.(d)(1)b, window sign(s) shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Window signs shall be displayed only on the ground floor of buildings. 
b.  Window signs, which are in whole or in part illuminated or designed to be illuminated by an electrical service, shall be counted as a part of allotted building sign area. Sign permits shall be required for such signs. 
c.  Window signs which do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of each individual window opening (determined individually and not collectively) shall be permitted. Sign permits shall not be required for this signage except for window signs described in subsection b. immediately above. 
d.  If window signage exceeds the twenty-five (25) percent limitation contained in subsection c. immediately above, whether for one (1) or more window openings, all of the window signage for a building (or for a given storefront, if applicable) shall meet all requirements applicable to display of building signs including the requirement to secure a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 4548-93; Ord. No. 4589-94; Ord. No. 5125-98; Ord. No. 6251-06; Ord. No. 6439-07; Ord. No. 7070-14; Ord. No. 7494-18)  
Sec. 33.01-6.1. - Electronic display signs. 
(a)  Electronic display signs shall conform to the provisions of this section, to all applicable general regulations as stated in Article I of this section, and to all applicable sign regulations of the district in which the electronic display sign is located; except, that such signs shall not be allowed as building signs, though electronic display marquee signs shall be permitted. 
(b)  Electronic display signs shall be permitted as free standing signs in the following manner: 
(1)  By right in conjunction with commercial and/or industrial uses, except that such nonconforming uses in residential districts may not use electronic signs; 
(2)  By conditional use permit in conjunction with multiple family facilities. 
(3)  By conditional use permit in conjunction with community facilities in a residential district. 
(c)  No electronic display sign shall be allowed in conjunction with any use or establishment unless such use or establishment is allowed to have a freestanding sign under applicable district sign regulations, and no such sign shall be allowed in any historic district. In addition, no electronic display sign visible from and within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any portion of a single or multiple family dwelling district shall be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(d)  Electronic display signs shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  No more than one (1) such sign shall be permitted on any developed site; 
(2)  The entire sign structure, including the structure surrounding the sign face, shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height; 
(3)  The area encompassing an electronic display sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face. 
(4)  All electronic displays shall remain static for a period of at least five (5) seconds, and automatic change sequences shall be accomplished by means of instantaneous re-pixelization. Flashing, scrolling, blinking or any other type of intermittent illumination of elements of the display shall be prohibited; 
(5)  Audio speakers on, or electronically connected to, such signs shall be prohibited; 
(6)  The illumination of such signs shall be no greater than ten thousand (10,000) nits or foot candles from sunrise to sunset or seven hundred (700) nits or foot candles between sunset and sunrise, and shall be equipped with automatic brightness control which will operate at all times the display is lit, and which can further dim the display's brightness when ambient conditions do not require the maximum allowed brightness. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed the maximum intensity level and the owner/operator understands and agrees to these restrictions. 
(7)  The electronic service lines providing power to such signs shall be underground. 
(Ord. No. 7070-14; Ord. No. 7348-17; Ord. No. 7494-18)  
Sec. 33.01-7. - Temporary and other permissible signs. 
The following signs shall be permitted in addition to those permitted in section 33.01-6: 
(1)  One (1) temporary sign for a site under construction limited to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet for such sites. Such sign(s) shall not be displayed prior to issuance of the building permit and/or approval of the site plan for construction on the site. Such sign(s) shall be removed at the completion of development or construction. 
(2)  Except as otherwise permitted, freestanding on-premises directional signs at site entrances each not to exceed two (2) square feet of sign area. Provided, however, that menu board informational signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet and shall not be placed in a manner that impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or that provides a visual obstruction for vehicular traffic. No directional or menu board informational sign shall exceed three (3) feet in height. 
(3)  Nameplates when attached to buildings and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(4)  One (1) temporary sign on property for sale, lease or rent not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet shall be permitted. 
(5)  One (1) temporary sign per street frontage on detached single-family, two (2) family and single-family attached property for sale, lease or rent not to exceed six (6) square feet in area shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such sign shall not be located closer than five (5) feet from the paved portion of the adjacent public street. Maximum sign height shall be three (3) feet. 
b.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection a. immediately above, if such sign is located not less than fifteen (15) feet from the paved portion of the adjacent public street, the height of said sign shall be no greater than six (6) feet. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the above, one (1) temporary sign per street frontage, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet, may be displayed on multiple-family, commercial, industrial and public property any time up to three (3) times per calendar year not to exceed a total of thirty (30) consecutive days per event. One (1) temporary sign per street frontage, not to exceed six (6) square feet, may be displayed on single-family, two family and single-family attached property any time up to three (3) times per calendar year not to exceed a total of thirty (30) consecutive days per event. 
(7)  Residential subdivision signs erected permanently at the entrance to any single-family subdivision development, two-family dwelling development or planned residential development. 
a.  Such sign shall not exceed three (3) feet in height measured from normal grade as defined in Section 33.01-3; 
b.  Such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width; 
c.  No more than two (2) signs shall be located at any one (1) entrance; and 
d.  Such signage erected in the public right-of-way shall also be erected in conformance with Chapter 38, Streets and Sidewalks, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 4322-92; Ord. No. 4497-93; Ord. No. 5754-02; Ord. No. 6367-07, § 1; 7101-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7494-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7494-18, adopted Sept. 11, 2018, amended the title of § 33.01-7 to read as herein set out. The former § 33.01-7 title pertained to other permissible signs.  
Sec. 33.01-8. - Prohibited signs. 
Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter, the following signs shall be prohibited: 
(a)  Posters or temporary signs on any public property or public right-of-way, including those attached to trees, telephone poles, public benches, streetlights, or other objects, shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Temporary signs, except as exempted in section 33.01-7.(6), including without limitation, flags, banners, pennants, festoons, and any other nonpermanent sign shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Vehicular signs on cars or trucks which are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying said sign shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Signs projecting above the top or ridge of any roof, or above the parapet if higher, shall be prohibited. 
(e)  Animated signs are prohibited. Electronic display signs operating in conformance with section 33.01-6.1 are not considered animated signs. 
(f)  Portable signs as defined in section 33.01-3. 
(g)  No off-premises sign shall be erected in the city that is visible from the main traveled way of any interstate system highway, federal-aid primary highway, or national highway system highway except as pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12 of Title 33.2 of the Code of Virginia to include the issuance of applicable permits for such signs by the Virginia Commissioner of Highways. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 7070-14; Ord. No. 7494-18)  
Sec. 33.01-9. - Existing signs. 
(a)  Any permanent sign(s) lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter and not in conformance with the number, locational, area, dimensional, structural and/or other requirements of the sign regulations existing on the effective date of this chapter may continue to be displayed, provided: 
(1)  Any damaged, destroyed or deteriorated existing sign requiring repairs valued at fifty (50) percent or more of its current replacement cost shall be removed or brought into conformance with this chapter. 
(2)  Should an existing sign be altered, changed or modified to the point of requiring a building or electrical permit (other than for repairs valued at less than fifty (50) percent of its current replacement cost), such sign shall be brought into conformance with this chapter. 
(3)  Such existing signs shall not be altered, modified or changed to increase its existing number, height or area or to decrease its setback. This shall not be construed to prohibit normal maintenance as required elsewhere in this Code. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall permit existing signs that exceed their permitted number, height or area or that do not meet setback requirements to be reduced in number, height and/or size and/or relocated without complying with the requirements of this chapter provided that: 
(1)  An application for relief shall be filed with the zoning administrator and the application shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), which sum shall be applied to the cost of processing the application. 
(2)  The new sign is at least fifty (50) percent closer to compliance with each of the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  The green area requirements of the site plan ordinance are met. 
(4)  It is determined by the zoning administrator that the proposed sign and its structure are not detrimental to traffic safety or to uses in the general area. Sign area alone shall not be a factor for consideration when determining the existence of any detrimental impact. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 7494-18)  
Sec. 33.01-10. - Abandoned conforming signs. 
For the purposes of this section, the structure of a sign or a former sign, shall be deemed to be abandoned when such sign or former sign has not been in use for a period of three hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive days and shall be removed by the owner of the sign and/or by the owner of the real property upon which the sign sits. However, that such sign may remain if it is: 
(1)  Conforming with all number, locational, area, dimensional and structural requirements of the current sign regulations; 
(2)  Properly maintained; and 
(3)  Existing on premises, the currently existing improvements of which are reasonably capable of receiving a certificate of use and occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 7494-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7494-18, adopted Sept. 11, 2018, amended the title of § 33.01-10 to read as herein set out. The former § 33.01-10 title pertained to abandoned signs.  
Sec. 33.01-11. - Abandoned nonconforming signs. 
(a)  A nonconforming sign may continue in use only so long as the then existing or a more restricted use continues and such use is not discontinued for more than two (2) years, and so long as the sign is maintained in its then structural and material condition. The use of such sign shall conform to the applicable sign ordinance requirements whenever, with respect to the sign, it is moved, enlarged, or is structurally altered. 
(b)  At the expiration of two (2) years, any abandoned nonconforming sign shall be removed by the owner of the property on which the sign is located, after being notified by the city to remove such sign. For purposes of this section, a sign shall be considered abandoned if the business for which the sign was erected has not been in operation for a period of at least two (2) years. After making a reasonable attempt to notify the property owner, the city through its own agents or employees may enter the property upon which the abandoned sign is located and remove any such sign whenever the owner has refused to do so. The cost of removal shall be chargeable to the owner of the property. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from applying to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order requiring the removal of such abandoned nonconforming sign by the owner by means of injunction or other appropriate remedy. 
(Ord. No. 7494-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7494-18, adopted Sept. 11, 2018, renumbered the former § 33.01-11 as § 33.01-12 and enacted a new § 33.01-11 as herein set out. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
Sec. 33.01-12. - Maintenance. 
All signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and surface coated when required to prevent deterioration. Missing or defective parts shall be replaced. The director of codes compliance or his duly authorized representative shall have the authority under Article IV to order the repair or removal of any sign which is defective, damaged or deteriorated. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 7494-18)  
Secs. 33.01-13—33.01-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REMOVAL OF UNSAFE SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7494-18, adopted Sept. 11, 2018, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 33.01-15—33.01-24, and renumbered Arts. III—VII, §§ 33.01-30—33.01-32, 33.01-40, 33.01-41, 33.01-45, 33.01-50, 33.01-55, and 33.01-60, as Arts. II—VII, §§ 33.01-15—33.01-17, 33.01-25, 33.01-26, 33.01-30, 33.01-34, 33.04-40, 33.01-45, as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to regulations governing use of portable signs and derived from Ord. No. 4308-92 and Ord. No. 5470-00, § 1. The historical provisions have been retained with the renumbered provisions for reference purposes. 
 
Sec. 33.01-15. - Removal of unsafe signs; service of notice. 
Whenever the director of codes compliance shall have caused to be served a written notice of an unsafe sign under the provisions adopted by this chapter, and upon refusal or neglect of the person served with such notice to comply with the requirements of the order to abate the unsafe condition, the director is hereby authorized and empowered to cause such sign that has been declared unsafe to be taken down and removed. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92)  
Sec. 33.01-16. - Same; emergency action. 
(a)  When, in the opinion of the director, there is immediate danger of collapse or failure of a sign, or any part thereof, which would endanger persons or premises; or when a violation of this chapter results in a fire hazard that creates an immediate, serious and imminent threat to life and safety, he shall order the affected area barricaded or otherwise segregated and marked off to the extent necessary to warn others of such danger. 
(b)  Upon notice of such dangerous condition, the director or his designee, shall make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner of the premises as shown on the real estate assessor's records. If the owner is unable to be contacted within forty-eight (48) hours, or if the owner is contacted and takes no action within that time after notification, the director shall cause the sign, or so much thereof as is unsafe, if it can be safely removed from the remainder, to be demolished and removed from the site. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92)  
Sec. 33.01-17. - Same; costs and expenses; lien created. 
Whenever the director shall have caused an unsafe sign, or part thereof, to be demolished and removed, such director shall determine the costs and expenses of the demolition and removal. Such costs and expenses shall include an administrative charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00), and such costs and expenses shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of the premises upon which such sign was located and shall be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. Every charge assessed under this section which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such premises. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92)  
Secs. 33.01-18—33.01-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to Art. II. 
 
Sec. 33.01-25. - General. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the department of codes compliance to enforce this ordinance by receiving applications and issuing permits where applicable, as required by this chapter, and by making the necessary inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The director of codes compliance may revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter for reasons of misrepresentation or false statement which is made knowingly or unknowingly, as to a material and relevant fact as to the plans or the premises upon which a permit was based. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92)  
Sec. 33.01-26. - Notice of order to abate violations of chapter; removal of illegal and prohibited signs. 
(a)  The director of codes compliance and any person assigned to the department of codes compliance who has been appointed as a special conservator of the peace and has been given the duty to enforce the regulations set forth in this chapter shall have the authority to serve a written notice of violation and to order the abatement of such violation. Except in emergencies, such notice and order shall provide for a minimum three-day period within which violations are to be abated. Such director of codes compliance and special conservator of the peace are each hereby granted the authority to issue a summons to the general district court to any person in the city who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such notice of violation. 
(b)  Enforcement of this chapter shall specifically include the ability to order removal of illegal or prohibited signs. For purposes of removal, the definition of sign shall include all sign embellishments and structures designed specifically to support the sign. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 4605-94)  
Secs. 33.01-27—33.01-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PENALTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to Art. II. 
 
Sec. 33.01-30. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense. Each and every day on which a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92)  
Secs. 33.01-31—33.01-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AMENDMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to Art. II. 
 
Sec. 33.01-34. - Amendment. 
No amendment to any provision of this chapter shall be enacted by the city council unless and until such amendment shall have been studied by the planning commission and the planning commission's recommendation shall have been received by the city council. The planning commission shall, however, make its recommendation within sixty (60) days after the date of referral to the commission. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing after notice published in accordance with Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92; Ord. No. 5305-99)  
Secs. 33.01-35—33.01-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SEVERABILITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to Art. II. 
 
Sec. 33.01-40. - General. 
If any part or parts, section or subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92)  
Secs. 33.01-41—33.01-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to Art. II. 
 
Sec. 33.01-45. - General. 
Any ordinances or any part of any ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 4308-92)  
Chapter 33.02 - SITE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5030-97, adopted June 10, 1997, amended the Code by redesignating former Ch. 45, Art. III as a new Ch. 33.02. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of said Ord. No. 5-30-97. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 33.02-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Site Regulations Ordinance" of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the orderly development of certain activities within the city and to ensure that such activities are developed in a manner that is harmonious with surrounding properties and consistent with the comprehensive plan of the city. If the requirements of this chapter will affect sites which are already developed, or which are partially developed, such sites should be brought into compliance as much as is possible with the provisions of this chapter without creating an undue hardship especially with regard to a potential need to demolish or relocate existing parking lots or structures. 
(b)  Intent. The intent of this chapter is to provide for a review of site development proposals in terms of: 
(1)  The compatibility of the project with its environment and with other land uses and buildings in the surrounding area. 
(2)  The quantity, quality, utility, size and type of the recreation space required because of the project. 
(3)  The impact of the project upon the existing natural environment and proposed landscaping improvements. The ecological balance among air, soil and water shall be preserved by the planting and retention of trees, landscaping and green areas since these features will cleanse stormwater runoff, stabilize soils, absorb carbon dioxide and produce oxygen and water vapor. 
(4)  The ability of the traffic circulation system for the project to provide for convenient and safe internal and external movement of vehicles and pedestrians, to include abatement measures for anticipated noise associated with increased traffic. 
(5)  The quantity, quality, utility and type of community facilities required because of the project. 
(6)  The location and adequacy of drainage facilities and other utility provisions associated with the project, whether existing or proposed. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Accessory structure. A structure subordinate to the principal building on the same lot or serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal building. 
Accessory use. Except as otherwise provided in the zoning district regulations, an "accessory use" is: 
(1)  A use which is conducted on the same lot as the principal use to which it is related, 
(2)  Clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with such principal use, and 
(3)  Operated and maintained substantially for the benefit or convenience of the occupants. 
Adequate/reasonable. Standards or specifications as promulgated and/or approved by the City of Newport News, the Commonwealth of Virginia or other regulatory agencies. 
Alteration. Change, improvement and/or replacement of part(s) in buildings or structures not affecting the supporting members of such buildings or structures. 
Building. Any structure for the housing, shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
Caliper. The diameter of a tree trunk measured six (6) inches above ground level for nursery stock and four and one-half (4½) feet above grade for existing trees on-site. 
City. The Corporation of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
City manager. The City Manager of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
Committee. The site plan review committee, an advisory body that reviews plans and provides recommendations to the director. 
Comprehensive plan. All plans or parts thereof officially adopted by the city council pursuant to Virginia law for the physical development of the City of Newport News or any territory within its jurisdiction showing the long-range proposals for the general development of the city. 
Construction area. The portion of a site on which a structure or improvements are made. 
Design Criteria Manual. A formal document of design criteria, prepared by the department of engineering and approved by the council, that is used in the review of construction plans for and the design of public facilities (other than public water supply) and in the review of plans. 
Developer. A person who owns or leases property being developed or such person's authorized agent. 
Director. The director of the department of planning for the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
Dripline. A vertical projection to the ground surface from the farthest lateral extent of a tree leaf canopy. 
Durable landscape barrier. Hedge, wall, anchored landscape timber or berm. 
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete and independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, to include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation. 
Dwelling, single-family. A detached building containing one (1) dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, two-family. A building containing two (2) dwelling units. 
Dwelling, multi-family. A building containing more than two (2) dwelling units. 
Green area. See landscape. 
Ground cover. Any of a variety of living plants that lie close to and cover the ground. 
Impervious area. A surface that is covered with material that is resistant to infiltration by water, including but not limited to most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures. 
Interior property line. Any property line that is not adjacent to a street. 
Landscape. To cover, adorn or improve an area using living plants (such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers or grass), natural features (such as rock, stone, bark chips, wood shavings or land contouring) and/or structural features (such as fences or walls). 
Landscape treatment. Rock, stone, bark chips, wood shavings or opaque durable barrier. 
Neotraditional Overlay District. Neotraditional Overlay District is defined as that overlay district established in the Zoning Ordinance of the City Code which regulates that development of property defined as "neotraditional" in section 45-201 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Parking garage. A structure for parking vehicles. 
Parking lot. An on-site area at finished grade for the parking of vehicles and any associated accessways, driveways, or loading and unloading areas; but, excluding parking garage. 
Person. An individual, firm, association, partnership, or body politic and/or corporate. 
Plant materials. All genera of the plant kingdom such as trees, shrubs, groundcover, annuals and perennials. 
Plat. Map or plan of a tract or parcel of land that is to be or has been developed; including the terms map, plan, plot, replat, replot, and any other term that can be reasonably construed to mean such. 
Property. A lot, tract, parcel of land, or several of the same assembled for the purpose of development. 
Public facility. A physical improvement, except for a commercial entrance, that by virtue of its use or ownership is under the control of the City of Newport News, the Commonwealth of Virginia or the United States of America. 
Public right-of-way. A right-of-way that, by virtue of its use or ownership, is under the control of the City of Newport News, the Commonwealth of Virginia or the United States of America. 
Site. The property being or to be developed. Said property may include a lot or group of lots or the leased portion of a lot. 
Site plan: 
(1)  Class 1 site plan. A plan that delineates the overall development of a site, showing phases if appropriate. 
(2)  Class 2 site plan. A plan that delineates the minor development activity contemplated. 
Standard specifications. A formal statement of terms, directions, provisions, requirements and specifications, prepared by the department of engineering and approved by the council, that is used in administering public construction contracts and in reviewing plans. 
Street. The word "street" includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public highways in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. 
Street, private. A street located entirely on private property. 
Street, public. A street that, through its use or ownership, is under the control of the City of Newport News, the Commonwealth of Virginia or the United States of America. 
Structure. Any construction or any production or piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together. The word "structure" specifically includes signs and billboards, but not paving such as driveways, walkways, patios, etc. 
Surface treatment. One (1) application of prime coat and aggregate cover material and one (1) application of seal coat and aggregate cover material. 
Tree. Unless the context in which the word is used indicates otherwise, a tree is any living, self-supporting woody plant that usually produces one (1) main trunk. 
Tree, height. The distance measured vertically above ground to the uppermost branch joining the main stem(s) or trunk. 
Tree, multi-stem. A tree having several stems emanating from the root mass or root crown. 
Tree, single-stem. A tree with one (1) main central stem or trunk emanating from the root mass or root crown. 
Vehicular use area. The parking area of a parking lot or parking garage, along with parking accessways, fire lanes and loading/unloading areas, but not including private streets. 
Wheel stop. A limiting device that is anchored to a paved area to prevent vehicle wheels from being advanced. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 5632-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5724-02, § 1; Ord. No. 7502-18)  
Sec. 33.02-4. - Scope. 
Plan approval shall be required for the construction of any building, the modification of any existing building, the use of land as a parking lot or the alteration of the grade of any parcel of land within the city, except when: 
(1)  The proposed activity is a residential subdivision for which a plan has been approved for the development of a parcel of land in accordance with the subdivision regulations; and 
(2)  The proposed activity involves only a single-family dwelling, a two-family dwelling, accessory buildings to such dwellings, or the parcel of land on which these dwellings and accessory buildings are situated or proposed to be situated. 
In the Neotraditional Overlay District, plan approval shall be required for the construction of any building, the modification of any existing building, the use of land as a parking lot or the alteration of the grade of any parcel of land. In addition, the provisions of Articles VII, VIII, IX, and X of Appendix B, Subdivision Regulations, shall be applicable to in residential subdivisions within the Neotraditional Overlay District, except where any such article would be in conflict with the Neotraditional Overlay District Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 5633-01)  
Sec. 33.02-5. - Administration of chapter. 
The director shall administer this chapter for the city. All plans shall be submitted to the director, who shall coordinate site plan reviews with other city departments as necessary and shall approve, conditionally approve (with plan discrepancies) or not approve (with plan discrepancies) such plans according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 7502-18)  
Sec. 33.02-6. - Site plan preparation. 
Class 1 site plans shall be prepared in accordance with the appropriate provisions of this chapter by a professional civil engineer, architect, land surveyor or landscape architect appropriately registered, licensed and certified by the Commonwealth of Virginia. However, if in the opinion of the director the proposed activity will not affect any public facility and does not conflict with any ordinance of the city, the director may set aside the requirement that the plan be prepared by a registered professional and accept instead a Class 2 site plan that is prepared in accordance with the appropriate provisions of this chapter by or on behalf of the requestor. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-7. - Runoff control permit required. 
A runoff control permit shall be obtained from the department of public utilities prior to any construction and/or the alteration of grade in areas regulated by the Reservoir Protection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-8. - Land-disturbing permit required. 
A person shall not cut down, destroy, remove, move or otherwise damage trees on vacant, developed or undeveloped property in such a manner as to change existing contours of the land until a site plan and/or erosion control plan has been approved and a land-disturbing permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 35, "Soil Removal and Other Land-Disturbing Activities" of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-9. - Off-site public facilities. 
The developer shall install or modify offsite abutting streets and other affected public facilities such as utilities, sidewalks, curb and gutter, acceleration and deceleration lanes, etc., whether existing or proposed, whether any such facilities exist along that street, as each is defined in this chapter, when required as a result of the development activity proposed and pursuant to the authority of and in accordance with the requirements of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the City Charter, or any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-10. - Dedication of on-site easements, rights-of-way. 
The developer of a parcel shall dedicate to the city adequate rights-of-way, easements or additional areas to increase existing rights-of-way or easements when it is determined that: 
(1)  There is a mutual desire on the part of the developer and the city to install public facilities on the site; 
(2)  Public facilities are presently located or partially located on the site; 
(3)  Storm drainage systems (manmade or natural) that convey stormwater from public rights-of-way or public drainage systems are located or partially located on the site; or 
(4)  On-site public facilities are required to meet the provisions of this chapter or other city ordinances, policies or the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-11. - Requirements for public facilities. 
(a)  Construction of any public facilities shall require a land development agreement between the city and the developer. The terms, conditions, and specifications contained in the land development agreement shall be limited to those items depicted or provided for in the approved plan, plat, permit application, or similar document. The land development agreement shall be secured by approved surety in the form of a corporate surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit or certified check. Also required is a certificate of insurance showing evidence of an acceptable liability insurance policy that holds the city free and harmless from any liability because of injury or death to persons growing out of the activity by the developer in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each occurrence and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) aggregate, together with twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) property damage coverage. Such insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured by separate endorsement to the policy. The agreement, surety and insurance documents shall be reviewed by the city attorney prior to acceptance by the city. An approved surety shall only apply to, or include the cost of, any facility or improvement shown or described on the approved plat or plan of the project for which the guarantee is furnished. 
(b)  Upon satisfactory completion of any public facility, a performance bond or cash of an amount equal to ten (10) percent of estimated costs for proposed public facilities shall be filed with the director until city acceptance of streets and other public facilities in accordance with the subdivision regulations but no longer than twelve (12) months. This performance bond will be used to correct any defects or failures in the constructed public facilities should the developer fail to correct such defects or failures. 
(c)  Acceptance of public facilities by the city: 
(1)  After the installation by the developer of streets and other public facilities as shown on the approved site plan as required by this chapter, the director shall issue a statement of intent to accept streets and other public facilities into the public system. Thereupon, the city shall release part of the performance bond, retaining a bond equal in value to ten (10) percent of the total public facilities. 
(2)  Up to twelve (12) months after issuance of such statement (to allow for the detection and correction of defects) if all defects have been corrected, the city manager shall report to the city council whether or not the streets and other public facilities have been installed in accordance with the terms of the agreement between the developer and the city and have survived the defect-detection period. Upon such approval, the city council shall accept by ordinance such streets and other public facilities for permanent public maintenance, operation and repair, release all remaining performance bonds, and shall upon request furnish certification of same to the developer, his attorney or agents. 
(3)  When the developer has complied with applicable provisions of this chapter, and where the necessary facilities have been substantially, but not completely, installed, the director may issue a certificate setting forth such facts to the developer or to any agency of the state or the U.S. Government. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 6837-12, § 1)  
Sec. 33.02-12. - Reservation of public lands. 
(a)  The director, subject to the approval of the city manager, shall require the reservation of land for parks, recreation areas, schools or other public facilities in accordance with the city comprehensive plan. When it shall be determined that such reservation is required for the site being developed, the developer shall incorporate into his plan design adequate area to accommodate the proposed facility. 
(b)  The city manager shall determine within a reasonable time not to exceed ninety (90) days after submission of the site plan whether the land area involved should be acquired to further the implementation of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Upon determining that property for such a public facility should be acquired, the city shall enter into an agreement with the developer to acquire through negotiated purchase, or institute condemnation proceedings, within ninety (90) days after filing of the site plan of the affected area or any area contiguous thereto, or the city's interest therein shall be automatically vacated. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-13. - City action on plans. 
(a)  Site plans shall only be reviewed after having been properly submitted. Among other things, a site plan shall be deemed properly submitted only after all of the fees appropriate to the filing have been paid. 
(b)  There is hereby established a site plan review committee, which shall be an advisory body composed of representatives of city departments involved in the review of plans along with such other participants as the director may require in the review of a specific plan. The director shall chair such committee but, when desired, may designate a qualified representative from the department of planning to conduct committee meetings. 
(c)  Although the committee may take the regulations of other regulatory or governing bodies into consideration while reviewing a site plan, the director's approval of a plan does not relieve the requestor from the responsibility for complying with the regulations of such other bodies. 
(d)  A Class 2 site plan is not eligible for conditional approval; however, the director may grant conditional approval of a Class 1 site plan if, in the director's opinion, the proposed development activity can be started while the property owner completes minor actions related to the plans review process. Such minor actions may include correcting notes on or omitted from the plan, finalizing a pending agreement for water service, or complying with administrative or engineering requirements that in the opinion of the director would not preclude the proposed development activity (such as vicinity map, street centerline indications, legal reference for the site, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 7502-18)  
Sec. 33.02-14. - Failure of city to act. 
(a)  Failure of the city to act on any properly submitted plan within twenty (20) working days shall constitute approval of the plan, unless there has been a written notice sent within or at the end of that period to the applicant notifying him that more time will be needed before approval can be given. Additional time, not to exceed forty (40) working days, will be required in cases involving storm sewer or drainage elevations, right-of-way or easement acquisition or any conflict with other city ordinances or the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Failure of the city to act on a plan that has been revised and resubmitted after initial committee consideration within fifteen (15) working days after receipt of the revised plan shall constitute approval of the plan. 
(c)  The city shall be deemed to have acted whenever written notice of either approval, conditional approval (with plan discrepancies), or no approval (with plan discrepancies) shall have been sent by the director or an authorized representative to the developer. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-15. - Appeal. 
If a site plan is conditionally approved or is not approved by the director, the city manager may hear an appeal concerning this decision. Any appeal must be in written form and filed with the city manager within twenty (20) working days after the date of the director's notification. After consulting with the director, the city manager will notify the applicant of his decision within twenty (20) working days of the date on which the appeal was filed. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-16. - Time of validity. 
(a)  A plan that has been reviewed in which plan discrepancies have been identified must be resubmitted within six (6) months from the date of the letter that notified the developer that the plan required revision. If the resubmission is not made within such period, the plan that was originally submitted shall be null and void, and any future plan that is submitted for the same property shall be treated as a separate plan submission. 
(b)  Plan validity period: 
(1)  Approved Class 1 and Class 2 site plans shall be valid for a period of five (5) years from the date of approval thereof. 
(2)  Extensions for site plan validity: 
a.  Upon application of the property owner or the developer, as applicable, filed prior to expiration of a site plan, the director or his agent may grant one (1) or more extensions of such approval for additional periods as the director or his agent may, at the time the extension is granted, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development along with the laws, ordinances and regulations that are in effect at the time of the request for an extension. 
b.  If the director or his agent denies an extension requested as provided herein and the property owner or developer, as applicable, contends that such denial was not properly based on the ordinance, law or regulation applicable thereto, the foregoing considerations for granting an extension, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal to the Circuit Court of Newport News, provided that such appeal shall be filed with the Circuit Court within sixty (60) days of the date of the written denial. 
c.  For so long as the approved site plan remains valid in accordance with the provisions of this section, no change or amendment to any city ordinance, map, resolution, rule, regulation, policy or plan adopted subsequent to the date of approval for such site plan shall adversely affect the right of the property owner or developer, as applicable, or his successor in interest, to commence and complete an approved development in accordance with the lawful terms of the approved site plan unless the change or amendment is required to comply with state law or there has been a mistake, fraud or a change in circumstances substantially affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
d.  Application for minor modifications to approved site plans made during the periods of validity of such plans established in accordance with this section shall not constitute a waiver of the provisions hereof nor shall the approval of such minor modifications extend the period of validity of such plans. 
e.  The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all approved site plans valid on or after the date this chapter is adopted by the city council, provided that nothing contained in the foregoing subsections of this section shall be construed to affect the following: 
1.  Any litigation concerning the validity of an approved site plan pending prior to the date of adoption of this chapter or any such litigation nonsuited and thereafter refiled; 
2.  The authority of the city to impose valid conditions upon approval of any special use permit, conditional use permit or special exception; 
3.  The application to individual lots on recorded plats or parcels of land subject to approved site plans, to the greatest extent possible, of the provisions of the city's Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance; or 
4.  The application to individual lots on recorded plats or parcels of land subject to approved site plans adopted to comply with the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act, Section 402(p) of the stormwater program and regulations promulgated thereunder by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-17. - Site plan filing fees. 
The following non-refundable filing fees shall be paid to the city upon the filing of Class 1 site plans: 
(1)  For the initial filing of a Class 1 site plan: three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) plus one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00) per acre of the site. 
a.  For the next filing of a Class 1 site plan that has been revised in response to initial city review, there shall be no charge, but 
b.  For subsequent filings of a Class 1 site plan that has been revised in response to initial city review: two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)/each filing. 
(2)  For the initial filing of a Class 2 site plan: two hundred twenty ($220.00). There is no per acre charge. 
a.  For the next filing of a Class 2 site plan that has been revised in response to initial city review, there shall be no charge, but 
b.  For subsequent filings of a Class 2 site plan that has been revised in response to initial city review: one hundred dollars ($100.00)/each filing. 
(3)  For the filing of any subsequent plan to phase the project or make minor alterations or revisions to the site plan originally submitted, except as provided above: one hundred dollars ($100.00)/each filing. If the director determines that the alterations and/or revisions reflect major changes in the project, the plan shall be deemed a separate site plan and shall be processed in the same manner as that provided for above for the initial filing of a Class 1 or Class 2 site plan, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-18. - Inspection required. 
Sites for which plans have been approved are subject to inspection by the city. An approved plan or a legible, full-sized copy of the approved plan must be located at the site during all phases of the construction of site improvements. No work shall begin until a city civil construction inspector has been notified and has visited the site. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 7502-18)  
Sec. 33.02-19. - Inspection fees. 
The following non-refundable inspection fees shall be paid to the city at the time of approval: 
(1)  For an approved Class 1 site plan: one hundred twenty-five ($125.00) plus a rate of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per acre of the site. 
(2)  For an approved Class 2 site plan: thirty-five ($35.00). 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-20. - Maintenance of improvements and landscaping required. 
The property owner or the developer, as applicable, shall be responsible for the perpetuation and maintenance of all site improvements, including landscaping, required by this chapter and shown on an approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-21. - Stop work order. 
The director or an authorized representative shall have the authority to stop site construction, improvements or alterations in the event of any deviation from the approved plan or on the discovery of unexpected adverse impacts of the development activity on adjacent properties or public facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-22. - Public records. 
Copies of approved plans shall be kept on file in the department of engineering at City Hall, 2400 Washington Avenue, Newport News, Virginia 23607, and shall be deemed public records. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Secs. 33.02-23—33.02-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SITE PLAN FORM AND CONTENT 
 
Sec. 33.02-30. - Form. 
(a)  Class 1 site plans are to be printed on paper with a maximum size of thirty-six (36) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, using standard mechanical drawing techniques and an engineering scale. Plans shall be clear, legible and of professional quality. Twelve (12) copies are required. 
(b)  Class 2 site plans must be clear, legible and drawn to a scale, which must be indicated on the plan, that adequately depicts the proposed activity. Twelve (12) copies are required. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-31. - Content of Class 1 site plans. 
Class 1 site plans shall contain information necessary to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. The information to be supplied includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  The name of the development and the street address, when available or assigned by the city. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of record and the developer. 
(3)  The name, address, signature, registration number and seal of the professional preparing the plan. 
(4)  The zoning of the site and adjacent properties; zoning district lines with associated transitional areas, if applicable. 
(5)  The identifying number, wording and approval date, proffers and conditions of any special exceptions, variances, conditional-use permits, conditional rezonings or planned residential development (PRD) approvals affecting the site. 
(6)  Courses, distances and rights-of-way widths of all adjacent and on-site streets and the courses and distances of all property lines. Courses and distances shall include curve data (arc lengths, radii and delta angles or degrees of curve). As a minimum, on Newport News datum, one (1) property corner shall be field-tied to the city's Horizontal Control Network (NAD1983-Virginia State Coordinate System) from a first- and second-order control monument. The city shall extend a control monument to a location within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the proposed site if one does not exist within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the site. The coordinates of the corner shall be clearly shown and uniquely denoted on the plan. Computations listing the coordinates of all other property corners and rights-of-way points for adjacent or on-site streets shall be provided. 
(7)  Date, scale and north arrow. 
(8)  All building setback lines, special highway setback lines, easements, reservations and rights-of-way that affect the development of the site. 
(9)  The total land area of the site and also of the area to be developed. 
(10)  A vicinity sketch drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet. 
(11)  A legal property description showing subdivision, lot, block and section number, where applicable. 
(12)  A lighting and landscaping plan showing proposed lighting facilities and landscaping features, such as the number, location, size and species of landscaping materials and details of irrigation systems and plant protection. A note shall be included on the plan reciting the requirements of section 33.02-51 for protecting trees to be preserved on the site. 
(13)  The location, type, detail, dimension, elevation, size, and/or number of the following existing and proposed items: 
a.  Sidewalks, curbs, gutters, etc. 
b.  Buildings and other structures. The number of floors, along with the height and the use of the building, shall be noted. Site plans for multi-family dwelling projects shall list the number of and the square footage of individual dwelling units. 
c.  Public sanitary sewage collection systems, including lateral and cleanout locations, with relevant calculations. 
d.  Private sanitary sewage collection systems, with relevant calculations. 
e.  Terraces and retaining walls, including grades or elevations. 
f.  Site entrances and parking lots, with a detail of the paved areas and locations of all wheel stops required by this chapter. 
g.  Water mains, meters and valves; standpipes; fire service lines and fire hydrants. 
h.  Natural and artificial water courses. 
i.  Areas that are proposed for recreational uses. 
j.  The limits of clearing, including the driplines of trees to be preserved on the site. 
k.  Methods of collecting, retaining, directing or disposing of stormwater, including appropriate drainage calculations. 
l.  Floodplain, including limits. 
m.  Chesapeake Bay Preservation areas. The Class 1 site plan shall show a delineation of any Resource Protection Area ("RPA") and Resource Management Area ("RMA") if the property falls within an area regulated by the CBPA. The Class 1 site plan shall also include a note that states that the RPA will be retained as an undisturbed and vegetated one hundred (100) foot buffer not subject to development under this Code section 37.1-51(b)(1), unless the development is a water dependent facility or redevelopment. If the area to be developed has a septic system, or other onsite sewage treatment facility, the Class 1 site plan shall include a note citing to this Code section 33-91.1, indicating that there is a requirement for pump-out of the system every five (5) years and a one hundred (100) percent reserve drain field sites for onsite sewage treatment systems. 
n.  Site impervious area calculations. 
o.  Areas where special regulations apply to properties on or adjacent to airports. 
p.  Indication that the site or any portion of the site is in the reservoir protection area as defined by the Reservoir Protection Ordinance. 
q.  Grades reflecting the existing and proposed topography of the site, paved areas, streets, utilities, sewers, and ground floor elevation of proposed buildings and other structures, all shown by one-foot contours and spot elevations as appropriate. Grades depicting the existing and proposed topography associated with off-site adjustments and/or facilities necessitated by implementation of the planned construction, shown by one-foot contours and spot elevations as appropriate. 
r.  Points of refuse collection (dumpster pads). 
s.  Parking lots; area and details. 
t.  Erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
u.  Human graves, burial sites or monuments or markers of human burial sites. 
v.  Areas that are designed as required transitional area and/or landscaping and green area required and provided, including the number and location of trees and shrubs required and provided on-site to meet the provisions of this chapter. 
w.  Other information as necessary to ensure compliance with city regulations, policies and procedures. 
x.  Informational notes, as necessary, to satisfy administrative processing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 5725-02; Ord. No. 7455-18)  
Sec. 33.02-32. - Same—Class 2 site plans. 
Class 2 site plans shall contain sufficient information to facilitate an engineering review so that the director can determine whether the plan may be accepted for review rather than requiring that the proposed development activity be handled through the review process for Class 1 site plans. Information required to be indicated on a Class 2 site plan includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  The name of the development and the street address, when available or assigned by the city. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of record and the developer. 
(3)  The zoning of the site and adjacent properties; zoning district lines with associated transitional areas, if applicable. 
(4)  The identifying number and approval date of any special exceptions, variances, conditional-use permits or planned residential development (PRD) approvals affecting the site. 
(5)  Date, scale and north arrow. 
(6)  A vicinity sketch showing the location of the property in relation to one (1) or more public streets. 
(7)  As appropriate for the site under consideration, the location, type, dimension, elevation, size and/or number of the following existing and proposed items: 
a.  Site entrances and parking lots, with associated pavement design/cross-section. 
b.  Areas that are designated as recreational. 
c.  The limits of clearing, including the driplines of trees to be preserved on the site. 
d.  Methods of collecting, retaining, directing or disposing of stormwater, including appropriate drainage calculations. 
e.  Chesapeake Bay Preservation areas. The Class 2 site plan shall show a delineation of any Resource Protection Area ("RPA") and/or Resource Management Area ("RMA") if the property falls within an area regulated by the CBPA. The Class 2 site plan shall also include a note that states that the RPA will be retained as an undisturbed and vegetated one hundred (100) foot buffer not subject to development under this Code section 37.1-51(b)(1), unless the development is a water dependent facility or redevelopment. If the area to be developed has a septic system, or other onsite sewage treatment facility, the Class 2 site plan shall include a note citing to this Code section 33-91.1, indicating that there is a requirement for pump-out of the system every five (5) years and a one hundred (100) percent reserve drain field sites for onsite sewage treatment systems. 
f.  Site impervious area calculations. 
g.  Areas where special regulations apply to properties on or adjacent to airports. 
h.  Areas of all required transitional area and landscaping and green area required and provided, including the number of trees and shrubs required and provided on the site to meet the provisions of this chapter. 
i.  Other information as necessary to ensure compliance with city regulations, policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 7455-18)  
Secs. 33.02-33—33.02-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SITE PLAN REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 33.02-40. - Minimum regulations and standards. 
The details of site development shown or noted on a site plan shall adhere, as a minimum, to the regulations and standards set forth in this chapter, provided, however, that the regulations and standards as set forth in sections 33.02-43, 33.02-44, 33.02-51, and 33.02-52 or any other provision of the Site Regulations which would be in conflict with the Neotraditional Overlay District shall not apply to property located in the Neotraditional Overlay District, which district shall be subject to the regulations and standards set forth in section 33.02-53. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 5633-01)  
Sec. 33.02-41. - Accessibility. 
Buildings, structures and the site on which they are situated shall be accessible to fire, police, emergency personnel, pedestrians, handicapped persons and vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-42. - Scope of compliance. 
(a)  Any on-site development, associated public right-of-way work or required off-site improvements shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, other city ordinances, the Standard Specifications, the Design Criteria Manual, the Waterworks Distribution Standards for Material and Construction and Distribution Design Standards, and any applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the United States of America. 
(b)  If development of the site requires any public facility, as defined in this chapter, a Class 1 site plan must be submitted for review. If development includes a detached building addition exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or attached building addition exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet, a Class 1 site plan must be submitted for review. When a combination of building additions exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet in a five (5) year period, a Class 1 site plan must be submitted. 
(c)  When a site plan is submitted for the leased portion of a lot, only the leased portion shall be reviewed for compliance to this chapter, not the remainder of the site. The site plan submittal must include a copy of the lease agreement. Should the land area affected by such a lease agreement change, a new site plan submittal shall be required. The new site plan shall meet all the requirements of this chapter and may require the relocation of a building or parking area if such is necessary to bring the new site area into compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-43. - Public streets and sidewalks. 
The width, grade, alignment and arrangement of public streets shall conform to the appropriate transportation plan. Proposed streets and sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the Design Criteria Manual. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-44. - Traffic circulation; site access. 
Vehicular access points to the site shall provide good traffic circulation to adjacent properties, existing streets and proposed or planned streets. Vehicular access points to the site shall be strictly limited to those that are absolutely necessary for proper function of the site, using the guidelines contained in the council-approved driveway access policy. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-45. - Public water system mandatory. 
An adequate public water system shall be available to the site, any required fire hydrants, and, if pertinent, on-site buildings and/or other improvements. 
(1)  The property owner or the developer, as applicable, shall provide adequate: 
a.  Fire hydrants in accessible locations. Fire hydrants shall be located so as to cover an area the limits of which are a maximum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet from a fire hydrant in residential districts and five hundred (500) feet from a fire hydrant in other districts. These maximum distances are to be measured along normal access routes or streets. Fire hydrant locations shall be approved by the city's fire marshal or an authorized representative, and the location(s) shall be predicated on the distance limitations described previously, public safety considerations, and the ability to properly and efficiently use firefighting apparatus. Decisions of the fire marshal may be appealed to the fire chief, whose decision shall be final. 
b.  Water mains to fire hydrants. Water supplies to fire hydrants shall be capable of providing minimum flow rates as determined by the standards set forth in the Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting, N.F.P.A., Volume 12 (1983 edition, as amended). Approval of pipeline size to provide the required water flow rates is the responsibility of the waterworks department. 
(2)  The property owner or the developer, as applicable, has the sole responsibility to make application to the waterworks department for a water pipeline extension agreement. The agreement shall have been executed and all fees shall have been paid prior to the installation of water pipelines. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 7204-15)  
Sec. 33.02-46. - Drainage facilities mandatory. 
Adequate provisions shall be made for the collection and disposition of all on- and off-site stormwater and natural water so as to protect the site, structures, persons and other properties. Storm drainage systems shall be installed in accordance with applicable city policies and the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-47. - Utilities to be underground. 
Utilities shall be placed underground in accordance with city-adopted ordinances, policies, programs and the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-48. - Noise abatement required. 
Noise abatement measures shall be included in accordance with the council-approved noise abatement policy. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-49. - Buffer zone restriction—Sanitary sewer facilities prohibited. 
Privately owned sanitary sewage pump/lift stations or pressurized sewage disposal systems shall be expressly prohibited in "buffer zones" as defined in Chapter 42, "Water Supply" of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-50. - Refuse collection points to be accessible and specifically constructed. 
When required, points of refuse collection (dumpster pads) shall be accessible and located so as to minimize the disruption of site vehicular movement. Dumpster pads shall be constructed of concrete capable of withstanding three thousand five hundred (3,500) pounds per square inch (p.s.i.) and in the following dimensions: ten (10) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long by seven (7) inches thick. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Sec. 33.02-51. - Landscaping and green area required. 
(a)  The area to be developed shall be clearly delineated on the site plan(s). Within such area and subject to the provisions of this section, a minimum percent of the site shall be designated as landscaping and green area as follows: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent of the area to be developed shall be so designated for a site containing less than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet. 
(2)  Fifteen (15) percent of the area to be developed shall be so designated for a site containing forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet and no more than ninety thousand (90,000) square feet, subject to modifications that are authorized by this section. 
(3)  Twenty (20) percent of the area to be developed shall be so designated for a site containing more than ninety thousand (90,000) square feet, subject to modifications that are authorized by this section. 
(4)  Landscaping and green area requirements of this section do not apply when improvements are made on existing impervious areas. Demolition of a majority (50.1% or more) of the primary structure on the site shall require the entirety of the site to come into compliance with the chapter. 
(b)  The following requirements shall be applicable to the landscaping and green area within the developed area: 
(1)  Existing trees. All landscaping and green areas must be identified on the plan. Within those landscaping and green areas, healthy existing trees of a minimum six (6) inch DBH (diameter at breast height), measured at least four and one-half (4.5) feet above grade, for single-stemmed, deciduous trees, and of a minimum eight (8) feet in height for multi-stemmed or evergreen trees, shall be retained, preserved and protected during construction in accordance with the following: 
a.  Preserved trees shall be identified by size and variety, clearly marked in the field, and shown on the landscaping, erosion and sedimentation, demolition, and grading plans. 
b.  In naturally vegetated areas of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more, groups of trees rather than single trees may be identified on the plan. Existing tree canopy limits shall be clearly shown on all plans. Within the tree canopy limits shown on the plan(s), an accounting shall be provided stating the minimum quantities, sizes and varieties of trees to remain in each group. 
c.  Existing healthy, single-stemmed deciduous trees meeting a minimum of two (2) inch caliper measured six (6) inches above the ground and no less than eight (8) feet in height, and multi-stemmed or evergreen trees meeting a minimum of eight (8) feet in height which are preserved and protected on-site, may be counted toward meeting the requirements identified below in subsection (2). 
d.  When the loss creates a quantity deficit or void in spacing for the minimum requirements of this section, any preserved tree(s) on-site shall be replaced if such tree(s) should die, or at such time that fifty (50) percent of the tree crown is severely trimmed, damaged, diseased or dead. If trees to be replaced are four (4) inch caliper or less for single stemmed species, or twelve (12) feet in height for evergreen or multi-stemmed species, they shall be replaced with trees the same size as those removed. If trees to be replaced are greater than four (4) inch caliper for single stemmed species, or twelve (12) feet in height for evergreen or multi-stemmed species, then replacement trees shall be a minimum of four (4) inch caliper for single stemmed species, or twelve (12) feet in height for evergreen or multi-stemmed species. 
e.  Individual trees and groups of trees that are preserved shall be enclosed by a temporary fence or barrier to be located and maintained five (5) feet outside the dripline of the tree(s) during construction. Such a fence or barrier shall be installed prior to clearing, construction or issuance of a land disturbing permit (section 33.02-8, Site Regulations, and chapter 35, Soil Removal and Other Land Disturbing Activities). The tree protection fencing shall be a minimum of forty (40) inches in height and sufficient to prevent intrusion into the protected area during construction In no case shall materials, vehicles or equipment be stored or stockpiled within the enclosure. 
f.  The property owner, the owner's agent or the developer, as applicable, shall be responsible for notifying all construction personnel of the presence and purpose of clearing limits and protective fences or barriers and for ensuring that the restrictions associated with the same are observed. 
g.  Where grade changes in excess of six (6) inches from the existing natural grade level are necessary, permanent protective structures, such as tree wells or walls, shall be properly installed by the property owner, the owner's agent or the developer, as applicable. 
h.  The director may allow trees to be removed in the case of hardship in developing the site, when the tree becomes irreversibly diseased or damaged by natural causes, or when prohibited by FAA regulations. Such tree removal(s) shall be based on the following: 
1.  The number of trees to be removed are replaced with at least an equal number of trees meeting the size and species provisions of this section. Replacement trees shall be located in such a manner so as to more effectively landscape the entire site, taking into consideration the objectives of dispersal, screening, pedestrian and vehicular movement on-site, and the size and location of proposed buildings. 
2.  Existing trees that fall within proposed parking islands of four hundred (400) square feet or less shall not be required to be preserved and protected. However, replacement trees shall be required, meeting the provisions of section 33.02-52, and provided within all interior parking islands as well as in the landscaping and green areas at the ends of parking rows. 
3.  For sites located on property of the Newport News Williamsburg International Airport, the director may waive the preservation of existing trees that may affect aviation safety. 
(2)  Trees and shrubs: 
a.  A minimum of one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs for every four hundred (400) square feet of the required landscaping and green area shall exist or be provided. No more than sixty (60) percent of the required number of trees or shrubs shall be of the same species. No less than twenty (20) percent or more than sixty (60) percent evergreen trees shall be planted on each site. No less than fifty (50) percent or more than eighty (80) percent evergreen shrubs shall be planted on each site. 
1.  Existing healthy trees may be counted toward meeting the above requirements if they are either: 
i.  Single-stemmed deciduous trees of a minimum of two (2) inch caliper measured six (6) inches above ground, and no less than twelve (12) feet in height; 
ii.  Or multi-stemmed or evergreen trees of no less than eight (8) feet in height. 
2.  Credit under this chapter for existing trees shall be given as follows: 
i.  One (1) tree credit for existing trees up to six (6) inch DBH. 
ii.  Two (2) tree credits for existing trees between six (6) inch and less than ten (10) inch DBH. 
iii.  Three (3) tree credits for existing trees between ten (10) inch and less than fifteen (15) inch DBH. 
iv.  Four (4) tree credits for existing trees fifteen (15) inch DBH or greater. 
3.  Shrubs at the time of planting shall be from nursery stock grown in a minimum three (3) gallon size container, with a minimum spread and/or height of eighteen (18) inches. Shrubs serving as a visual barrier for parking shall be a variety capable of reaching a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches. 
b.  All landscaping and green areas must be identified on the plan, and where an insufficient number of plant materials exist in the required landscaping and green area, the property owner, the owner's agent or the developer, as applicable, shall supplement the existing landscaping. Newly provided trees shall be either single-stemmed deciduous trees of a minimum two (2) inch caliper measured six (6) inches above ground and no less than eight (8) feet in height or multi-stemmed or evergreen trees of no less than eight (8) feet in height, or a combination thereof. A minimum of one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs (eighteen (18) inch) minimum height/spread) for each four hundred (400) square feet of required landscaping and green area shall exist or be provided. All plant materials, new or existing, meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in perpetuity in a healthy condition or replaced. Trees may not be severely trimmed beyond the standards of ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations as amended. Appropriate plant replacements shall be provided in the event that fifty (50) percent or more of the plant vegetation is severely trimmed, damaged, diseased or dead. 
c.  For plant materials newly provided on the approved plan(s), the replacement trees and shrubs shall account for plant growth since initial installation and be provided as follows: 
1.  For single-stemmed deciduous trees, the minimum replacement tree size shall be two (2) inch caliper for the first growing year with an increment of one-half (0.5) inch in caliper for each subsequent year of growth since installation. The maximum installation size for single-stemmed deciduous species shall be three and one-half (3.5) inches in caliper. 
2.  For multi-stemmed or evergreen trees, the minimum replacement size shall be eight (8) feet in height for the first growing year with an increment of one (1) foot in height for each subsequent year of growth since installation. The maximum installation size for multi-stemmed or evergreen replacement trees shall be twelve (12) feet in height. 
3.  For shrubs, the minimum replacement size shall be eighteen (18) inches in spread and/or height for the first growing year with an increment of three (3) inches in height and/or spread for each subsequent year of growth since installation. For large growing shrub varieties located in transitional buffer areas, shrubs shall have a minimum replacement size of forty-eight (48) inches in height for the first growing year with an increment of six (6) inches in height for each subsequent year of growth since installation. The maximum installation size for shrubs shall be thirty-six (36) inches in height and/or spread for low to medium growing shrub varieties and sixty (60) inches in height for large growing shrub varieties. 
d.  Single-street frontage properties shall have at least fifty (50) percent of the total number of required trees and shrubs placed forward of the front building line. Multiple-street frontage properties shall have at least thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) percent of the total number of required trees and shrubs forward of the front building line and at least twelve and one-half (12.5) percent of the total number of required trees and shrubs between the side of the largest building and the minor street right-of-way or where there is no right-of-way, the side property line. 
e.  The species of the trees, shrubs and ground covers which may be planted shall be left to the discretion of the property owner, the owner's agent or the developer, as applicable, with the exception that use of the following species of trees shall be prohibited: 
American Elm (Ulmus americana) 
Black Locust (Robinia pseudoacacia) 
Boxelder (Acer negundo) 
Bradford Pear (pyrus calleryana 'Bradford') 
Chinaberry (Melia azedarach) 
Common Honeylocust (Gleditsia triacanthos) 
European White Birch (Betula pendula) 
Lombardy Poplar (Populas italica) 
Mimosa (Albizzia julibrissin) 
Purple Leafed Plum (Prunus cessiforia) 
Quaking Aspen (Populus tremuloides) 
Siberian Elm (Ulmus pumila) 
Silver Maple (Acer saccharinum) 
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus glandulosa) 
Virginia (Scrub) Pine (Pinus virginiana) 
Weeping Willow (Salix babylonica) 
f.  The director may waive the requirements when prohibited by FAA regulations for trees and shrubs when their planting may affect the aviation safety for sites located on property of the Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport. Any newly proposed plant materials within aviation affected areas shall mature at a height no greater than twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  An annual listing of recommended trees will be prepared and issued by the department of planning. 
(4)  If requested in writing and the activity will not result in impervious surfaces being installed, the director may permit recreational uses within this area that are consistent with the type of development indicated on the plan. 
(5)  There shall be no storage of any kind in this area. 
(6)  Single-street frontage, undeveloped properties shall have sixty (60) percent of the required landscaping and green area either between the front of the proposed building and the right-of-way or where there is no right-of-way, the front property line. 
(7)  Multiple-street frontage, undeveloped properties shall have forty-five (45) percent of the required landscaping and green area either between the front of the proposed building and the right-of-way or where there is no right-of-way, the front property line. Fifteen (15) percent of the required landscaping and green area shall be located either between the side of the proposed building and the minor street right-of-way or where there is no right-of-way, the side property line. 
(8)  Single-street frontage, developed properties shall have sixty (60) percent of the required landscaping and green area either between the rear of the largest building and the right-of-way or where there is no right-of-way, the front property line. 
(9)  Multiple-street frontage, developed properties shall have forty-five (45) percent of the required landscaping and green area either between the rear of the largest building and the right-of-way or where there is no right-of-way, the front property line. Fifteen (15) percent of the required landscaping and green area shall be located either between the side of the largest building and the minor street right-of-way or where there is no right-of-way, the side property line. 
(10)  A landscape strip shall be located along street frontage. Landscaping in this strip shall include at least one (1) tree, either existing or installed, in every thirty (30) feet of street frontage, exclusive of driveway entrances. The remainder of the required landscaped strip shall consist of shrubs, grass, ground cover or other landscape treatment approved by the director in conjunction with the review of a site plan. The director may reduce the width of the landscaped strip by up to fifty (50) percent along minor streets when the total site is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
a.  For public streets, the landscaped strip shall be placed along the right-of-way and located between the adjacent right-of-way line and either the front building setback line or parking lot, whichever is closer to the adjacent right-of-way. The width of this strip shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet or ten (10) percent of the existing right-of-way width or the proposed right-of-way width, whichever is greater, included in the appropriate transportation plan. Landscape strips and utility easements shall be permitted to collocate for up to fifty (50) percent of the landscape strip width. On existing sites, if this landscaped strip is landscaping and green area, it cannot be disturbed. Whenever there is a street right-of-way dedicated for a site, except on the major street, the director may reduce the landscaped strip width up to fifty (50) percent. 
b.  For private streets, the landscaped strip shall be located in an area bounded by a line no closer than ten (10) feet to the edge of pavement of the private street and either the building setback line or the parking lot, whichever is closer to the private street. 
(11)  When parking lots are adjacent to public or private streets, a continuous visual barrier of shrubs is required. 
(12)  Parking lots adjacent to any residential use shall be screened in accordance with section 45-3002 of the zoning ordinance. 
(13)  Refuse collection points shall be screened from view of all adjacent properties and rights of way by privacy fencing and/or dense vegetation sufficient to form a visual barrier a minimum of six (6) feet in height, except where transitional buffer areas are required by the zoning ordinance. Such screening shall be compatible with the surrounding properties and shall permit adequate air circulation and lighting on both sides. 
(c)  For areas of naturally vegetated land which are greater than one (1) acre in area that will remain undeveloped, a note on the plan(s) stating "This area will remain undisturbed and all natural vegetation shall be preserved and protected in accordance with Section 33.02-51 of the Site Regulations." shall be acceptable. 
(d)  The following modifications shall apply to landscaping and green area requirements: 
(1)  The landscaping and green area requirements of this ordinance shall not be required in the regional business district (C3), the heavy industrial district (M2) bounded by the James River and Hampton Roads from 70th Street to the east side of Jefferson Avenue, the Oyster Point Urban Core, Lower Jefferson Avenue Corridor Overlay District or the Hilton Village Historic District, except as otherwise provided for in the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  If a class 2 site plan is involved, the director may, upon written request, reduce the percentage of landscaping and green area required, but not to less than ten (10) percent, with respect to a specific site under the following conditions: 
a.  The plan relates to modifying an existing building whose physical characteristics preclude full compliance; or, 
b.  Pre-existing physical characteristics of the site preclude full compliance (e.g., building takes up most of the property or limited setback distance is available). 
(3)  The minimum percentage of the site area that shall be designated as landscaping and green area in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) above may be reduced by the director to no less than ten (10) percent for sites requiring a minimum of fifteen (15) percent green area and no less than twelve (12) percent for sites requiring a minimum of twenty (20) percent green area. Each of the following may account for up to one-third ( 1/3 ) of the allowable reduction: 
a.  Every additional tree planted over the minimum required may reduce the required landscaping and green area by three hundred (300) square feet. 
b.  Every additional shrub planted over the minimum required may reduce the required landscaping and green area by one hundred thirty-five (135) square feet. 
c.  Where parking is screened by an earthen berm or other visual barrier planted with approved ground cover and shrubs, and the top of berm is at least two and one-half (2.5) feet above ground and within a minimum slope of 2.5:1, each linear foot of such berm may be used to reduce the required landscaping and green area by fifty (50) square feet. Berms proffered can qualify for landscaping and green area reduction under this section. 
(4)  If a master landscape plan is approved by the director, all individual sites participating in such plan shall be able to reduce the minimum required landscaping and green area percentage to ten (10) percent where the minimum following criteria are included: 
a.  A landscape strip shall be established along all streets a minimum width of ten (10) feet from the property line or edge of a private street right-of-way. 
b.  Trees shall be planted at a minimum of thirty (30) feet on center in this strip exclusive of driveway entrances. 
c.  Shrubs shall be used to form a continuous hedge on at least fifty (50) percent of the right-of-way. 
d.  Berms with ground cover can be used in lieu of shrubs as a continuous visual barrier. 
e.  No more than five (5) trees shall be planted along the same line; staggering and other methods of creating variations are encouraged. To encourage the same effect, no hedge or berm shall continue more than sixty (60) feet along the same line. 
(5)  Trees or other landscaping shall not be placed or planted so as to interfere with the proper operation or maintenance of any utility line or apparatus or obstruct vehicular sight distances as defined in the design criteria manual. 
(6)  The site plan for any subdivision or development must include a provision that, at twenty (20) years, a minimum ten (10) percent tree canopy will be provided on the site of any cemetery as defined in the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, §54.1-2310, notwithstanding any other provision of this section. In no event shall any city tree replacement or planning ordinance adopted pursuant to this section exceed the requirements of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 5509-00; Ord. No. 5726-02; Ord. No. 5967-03; Ord. No. 6953-13; Ord. No. 7042-14; Ord. No. 7491-18, § 1)  
Sec. 33.02-52. - Parking lot, traffic area, and loading and unloading area requirements. 
Parking lots, traffic areas, and loading and unloading areas shall be accessible, functional and meet all applicable requirements as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance and according to the following: 
(1)  Parking lots, traffic areas, and loading areas shall be equipped with on-site lighting systems designed to provide illumination levels as specified in the Design Criteria Manual, provided that the director, at his discretion, may require other illumination levels (such as increased illumination at employee entrances and/or exits for personal safety reasons) in regard to a specific plan undergoing review. Required lighting shall be shielded to direct illumination inward and prevent glare on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Parking lots, traffic areas, and loading and unloading areas shall be paved with bituminous concrete, equivalent paving subject to the prior approval of the director or pervious materials as necessary to comply with the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance. Surface treatment shall not be considered as equivalent paving. Such facilities and areas shall be separated from transitional area and/or landscaping and green area by concrete curbing or other landscape barriers as shown on the approved site plan. 
(3)  Parking design standards: 
a.  Parking garages and parking lots shall meet the minimum parking design standards as listed in Table 33.02-52-A, "Minimum Parking Garage and Parking Lot Design Standards." 
b.  For all uses with parking exceeding twenty (20) spaces as required by this chapter or the zoning ordinance, except residential uses not being served by a parking garage, an allowance of no more than thirty (30) percent of the spaces required by ordinance may be designed for compact cars provided such spaces meet the minimum parking design standards reflected in Table 33.02-52-B, "Minimum Design Standards for Compact Car Parking Facilities." 
c.  The design and number of accessible parking spaces to be provided for handicapped persons shall comply with current Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). 
(4)  Wheel stops (concrete or suitable substitute as approved by the director) shall be installed by the property owner or the developers, as applicable, in parking lot (areas) at all points necessary to prevent encroachment of vehicles into rights-of-way. The director may require the installation of wheel stops in addition to those proposed. 
TABLE 33.02-52-A 
MINIMUM PARKING GARAGE AND PARKING LOT DESIGN STANDARDS 
(all dimensions in feet) 
Orientation 
and Size 	Stall 
Width 
Parallel 
to Aisle 	Stall 
Depth 
to Wall (1) 	Aisle Width (2) 	Wall-to-Wall 
Module (1), (2) 	Lane 
Movement (3) 
			Garage 	Lot 	Garage 	Lot 	
45 degrees: 							
 8.5 stall 	12.0  	19.0 	13.0 	X 	51.0 	X 	One-way 
 8.75 stall 	12.35 	19.0 	12.0 	X 	50.0 	X 	One-way 
 9.0 stall 	12.7  	19.0 	11.0 	12.0 	49.0 	50.0 	One-way 
60 degrees: 							
 8.5 stall 	 9.8  	20.0 	17.0 	X 	57.0 	X 	One-way 
 8.75 stall 	10.1  	20.0 	16.0 	X 	56.0 	X 	One-way 
 9.0 stall 	10.4  	20.0 	15.0 	16.0 	55.0 	56.0 	One-way 
75 degrees: 							
 8.5 stall 	 8.8  	19.5 	23.0 	X 	62.0 	X 	One-way 
or two-way 
 8.75 stall 	 9.1  	19.5 	22.0 	X 	61.0 	X 	One-way 
or two-way 
 9.0 stall 	 9.3  	19.5 	21.0 	22.0 	60.0 	61.0 	One-way 
or two-way 
90 degrees: 							
 8.5 stall 	 8.5  	18.0 	26.0 	X 	62.0 	X 	One-way 
or two-way 
 8.75 stall 	 8.75 	18.0 	24.0 	X 	60.0 	X 	One-way 
or two-way 
 9.0 stall 	 9.0  	18.0 	22.0 	24.0 	58.0 	60.0 	One-way 
or two-way 
 
X = Not permitted 
(1) For bumper overhang of six-inch curb, deduct one-and-one-half (1½) feet from stall depth to wall, or three (3) feet from wall-to-wall module if curb on both sides, for 45- and 60-degree parking. The equivalent dimensions for 75- and 90-degree angles are two (2) and four (4) feet, respectively. 
(2) Assumes similar design type on both sides. If dissimilar, aisle width dimension shall be based upon the most restrictive stall design type adjacent to that aisle. 
(3) Two-way movement may be used for 45- and 60-degree parking if a minimum 22.0 aisle width is provided. 
TABLE 33.02-52-B 
MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS FOR COMPACT CAR PARKING FACILITIES (1) 
(all dimensions in feet) 
Orientation 
and Size 	Stall 
Width 
Parallel 
to Aisle 	Stall 
Depth 
to Wall (2) 	Aisle Width (3) 	Wall-to-Wall 
Module (2), (2) 	Lane 
Movement (3) 
			Garage 	Lot 	Garage 	Lot 	
45 degrees: 							
 8.0 	11.3 	17.0 	13.0 	14.0 	47.0 	48.0 	One-way 
60 degrees: 							
 8.0 stall 	9.2 	18.0 	14.0 	15.0 	50.0 	51.0 	One-way 
75 degrees: 							
 8.0 stall 	8.3 	17.5 	17.0 	19.0 	52.0 	54.0 	One-way 
90 degrees: 							
 8.0 stall 	8.0 	16.0 	20.0 	22.0 	52.0 	54.0 	One-way 
or two-way 
 
(1) Every compact car space shall be conspicuously surface-marked and signed at a height between six (6) and eight (8) feet above the parking surface at a rate of one (1) sign for every twelve (12) spaces. 
(2) For bumper overhang of a six-inch curb, deduct one-and-one-half (1½) feet from stall depth to wall, or three (3) feet from wall-to-wall module if there is curb on both sides, for 45- and 60-degree parking. The equivalent dimensions for 75- and 90-degree angles are two (2) and four (4) feet, respectively. 
(3) Two-way movement may be used for 45-, 60- and 75-degree parking if a minimum aisle width of 20.0 and 22.0 is used, respectively, for parking garage and parking lot. 
(5)  All parking facilities shall be indicated on the site plan and shall be marked, in accordance with the Design Criteria Manual, provided that parking facilities serving funeral homes shall not require marking other than handicap spaces. 
(6)  All sites having more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or having more than fifteen (15) parking spaces shall have landscaped islands or parking lot perimeter landscaping at each end of parking rows subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Landscaped islands shall also be provided at the ends of parking rows to separate them from accessways. These islands must be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width for the full depth of the adjacent parking stalls. 
b.  Internal landscaped islands are required when the length of a parking row exceeds fifteen (15) regular spaces or seventeen (17) compact spaces. Internal islands must be a minimum of nine (9) feet of width for the full depth of the adjacent parking stalls. The director may permit, upon written request, relocation or reduction of internal islands to better conform to the physical characteristics of the site. 
c.  These landscaped islands may be omitted where handicapped spaces are parallel to entrances or entrance canopies to buildings. 
d.  All landscaped islands shall be raised at least five (5) inches above the adjacent parking surface. 
e.  Each landscaped island shall have a minimum of one (1) tree if the landscaped island is at least sixteen (16) feet long or a minimum of two (2) trees if it is at least thirty-two (32) feet long. 
f.  All landscaped islands shall be planted with ground cover or fully mulched or both. 
g.  The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable within any parking garage or on the top deck of any multi-level parking garage. 
(7)  Provisions for stormwater runoff shall be in accordance with the Design Criteria Manual. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 5509-00; Ord. No. 7502-18)  
Sec. 33.02-53. - Minimum regulations and standards for the Neotraditional Overlay District. 
(a)  Development within the Neotraditional Overlay District shall be covered by the provisions of this section, except that where there are no specific provisions to apply to a Neotraditional Overlay District, the provisions of sections 33.02-40 through 33.02-52 contained in this chapter shall be applicable. The director shall resolve any conflict among these sections. 
(b)  The purpose of this section is to establish standards for neotraditional developments and shall be applicable to all property located in the Neotraditional Overlay District. 
(c)  The width, grade, alignment and arrangement of public streets and all proposed streets and sidewalks (collectively "streets and sidewalks") shall be constructed in accordance with the city approved master plan, with the following principles to be a part thereof: 
(1)  The design and layout of streets and sidewalks shall be individually and specifically designed to meet and accommodate the intended uses contained within the district. 
(2)  The design of the streets and sidewalks shall be sufficient to handle anticipated small and large motor vehicle traffic, particularly emergency type and garbage type vehicles servicing the intended uses. 
(3)  Fire trucks and ambulances shall have at least two (2) means of access to any location within the Neotraditional Overlay District. 
(4)  The needs of bicyclists and pedestrians shall be considered, along with the needs of motorists. 
(5)  Streets shall be inter-connected, with culs-de-sac and dead-end streets not being permitted except where some topographic or environmental condition precludes connection. 
(6)  There shall be space provided for pedestrian traffic to connect throughout the development. 
(7)  The curb return radius shall be designed to handle the expected traffic mix, including the anticipated size and frequency of vehicles, to include motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating of sixty thousand (60,000) pounds and the anticipated flow of traffic within the district. Reference may be made to the general principles contained in Traditional Neighborhood Development, Street Design Guidelines, prepared by: ITE Transportation Planning Council Committee, 5P-8, dated June, 1999; 
(8)  Pavement and sidewalk depth or cross sections shall be as established in accord with the provisions found in the Design Criteria Manual. 
(9)  Submission and city approval of a master traffic circulation plan shall be required. 
(d)  Landscaping and green areas shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the approved conceptual master plan. 
(e)  Parking lot, traffic area and loading and unloading area requirements are as follows: 
(1)  All parking lots, traffic areas, and loading and unloading areas shall be accessible, functional, and shall be designed and installed in accordance with the approved master traffic circulation plan. 
(2)  The director may grant approval of on-site lighting systems designed and installed to provide illumination levels as specified in the Design Criteria Manual, which may be of a unique or different design from other lighting equipment used in the city. The director may require such equipment to provide illumination levels as determined to provide adequate and safe lighting and may require lighting to be shielded to direct illumination inward and prevent glare on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Parking lots, traffic areas and loading and unloading areas shall be paved and maintained with bituminous concrete, equivalent paving subject to the prior approval of the director or pervious materials as necessary to comply with the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance. Surface treatment shall not be considered as equivalent paving. Such facilities and areas shall be separated from transitional area and/or landscaping and green area by concrete curbing or other landscape barriers as shown on the approved site plan. 
(4)  Minimum parking design standards for parking garages and parking lots shall be approved by the director to comply with the approved master traffic circulation plan. 
(Ord. No. 5633-01)  
Secs. 33.02-54—33.02-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 33.02-60. - Notice of order to abate violations of chapter. 
The director and any person assigned to the department of planning who has been appointed as a conservator of the peace and has been given the duty to enforce the regulations set forth in this chapter shall have the authority to serve a written notice of violation and to order the abatement of such violation. Such director and conservator of the peace are each hereby granted the authority to issue a summons to the general district court to any person in the city who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 7502-18)  
Sec. 33.02-61. - General penalty for violations of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or any lawful order issued pursuant to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this chapter or any lawful order issued hereunder shall not preclude the city attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97)  
Secs. 33.02-62—33.02-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 33.02-70. - Procedure. 
(a)  General. This chapter may be amended in whole or in part by the governing body provided that any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the city planning commission for recommendation; and further provided that no such amendment shall be adopted unless and until notice of intention to do so has been published in accordance with Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, effective on the date of adoption of this chapter or as subsequently amended. 
(b)  City planning commission. In the event the city council should submit a proposed amendment to the city planning commission for recommendation, such commission shall make its recommendation within sixty (60) days after such reference, otherwise the failure of the commission to act shall be construed as a recommendation for approval of the proposed amendment as submitted. 
(Ord. No. 4952-96; Ord. No. 5030-97; Ord. No. 5306-99)  
Chapter 33.1 - SMOKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16; health and sanitation generally, Ch. 20; smoking on buses, § 41-18. 
State Law reference— Virginia Indoor Clean Air Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2800 et seq.; ordinances regulating smoking, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2803 et seq. 
 
Sec. 33.1-1. - Legislative purpose and intent. 
Based on a substantial body of scientific evidence and on the 1986 Report of the Surgeon General entitled, "The Health Consequences of Involuntary Smoking," the City of Newport News hereby acknowledges that passively inhaled tobacco smoke poses a potential health hazard to persons exposed thereto. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the smoking of tobacco in designated public places and places of employment in a manner that recognizes the competing interests of smokers and non-smokers, and the burdens hereby imposed on persons in control of the places so regulated. The regulations contained herein are intended to be viewed as minimum standards and shall not be construed as limiting, in any manner, the authority of persons in control of public places or places of employment to implement more stringent standards applicable to the particular establishment or place of employment. 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Sec. 33.1-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Bar or lounge area shall mean an area or a room utilized primarily for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the sale of food is merely incidental to the sale of alcoholic beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar or lounge area, the term "bar" or "lounge area" shall not be construed to encompass an entire restaurant or any dining area. 
Child care facility shall mean any facility which is a "child care center" or a "family day care home" as defined by Section 63.1-195 of the Code of Virginia, and any amendments thereto. 
Health care facility shall mean any office or institution providing individual care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical, physiological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, offices of any physician, dentist, psychologist, psychiatrist, physiologist, podiatrist, optometrist, chiropractor or optician. 
Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Public meeting or hearing shall mean any meeting, assembly or hearing held in a public building or building leased for a public purpose which is open to the public for the conduct of the affairs of, and the transaction of business by, any legislative, administrative or advisory body or agency of the city, including boards, commissions, authorities, committees, and any subordinate groups thereof, receiving or expending, and supported in whole or in part by, public funds. 
Public place shall mean an enclosed area available for use by, or accessible to, the general public during the normal course of business, conducted by either private or public entities. 
Restaurant shall mean any building, structure, or area used as, maintained as, advertised as, or held out to the public to be an establishment where food is made available to be consumed on the premises. 
Retail or service establishment shall mean any establishment which offers goods or services for sale to the general public. 
Smoke or smoking shall mean the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment, or the lighting, inhaling or exhaling of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
Theater shall mean any indoor facility or auditorium, open to the public, which is primarily used for, or designed for, the purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage production, musical recital, dance, lecture or other similar performance. 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Sec. 33.1-3. - Smoking prohibited in certain public places; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any of the following public places: 
(1)  Elevators, regardless of capacity, except in an elevator located in a single-family dwelling. 
(2)  Retail, wholesale discount and service establishments and financial institutions serving the general public, including, but not limited to, department stores, grocery stores, convenience stores, drug stores, clothing stores, shoe stores, hardware stores, banks, savings and loan institutions, hair salons and barber shops. 
(3)  Indoor service lines, cashier areas, and counter service area. 
(4)  Public restrooms. 
(5)  Health care facilities, regardless of capacity. 
(6)  Rooms in which a public meeting or hearing is being held. 
(7)  Places of entertainment, including, but not limited to, theaters, concert halls, gymnasiums, auditoriums, or other enclosed arenas; except smoking by performers as part of the theatrical production. 
(8)  Art galleries, libraries, museums, and similar cultural facilities. 
(9)  Educational facilities, whether public or private, in common areas such as classrooms, offices, hallways, libraries, auditoriums, and public meeting rooms. 
(10)  Child care facilities. 
(11)  Indoor facilities used for recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, bingo halls, bowling centers, and skating rinks. 
(12)  Any part of a restaurant designated a "no smoking" area pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(13)  Buildings owned or leased by the city or the school board used for public purposes with the exception of lawfully designated smoking areas. 
(14)  Meeting houses, community centers, and similar facilities open to the public at large. 
(15)  Vehicles owned or leased by the city used regularly for public transportation including, but not limited to, transit buses and school buses. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provision set forth in paragraph (a) above, the owner or person in charge of any building, structure, space, place or area in which smoking is prohibited may designate separate rooms or areas in which smoking is permitted, provided that: 
(1)  The designated smoking area should preferably be limited to twenty-five (25) percent, but in any event shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of that portion of the building, structure, space, place or area open to the general public. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the fifty (50) percent limitation, the designated smoking area may not encompass any area outlined in subsections (a)(1), (3), (4), (6), (12) and (15). 
(3)  Designated smoking areas shall be separate to the extent reasonably practicable from those rooms or areas entered by the public in the normal course of use of the particular business or institution. 
(4)  In designated smoking areas, ventilation systems shall be required and be adequate to minimize the permeation of smoke into no smoking areas, and physical barriers shall be constructed when reasonably practicable for said purpose. 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Sec. 33.1-4. - Designated no smoking areas in restaurants. 
(a)  Any restaurant having a seating capacity of fifty (50) or more persons shall have a designated no smoking area sufficient to meet customer demand. The designated no smoking area shall be located in a separate room if one is available or, if no separate room is available, in a compact and contiguous area as far removed from areas where smoking is permitted and closest to the best source of ventilation as reasonably possible under applicable building, fire and City Code regulations. 
(b)  Any restaurant required to have a designated no smoking area shall post signs in accordance with the provisions of section 33.1-6 at each entrance to the establishment indicating that a no smoking area is available. 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Sec. 33.1-5. - Where smoking not regulated. 
This chapter is not intended to regulate smoking in the following places or under the following conditions: 
(1)  Bars and lounge areas. 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores. 
(3)  Restaurants, conference or meeting rooms, and public or private assembly rooms while these places are being used exclusively for private functions. 
(4)  Office or work areas which are not shared work areas and which are not entered by the public in the normal course of business or use of the premises. 
(5)  Private hospital rooms. 
(6)  Areas of enclosed shopping centers or malls that are external to the retail stores and are used by customers as a route of travel from one (1) store to another, and that consist primarily of walkways and seating accommodations. 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Sec. 33.1-6. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  Any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any building or area in which smoking is regulated by this chapter shall post in an appropriate place in a clear, conspicuous, and sufficient manner "Smoking Permitted" signs or "No Smoking" signs (or a sign displaying the international "No Smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representative of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). Print on such signs shall be at least one (1) inch in height and the international symbol, if used, shall have a circle of at least four (4) inches in diameter. 
(b)  Every restaurant regulated by this chapter shall post at or near its entrance a sign stating that a no smoking section is available. 
(c)  "No Smoking" signs may, but are not required to, contain language that smoking is prohibited by city ordinance and that violation of the no smoking prohibition is a Class 4 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Sec. 33.1-7. - Structural modifications. 
Persons regulated by the provisions of this chapter are encouraged to make such structural modifications to their respective buildings or structures as may be necessary to prevent or reduce the permeation of smoke from smoking areas into no smoking areas; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring any such person to make such modifications. 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Sec. 33.1-8. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the prohibitions or restrictions of this chapter to fail to comply with its provisions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area prohibited or restricted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Sec. 33.1-9. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the department of public health, or any other department or person duly designated. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the department of public health. 
(c)  The department of public health or other duly designated department shall perform an evaluation for compliance with all requirements of this chapter while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections. 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Sec. 33.1-10. - Other applicable laws and policies. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited or restricted by other applicable statutes and ordinances, or the policies of individual establishments. 
(Ord. No. 3872-89, § 1)  
Chapter 34 - HUMAN SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1, amended Ch. 34, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 34 pertained to social services. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Department of human services; department of social services—Established; composition. 
Section 63.2-324 of the Code of Virginia requires each county and city to have a local department of social services. In the City of Newport News, the local department of social services shall be known as the department of human services. That department is hereby established and shall consist of the director of human services and such officers and employees, organized in such bureaus, sections and other units, as may be provided by ordinance or orders or directives consistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-2. - Same—Director. 
(a)  The director of the department of human services shall be appointed by the city manager. The director of human services shall be the head of the local department of social services. Such director shall be a person trained and experienced in social services administration. 
(b)  The director shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, sections and other units of the department, including the making of rules and regulations, consistent with the Charter and ordinances of the city, for the conduct of its business. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-3. - Same—Responsibilities. 
The department shall be responsible for: 
(1)  The duties imposed by the laws of the state relating to public assistance and relief of the poor. 
(2)  Such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-4. - Designation and duties of local board of public welfare. 
Pursuant to Section 63.1-43 of the Code of Virginia, the director of the department is hereby designated and shall constitute the local board of public welfare. The director shall discharge the duties and functions imposed upon him by title 63.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Secs. 34-5—34-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HUMAN SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD; SOCIAL SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 34-15. - Created. 
Section 63.2-305 of the Code of Virginia requires the governing body of a city or county to appoint a board to serve in an advisory capacity to the director of social services. The advisory board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the director of human services, the head of the local department of social services. The Newport News Human Services Advisory Board is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-16. - Composition; qualifications and appointment of members. 
The board shall consist of nine (9) members who must be residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the city council. The director of the department of human services shall be an ex officio member, without any voting privileges. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-17. - Terms of members; limitation on service. 
The terms of office of the members of the board shall be four (4) years each, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired terms. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-18. - Compensation of members. 
The members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-19. - Election and term of chairman. 
The board shall elect one (1) of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one (1) year or until reelected or until his successor is elected. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-20. - Meetings; adoption of rules. 
The board shall meet at least bimonthly. In addition to regularly scheduled meetings, the board may meet at the call of the chairman or on the petition of at least one-half (½) of the members. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for the transaction of its business. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-21. - General function. 
The board shall act in an advisory capacity to the director of the department of human services with respect to the duties and functions imposed upon him by title 63.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Sec. 34-22. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To interest itself in all matters pertaining to the social welfare of the people of the city. 
(2)  To monitor the formulation and implementation of social welfare programs in the city. 
(3)  To meet with the director of the department of human services at least four (4) times a year for the purpose of making recommendations on policy matters concerning the department. 
(4)  To make an annual report to the city council, concurrent with the budget presentation of the department of human services, concerning the administration of the public welfare program. 
(5)  To submit to the city council, from time to time, other reports that the board deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 6394-07, § 1)  
Chapter 37 - SPECIAL SALES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Going out of business sales, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-223, 18.2-224. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Permit for rummage sales, food sales, bazaars and flea markets. 
(a)  No person shall conduct any sales, commonly known as "rummage sales," "food sales," "bazaars" or "flea markets," at which is offered for sale food, secondhand, used or new clothing or wearing apparel or other used or new articles of whatever character, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city manager or the manager's designated representative. The applicant shall pay the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for such permit. Any permit issued hereunder shall be limited in duration to one (1) week from the date of its issuance, except that permits for flea markets shall be limited in duration to one (1) day. No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued hereunder for the conduct of any rummage sale, bazaar or flea market within two (2) blocks of a business conducted by a regularly licensed merchant handling or dealing in secondhand or used clothing or wearing apparel or other used articles of whatever character. Food sales may be held at locations approved by the city manager or the manager's designated representative and designated in the permit. 
(c)  Except as provided herein, no person shall receive more than three (3) permits pursuant to this section in any one (1) calendar year. 
(1)  The health director or the director's designated representative may permit additional temporary food sale permits for those persons who have consistently complied with applicable regulations and who have consistently exhibited good food handling practices. 
(2)  Persons receiving permits for temporary restaurants as defined by the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Health, Commonwealth of Virginia Governing Restaurants shall comply with those regulations and any additional requirements imposed by the local health department. Failure to comply with the terms of such permits or with applicable regulations may result in immediate suspension of a permit or in the denial of future such permits. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to rummage sales, food sales, bazaars or flea markets conducted for the benefit of religious or charitable causes when held upon the premises owned or occupied by the organization conducting the same. 
(e)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 61; Ord. No. 1525, § 1; Ord. No. 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39; Ord. No. 3802-88; Ord. No. 4459-93)  
Sec. 37-2. - Permit for garage sales; signs advertising such sales. 
(a)  No person shall conduct any sales, commonly known as garage sales, backyard sales, yard sales and the like, at which is offered for sale secondhand or used clothing, merchandise or any used articles of whatever character, without first having obtained a permit therefor from the chief of police. The applicant shall pay the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for such permit. Any permit issued hereunder shall be limited in duration to ten (10) consecutive days from the beginning date selected, which shall be reflected on the permit. The permit shall not be transferable. 
(b)  The permits provided for in this section shall be issued only for sales conducted at the applicant's usual residence. Four (4) permits per year may be issued to an applicant residing at a particular address provided that no less than forty-five (45) days must elapse between the expiration of each permit and the issuance of a subsequent permit. The limitation on the allowable number of permits shall apply to applications made by the same applicant for a particular address, to applications made by a member of the applicant's immediate family (parent, child or sibling) and to applications made by any other person residing at such residence. 
(c)  No signs advertising a sale authorized by a permit issued under this section shall be placed on any property other than that of the residence of the person conducting such sale. 
(d)  Any person violating this section shall pay a fine of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 1647, § 1; Code 1961, § 25-39.2; Ord. No. 2424-78; Ord. No. 3804-88; Ord. No. 4307-92; Ord. No. 4696-95)  
Secs. 37-3—37-12. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BANKRUPT, FIRE, REMOVAL, ETC., SALES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-13. - Purpose of article. 
This article is adopted to promote and preserve public morals and welfare, economic integrity and fair dealing between sellers and buyers and to prevent fraud, deceit and dishonesty in business dealings and transactions by regulating the conduct of certain sales of goods, wares and merchandise. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1)  
Sec. 37-14. - Exemptions from article. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a common carrier of freight, nor to a receiver, assignee, trustee, executor, administrator, fiduciary, officer in bankruptcy or other officer appointed by any court of this state or of the United States of America, nor to any person acting for or pursuant to the authority of a receiver, assignee, trustee, executor, administrator, fiduciary, officer in bankruptcy or other officer appointed as aforesaid, nor shall this section apply to any sale conducted by a common carrier of freight or by persons mentioned above, nor shall this article apply to any sale conducted pursuant to the Uniform Commercial Code, titles 8.1 through 8.9, Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1; Ord. No. 3819-89)  
Sec. 37-15. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1)  
Sec. 37-16. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the word "sale" means an event or a series of events during which goods, wares and merchandise are offered for sale to the public, called "insurance sale," "bankruptcy or bankrupt sale," "mortgage sale," "removal sale," "closing-out sale," "going-out-of-business sale," "quitting-business sale," "assignee's sale," "fire sale," "smoke sale," "water sale," and sales bearing similar names or of similar import. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, the word "business" shall mean the offering, by an owner of goods or services, for sale at a particular location, regardless of the trade name used. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1)  
Sec. 37-17. - General prerequisites to advertising or conduct of sale. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person proposing to conduct or conducting a sale to induce or to attempt to induce the public to purchase or otherwise acquire title to or an interest in goods, wares and merchandise at a sale by means of any publication or advertisement in a newspaper, magazine, book, notice, handbill, poster, circular, pamphlet, letter, billboard, sign, radio or television broadcast or in any other manner unless: 
(1)  In the case of an insurance sale, the goods, wares and merchandise are or were in fact the subject of or insured or covered by an insurance contract. 
(2)  In the case of a bankruptcy sale or bankrupt sale, the goods, wares and merchandise are or were in fact the estate or assets or part of the estate or assets of a bankrupt or other insolvent. 
(3)  [Reserved.] 
(4)  In the case of a removal sale, the seller in fact and in good faith intends to move the seller's place of business to another location under the same or similar trade name within the city. 
(5)  In the case of a closing-out sale, the seller in fact and in good faith is abandoning the continued sale of the goods, wares and merchandise or is going out of business. 
(6)  In the case of a going-out-of-business sale or a quitting-business sale, the seller in fact and in good faith intends to go out of business. 
(7)  In the case of an assignee's sale, the goods, wares and merchandise are or were in fact subject to an assignment for the benefit of creditors or some other person or persons. 
(8)  In the case of a fire sale, smoke sale or water sale or any combination thereof, the goods, wares and merchandise have been subject to damage by fire, smoke or water. 
(9)  In the case of a sale bearing a similar name or name of similar import, the representations made with respect thereto or to the goods, wares and merchandise are in fact true. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, at or during a sale, goods, wars and merchandise, unless such goods, wares and merchandise, or the circumstances under which they are sold or offered for sale, are in fact and in good faith the same as those set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1; Ord. No. 3820-89) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3.  
Sec. 37-18. - Separation and marking of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to add to or commingle with the goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale, at or during a sale, any goods, wares or merchandise other than those included in the inventory provided for in section 37-27. The goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale shall, before they are sold or offered for sale, be separated from other goods, wares and merchandise being offered for sale on the premises and marked with symbols distinguishing them from such other goods, wares and merchandise. It shall be unlawful for any person to mark any other goods, wares and merchandise with the same symbol used in identifying goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale at or during any such sale. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1)  
Secs. 37-19—37-23. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 37-24. - Required. 
No person shall conduct a sale within the city, without first obtaining a permit so to do from the chief of police. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1)  
Sec. 37-25. - Prerequisite to advertising sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a sale or intending to conduct a sale to publish or advertise the sale in a newspaper, magazine, book, notice, handbill, poster, circular, pamphlet, letter, billboard, sign, radio or television broadcast or in any other manner before the permit required by this division has been issued. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3.  
Sec. 37-26. - Filing and contents of application. 
Every person proposing to conduct a sale shall apply, in writing to the chief of police, for a permit. Such application shall be on a form approved by the chief of police and the applicant shall state therein under oath: 
(1)  The kind of sale to be conducted and its purpose. 
(2)  The place at which the sale is to be conducted. 
(3)  The name of the person who is to conduct the sale. 
(4)  The source from which the goods, wares and merchandise were obtained. 
(5)  The date on which the sale is to commence and the date on which it will terminate. 
(6)  The total of the prices at which the goods, wares and merchandise will be offered for sale. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1)  
Sec. 37-27. - Inventory to accompany application. 
(a)  There shall be filed with the application for a permit under this division, as a part thereof, a complete and itemized inventory of the kind and quantities of the goods, wares and merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, with a statement fully identifying the goods, wares and merchandise and indicating how and in what manner such goods, wares and merchandise can be identified. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to "going-out-of-business" sales conducted by large regional chain stores whose inventory consists of greater than one thousand (1,000) individual and separate pieces of merchandise valued at less than ten dollars ($10.00) per piece, so long as proof of the nature of the sale and the value of the inventory are on file with the chief of police with the application for a permit under this division. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1; Ord. No. 2963-82)  
Sec. 37-28. - Fee. 
The fee for a permit required by this division shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00), which fee shall be paid at the time the permit application is filed. Such fee shall not be refunded. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1; Ord. No. 3803-88)  
Sec. 37-29. - Issuance; term and extension thereof. 
(a)  When an application for a permit has been filed under this division, the chief of police, if satisfied that the provisions of this division have been complied with in making such application, and if the required fee has been paid, shall issue the permit for conducting the sale described in the application and for the purpose stated therein, commencing on the date specified by the applicant and terminating on a day not exceeding sixty (60) days from the date of the issuance of the permit. Should the purposes of the sale be not accomplished at the termination thereof, the chief of police shall extend the time for conducting the sale for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days from the date of the extension, upon the filing of another application containing like statements under oath as contained in the original permit application and containing a statement of the total of the prices at which the remaining goods, wares and merchandise will be offered for sale and of the amount of gross sales of the goods, wares and merchandise during the period covered by the permit. The application for extension shall be accompanied by an inventory meeting the requirements of section 37-27. Such extension shall not be granted until the applicant therefor has paid a fee of ten dollars ($10.00), which shall not be refunded. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a sale after the day for the termination of the permit has expired, and before an extension of the time for the sale has been granted, or after the expiration of such extension. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1)  
Sec. 37-30. - Misrepresentation to obtain permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement or representation as to inducement to obtain a permit under this division. The chief of police shall not issue the permit when it is found that a false statement or representation has been made with respect thereto, and if the permit has been issued, the chief shall revoke it and shall not thereafter issue a permit for the sale of such goods, wares and merchandise at a sale. 
(Ord. Nos. 630; 1778; 2198; Code 1961, § 25-39.1)  
Chapter 37.1 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Watercraft, docks, piers and waterways, Ch. 11; health and sanitation generally, Ch. 20; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; water supply, Ch. 42; zoning ordinance, Ch. 45.; subdivision regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference— Erosion and sediment control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.; Local stormwater management program, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 37.1-1. - General. 
The City of Newport News has developed and continues to maintain an infrastructure of manmade and natural components of a stormwater management system to both limit and manage the volume of stormwater runoff to control flood events and, through stormwater pollution control measures, to prevent degradation of the city's waterways. Adequate revenues shall be generated to provide for balanced operating and capital improvement budgets for the stormwater management system by setting sufficient levels of the service charge. 
(Ord. No. 4482-93, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-2. - Program administration. 
The Newport News stormwater management program shall be administered by the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 4482-93, § 1)  
Secs. 37.1—3—37.1-9. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SERVICE CHARGE 
 
Sec. 37.1-10. - Findings and determinations. 
(a)  Stormwater runoff is associated with all real estate in the city, whether residential or nonresidential, and the quantity and quality of runoff is correlated to the amount of impervious surface and land-disturbing activities on each parcel. 
(b)  The elements of the stormwater management system provide benefit and service to all land within the city through direct protection of property, control of flooding of critical components of the infrastructure, and enhancement of water quality and the city's natural environment. 
(c)  The costs of monitoring, operating, maintaining and constructing the system required in the city, both to meet stormwater pollution control regulations and to address and resolve erosion and flooding needs, should therefore be allocated to the extent practicable to all property owners based on their contribution to stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 4482-93, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-11. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Developed multifamily residential property shall mean any property used primarily for residential living purposes and containing dwelling units that are stacked vertically or one (1) on top of another, and are two (2) or three (3) dwelling units in height. 
(2)  Developed other property shall mean developed property that does not serve a primary purpose of providing permanent dwelling units or contain structures that are greater than three (3) stories in height. 
(3)  Developed property shall mean a parcel of real property that has been altered in whole or in part from its natural state by the addition of improvements, such as buildings, structures, paving and/or other impervious surfaces. 
(4)  Developed residential property shall mean any property used primarily for residential living purposes that does not have a separate dwelling unit located vertically or stacked above the single dwelling unit's footprint. 
(5)  Director shall mean the director of the department of engineering or his designee. 
(6)  Dwelling unit shall mean a single housing unit, mobile home, townhouse, condominium or apartment providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
(7)  Equivalent residential unit (ERU) shall mean the equivalent impervious area of the developed residential property class per dwelling unit located within the city based on the statistical average horizontal impervious area of developed residential property in the city. One (1) ERU shall equal one thousand seven hundred seventy-seven (1,777) square feet of impervious surface area. 
(8)  ERU rate shall mean the service charge fee charged for one (1) ERU as established in this article. 
(9)  Impervious surface area shall mean a surface that is covered with material that is resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures. 
(10)  Service charge shall mean the user fee based upon the ERU rate applied to property owners of developed residential property, developed multifamily residential property and developed other property. 
(11)  Stormwater management revenues or revenues shall mean all rates, service charges, fees, assessments, rentals, other charges or other income received in connection with the management and operation of the system, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of money in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by the city council from general revenues of the city. 
(12)  Stormwater management system or system shall mean the stormwater management infrastructure and equipment of the city and all improvements thereto. Infrastructure and equipment shall include structural and natural stormwater control facilities of all types including, without limitation, retention and detention basins, conduits, pumping stations, and other plants, structures, and real and personal property used for support of the system. 
(13)  Undeveloped property shall mean any parcel that has not been altered from its natural state in such a manner that the topography or soils on the property have been disturbed or altered to the extent that the rate of surface infiltration of stormwater has been affected. 
(Ord. No. 4482-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4683-95)  
Sec. 37.1-12. - Establishment of service charge and expenditures of revenue. 
(a)  There is hereby established a service charge pursuant to the statutory authority granted to localities in Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and Section 2.01 of the Charter of the City of Newport News, Virginia, to provide for the general health, welfare and safety of the city and its residents. 
(b)  The revenues collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited in a separate ledger account. The funds deposited shall be used exclusively to provide services and facilities related to the system. Services and facilities related to the system shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Acquisition of real or personal property and interests therein necessary to construct, operate and maintain the system; 
(2)  The cost of administering such programs, to include the establishment of reasonable operating and capital reserves to meet unanticipated or emergency requirements of the system and all associated legal and collection costs; 
(3)  Engineering, planning, design, inspection, debt retirement, and construction costs for new facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities, including the enlargement and improvement of dams, levees, floodwalls, and pump stations, whether publicly or privately owned, that serve to control stormwater; 
(4)  Facility and equipment maintenance including the maintenance of dams, levees, floodwalls and pump stations whether publicly or privately owned, that serve to control stormwater; 
(5)  Monitoring of the quantity and quality of stormwater and associated control devices; and 
(6)  Other activities consistent with the state or federal regulations or permits governing stormwater management, including, but not limited to, public education, watershed planning, inspection and enforcement activities, and pollution prevention planning and implementation. 
(Ord. No. 4482-93, § 1; Ord. No. 5307-99; Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6807-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 37.1-13. - Imposition of service charge. 
(a)  For the fiscal year beginning on July 1, 1993 and ending on June 30, 1994 and for each and every fiscal year thereafter there shall be and hereby is levied an annual stormwater management service charge on all developed property in the City of Newport News. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining the service charge, all properties in the city are classified into one (1) or more of the following classes: 
(1)  Developed residential property; 
(2)  Developed multifamily residential property; 
(3)  Developed other property; or 
(4)  Undeveloped property. 
(c)  The service charge for developed residential property shall equal the ERU rate multiplied by the number of dwelling units. 
(d)  The service charge for developed multifamily residential property shall be 0.42 multiplied by the ERU rate per dwelling unit or residence. 
(e)  The service charge for developed other property shall be the ERU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious surface area square footage of the property by the square footage contained in one (1) ERU. The numbered factor will then be rounded up to the nearest tenth (0.1) of a unit. The minimum service charge for any developed other property shall equal the ERU rate. 
(f)  The service charge for vacant developed property shall be calculated in the same manner as for occupied property of the same class. 
(g)  Undeveloped property shall not be subject to the service charge. 
(h)  Stormwater management service charges levied annually under the provisions of this article shall be effective on the first day of July in the year for which the same is made. 
(Ord. No. 4482-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4683-95)  
Sec. 37.1-14. - Service charge, billing, payment, interest, fee and lien. 
(a)  The levied service charge shall be billed, due and payable in two (2) equal installments. The first installment shall be due on or before the fifth (5th) day of December and the second (2nd) installment shall be due on or before the fifth (5th) day of June. Any parcel or dwelling unit owner who has remitted payment of the service charges and believes that it is incorrect may submit an adjustment request as provided for in this article. 
(b)  The service charge is to be paid by the owner of each parcel or dwelling unit that is subject to the charge. The owner of each parcel or dwelling unit in the city, except undeveloped property, shall be mailed a statement for the stormwater service charges. The statements shall include a date by which payment shall be due. All statements shall be mailed at least thirty (30) days prior to the payment due date stated thereon. Payments received after the due date of the bill shall be subject to interest as established in this article. 
(c)  The service charge due the city from property owners for stormwater management shall be based on the ERU rate of one hundred forty-two dollars and twenty cents ($142.20) per ERU per year. When applicable, the service charge shall be prorated at eleven dollars and eighty-five cents ($11.85) per ERU per month. 
(d)  Any bill which has not been paid by the due date shall be deemed delinquent. Unpaid service charges and accrued interest shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. All charges and interest due may be recovered by action at law and/or suit in equity. For delinquent charges, interest thereon shall commence on the first day of the month following the due date and shall accrue at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum until such time as the delinquent charges and accrued interest are paid. 
(e)  When previously undeveloped properties are brought into the system or in the event of alterations or additions to developed multifamily property or developed other property that alter the amount of impervious surface and/or the number of dwelling units, a service charge will accrue as determined by the director: 
(1)  Upon substantial completion of the improvements; or 
(2)  In the event completion of the improvements is not diligently pursued, upon establishment of the impervious area or dwelling units that affect stormwater runoff. A statement will be issued and said charges will be prorated for the number months for which the parcel is subject to the service charge. 
(f)  Prior to the adoption of any ordinance pursuant to this section related to the enlargement, improvement or maintenance of privately owned dams, notice consistent with Virginia Code § 15.2-1427 shall be given and a public hearing held. 
(Ord. No. 4482-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4683-95; Ord. No. 5463-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5622-01, § 1; Ord. No. 6126-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6243-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6362-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6484-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6585-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6873-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6966-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7058-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7171-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7270-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7372-17; Ord. No. 7547-19, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7270-16, § 2, adopted May 10, 2015, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2016.  
Sec. 37.1-15. - Administration, waiver and adjustment of service charge. 
(a)  The property owner may make application in writing to the director for an adjustment to or waiver of the stormwater management service charge. The property owner shall substantiate the claim to the satisfaction of the director with plans, engineering calculations and related documents prepared by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor. The director may waive the licensed professional requirement if in his opinion the specific adjustment request does not warrant such a requirement. 
(1)  New construction service charge adjustment applications for new construction shall be made in conjunction with the relevant site plan or development plan submittal or a request for waiver of normal site plan processing requirements. Action on such applications shall be within the response times specified for such submittals and requests. Approved adjustments shall be effective from the date of approval and will be prorated from the first day of the month in which the adjustment is approved. 
(2)  Any owner of a developed parcel or dwelling unit who believes his service charge to be incorrect may make application for adjustment of the charge to the director. Response to such requests shall be made by the director within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of a complete request. The director shall develop an administrative policy regarding the refund or credit of overpaid fees. 
(b)  Any owner may appeal the director's decision to the city manager but must do so in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the director's response. The city manager shall respond to the appeal within fifteen (15) calendar days and such response shall be final. 
(c)  The director may extend such city response times as appropriate to ensure full and complete evaluation of the application. In these cases, the director shall notify the applicant of the action by certified mail. 
(d)  Full waiver of the service charge shall be provided upon approval of a request for waiver for properties owned by a federal, state and local government or a public entity, that holds a permit to discharge stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system; except that the waiver of charges shall apply only to property covered by any such permit. 
(e)  Adjustments: 
(1)  The city recognizes that on-site stormwater control facilities and increased green area reduce peak stormwater runoff rates and the transport of pollutants. The city's stormwater management system is constructed and maintained for the benefit of everyone in the city. Each land owner in the city has an obligation to pay an equitable share of the stormwater management program costs. The partial waiver of service charges established in this section account for the efforts of individuals who install, operate and maintain a stormwater management facility that achieves a permanent reduction in stormwater flow or pollutant discharges. The amount of the waiver shall be based in part on the percentage reduction in stormwater flow or pollutant discharges, or both, from pre-installation to post-installation of the facility, as set for more fully below. No waiver shall be given to any person who does not obtain a stormwater permit from the department of conservation and recreation of the department of environmental quality when such permit is required by statute or regulations. The total maximum additive service charge adjustment shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the service charge for items contained in [subsections] (e)(2) and (e)(3). 
(2)  a.  In order to be eligible and maintain eligibility for the following service charge adjustments, all of the following conditions shall be met: 
1.  Applicant required to apply for and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that an adjustment is warranted; 
2.  Service charge after adjustment shall be greater than one (1) ERU; 
3.  Control facility shall be privately constructed, owned, operated and maintained; 
4.  Control facility shall be covered under an on-going maintenance program approved by the director; 
5.  Control facility shall be a permanent, on-site facility; 
6.  Control facility shall operate at design efficiency; 
7.  Service charge adjustment eligibility shall be certified by the owner and approved by the director every two (2) years; and 
8.  Control facility shall be designed to meet or exceed the minimum criteria as established and maintained in writing by the director. 
b.  Parcels utilizing stormwater control facilities that control the peak rate of discharge from a site in accordance with the following shall receive the service charge adjustment stated for the area controlled: 
1.  Seventy-five (75) to one hundred (100) percent reduction in post development peak runoff rate—Fifteen (15) percent service charge adjustment; 
2.  Fifty (50) to seventy-four (74) percent reduction in post development peak runoff rate—Ten (10) percent service charge adjustment; and 
3.  Thirty (30) to forty-nine (49) percent reduction in post development peak runoff rate—Five (5) percent service charge adjustment. 
c.  Parcels utilizing stormwater control facilities that provide structural stormwater pollution controls which serve at least eighty (80) percent of the developed portion of the site shall receive a service charge adjustment according to the following: 
1.  Wet retention basin(s)—Fifteen (15) percent; 
2.  Extended dry detention—Ten (10) percent; and 
3.  Infiltration facilities—Five (5) percent. 
(3)  In order to be eligible for the following service charge credits, all of the indicated conditions shall be met: 
• Applicant shall apply for and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that an adjustment is warranted; and 
• Service charge after adjustment shall be greater than one (1) ERU. 
a.  Parcels providing green area (percentage shall be based upon the ratio of green area to developed area) shall receive the service charge adjustment specified as follows: 
1.  Greater than ten (10) percent and up to and including twenty (20) percent green area—Five (5) percent; and 
2.  Greater than twenty (20) percent of green area—Ten (10) percent. 
b.  Parcels that are encumbered by a recorded public easement used exclusively for drainage purposes, the undeveloped area of which exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the parcel area with no portion of the encumbrance area being used to meet green area requirements or receive any other service charge adjustment, shall receive a one (1) percent service charge adjustment, not to exceed ten (10) percent of the service charge, for each one (1) percent of the easement area that exceeds fifteen (15) percent of the parcel area. 
(4)  Service charge adjustments shall be given to parcels that meet the conditions established in [subsection] (e)(2)a. and for which a reduction in the city stormwater management program costs can be documented to the satisfaction of the director. This is a stand alone adjustment that will be considered separate and not added to any other service charge adjustment. Any such credit shall be awarded on the basis of a "betterment" test and the reduction in the city's stormwater management program costs. The total maximum credit for this adjustment shall be seventy (70) percent of the service charge. 
(5)  A one hundred (100) percent service charge adjustment shall be granted upon approval of a request for those portions of parcels that are subject to and in compliance with the requirements of an individual federal or state industrial stormwater discharge permit, drain into a privately owned, operated and maintained storm drainage systems, and discharge directly into waters of the United States. 
(6)  A fifteen (15) percent service charge adjustment off of the annual service charge shall be granted to the owners of developed, individually billed and owned residential property and dwelling units within multi-family residential property who provide evidence of participation in the household chemical collection program at least once in a billing year. 
(Ord. No. 4482-93, § 1; Ord. No. 5053-97; Ord. No. 5294-99; Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6807-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Secs. 37.1-16—37.1-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORM SEWER DISCHARGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, effective on and after July 1, 2014, repealed the former art. III, §§ 37.1-20—37.1-23, and enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4569-94; Ord. No. 4669-94; Ord. No. 5829-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6282-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1. 
 
Sec. 37.1-20. - Findings and determinations. 
(a)  Pollutants in stormwater runoff from many sources are largely uncontrolled and have an adverse impact upon the quality of receiving waters. Major sources of stormwater runoff that cause water quality impacts include construction sites, illicit connections, illegal dumping and industrial activities. 
(b)  Amendments to the Clean Water Act (CWA) in 1987 required the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to establish National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) requirements for municipal separate storm sewer systems. NPDES regulations require the City of Newport News to control through ordinance, permit, contract, order or similar means the contribution of pollutants into waters of the United States. 
(c)  This article is adopted as an integral part of the city's stormwater management program. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-21. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this article shall have the following meanings. 
Discharge means to dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, dump, leak or place by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, dumped, leaked or placed by any means. 
Groundwater means all subsurface water, including, but not limited to, that part within the zone of saturation. 
Industrial wastes means liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business, or from the development of any natural resources. 
Other waste means materials that can adversely affect waters of the United States should they be discharged into same, including, but not limited to, garbage, refuse, lime, fertilizer, ashes, offal, tar, paint, solvents, petroleum products, antifreeze and chemicals. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Sanitary sewer means a system of underground conduits that collect and deliver sanitary wastewater to a wastewater treatment or pumping facility. 
Sewage means the water-carried human wastes from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together with such industrial wastes, stormwater or other water as may be present. 
State projects means any projects undertaken by the Commonwealth of Virginia or its state agencies. This does not apply to the projects of political subdivisions of the state located within the physical boundaries of the City of Newport News. 
Storm sewer system means the system of roads, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, pipes, lakes, ponds, channels, storm drains and other facilities designed or used for collecting, storing or conveying stormwater or through which stormwater is collected, stored or conveyed. 
Surface runoff means stormwater runoff from rain, snow or other forms of precipitation. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-22. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Discharge, or cause or allow to be discharged, sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the storm sewer system, or any component thereof, or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots or other areas draining to the storm sewer system; 
(2)  Connect, or cause or allow to be connected, any sanitary sewer to the storm sewer system, including any sanitary sewer connected to the storm sewer system as of the date of adoption of this article; 
(3)  Obstruct, block, divert, or otherwise alter the design capacity or specifications of any storm sewer system or to impede the efficient functioning of any storm sewer system without approval by the city manager, or designee; or 
(4)  Place, put, throw or deposit, or allow or cause to be placed, put, thrown or deposited, any limbs, leaves, wire mesh, compost, chips, construction debris, wood, or any other substance in the storm sewer system or in an area which drains into the storm sewer system. 
(b)  The following activities shall not be considered a violation of this article. 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverting stream flows or rising groundwater; 
(4)  Public safety activities, including, but not limited to, law enforcement and fire suppression; 
(5)  Pumping of uncontaminated groundwater from potable water sources, foundation drains, irrigation waters, springs, or water from crawl spaces or footing drains; 
(6)  Lawn watering; 
(7)  Individual car washing on residential properties; 
(8)  Dechlorinated swimming pools discharges; 
(9)  Street washing; 
(10)  Any activity authorized by and in compliance with a valid Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit or Virginia Pollution Abatement (VPA) permit; 
(11)  Any activity by a governmental entity for the maintenance or repair of drinking water reservoirs or drinking water treatment or distribution systems; and 
(12)  Any activity by the city, its agents and employees, for the maintenance of lakes and other components of its stormwater management system. 
(c)  A willful or knowing violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that a continuing violation of this article is maintained or permitted to remain shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Any person who, intentionally or otherwise, commits any of the acts prohibited by this article shall be liable to the city for all costs of containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the storm sewer system. 
(e)  Any person who, intentionally or otherwise, commits any of the acts prohibited by this article shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not more than thirty two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) for each day that a violation of this article continues. Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by a locality as an approved VSMP authority shall be paid into the treasury of the city. 
(f)  The city may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of this article, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or in equity, shall be no defense to any such action. 
(g)  The city manager, or designee, shall have authority to order that any activity found to be in violation of this article be stopped or conducted in such a manner as to avoid the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the storm sewer system. 
(h)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any ordinance, any condition of a permit, any order of the city, or any provision of this article, the city may provide, in an order issued against such person, for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty that could be imposed under this section. Any civil charges collected shall be paid to the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating, preventing or mitigating environmental pollution. 
(i)  The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that one (1) or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-23. - Inspections and monitoring. 
The city manager, or designee, shall have authority to make such lawful inspections and conduct such monitoring of stormwater outfalls or other components of the storm sewer system as may be necessary or appropriate in the administration and enforcement of this article. The city may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. This authority shall apply only to those properties from which a discharge enters their municipal separate storm sewer. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Secs. 37.1-24—37.1-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER CONTROL REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, effective on and after July 1, 2014, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 37.1-30—37.1-40, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4569-94; Ord. No. 6807, § 1. 
 
Sec. 37.1-30. - Findings and determinations; purpose. 
(a)  The Stormwater Management Act, §§ 62.1-44.15:24 through 66 of the Code of Virginia, requires localities to prepare and adopt a stormwater management plan and implementing ordinance no later than July 1, 2014. 
(b)  The city council hereby finds that the waters and waterways within the City of Newport News are at times subjected to flooding and channel erosion due to urban stormwater runoff, tidal action and storms; such flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public; such flooding and channel erosion is also a danger to the natural and water resources of the city; urban stormwater runoff carries pollution which causes the deterioration of the water resources of the city; the control of stormwater pollution discharges to the maximum extent practicable, is required by state and federal statutes and regulations; and such increased flooding, erosion and pollution discharges can be controlled to some extent by the regulation of stormwater runoff from new development. Therefore, it is determined that it is in the public interest to establish requirements to regulate the discharge of stormwater runoff. 
(c)  It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to: 
(1)  Reduce flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Minimize increased stormwater runoff where such runoff will increase flood damage; 
(3)  Maintain the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, dams and other structures; 
(4)  Prevent, to the maximum extent practicable, an increase in stormwater pollution; 
(5)  Maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes; 
(6)  Reduce the impact of increased runoff upon stream erosion; and 
(7)  Preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and nonpoint source pollution to the extent authorized by state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-31. - Applicability. 
(a)  Except as provided for in section 37.1-31(b) of this article, all land development projects shall comply with the requirements of this article. All land development projects located within Chesapeake Bay Preservation or Reservoir Protection areas shall additionally comply with the provisions of those respective ordinances. In the event of a conflict, the provisions of Chapter 37.1 Article V, Chesapeake Bay Preservation and Chapter 42, Article V, Reservoir Protection of the City Code shall take precedence for land development projects in their respective areas. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(2)  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the Board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of § 10.1-1163; 
(3)  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures. 
(4)  Land development projects that disturb less than one (1) acre of land area and discharge stormwater to an adequate system, except when those projects are located within Chesapeake Bay Preservation or Reservoir Protection areas, or activities that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater of disturbance. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  State projects as defined in this Chapter. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Activities under a State or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use. 
(9)  Discharges to a sanitary sewer system. 
(10)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection. 
(11)  Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the VSMP authority shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land-disturbing activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of section 37.1-31 through section 37.1-37 is required within thirty (30) days of commencing the land-disturbing activity. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Land development projects subject to the grandfathering provisions of 9 VAC 25-870-48 that are located within the watershed of and discharge stormwater to a City-approved regional stormwater management facility for water quality control or have the City-determined Chesapeake Bay watershed average baseline imperviousness of thirty-six (36) percent or less of impervious cover shall be exempt from complying with section 37.1-35(b) but shall comply with section 37.1-35(c). 
(e)  Approvals issued pursuant to this article do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance. 
(f)  If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-32. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Adequate stormwater management system or adequate system means the stormwater management infrastructure and equipment of the city and all improvements thereto that will convey the designated frequency storm event without overtopping the channel banks, causing erosive damage or flooding. 
Administrator means the VSMP authority including the staff person or department responsible for administering the VSMP on behalf of the city. 
Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan means a contract between the VSMP authority and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the VSMP authority in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this article. 
Board means the Virginia State Water Control Board. 
Channel means a natural stream or manmade waterway. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing activity means a land-disturbing activity including clearing, grading, or excavation that results in a land disturbance equal or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet and less than one acre in all areas of jurisdictions designated as subject to the regulations adopted pursuant to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:67, et seq. and the regulations incorporated at 9 VAC 25-830 of the Virginia Administrative Code. 
Clean Water Act or CWA means the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C §1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
Common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules. 
Control measure means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
Department means the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
Flooding means a volume of water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of the stream, water body or conveyance system and that overflows onto adjacent lands, causing or threatening damage. 
Floodplain means those areas adjoining a river, stream, channel, estuary, bay or lake which are likely to be covered by flooding. 
General Permit means the state permit titled GENERAL PERMIT FOR DISCHARGES OF STORMWATER FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES found in Part XIV (9 VAC 25-880 et seq.) of the Regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Impervious surface means a hard surface area which either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil mantle as under natural conditions prior to development, and/or a hard surface area which causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from the flow present under natural conditions prior to development. Impervious areas include, but are not limited to, roof tops, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, packed earthen materials, and oiled, macadam, or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater. Natural waterbodies and open, uncovered retention/detention facilities shall not be considered as impervious surfaces. 
Infiltration facility means a stormwater management facility which temporarily stores stormwater and discharges it via infiltration through the surrounding soil. 
Inspection means an on-site review of the project's compliance with the approved plan, the local stormwater management program, a state-issued stormwater construction general or individual permit as applicable, and any applicable design criteria. 
Land development or land development project means a manmade change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics. 
Land disturbance or land disturbing means a manmade change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation, except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in § 62.1-44.15:34 of the Code of Virginia. 
Layout means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
Minor modification means an amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
Nonpoint source pollution means pollution such as sediment, nitrogen, phosphorous, hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and toxics whose sources cannot be pinpointed but rather are washed from the land surface in a diffuse manner by stormwater runoff. 
Onsite stormwater management facilities means facilities which are designed to control stormwater runoff emanating from a specific site. 
Operator means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this ordinance. 
Peak flow rate means the maximum instantaneous flow from a prescribed design storm at a particular location. 
Permit or VSMP Authority Permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the Administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with this article, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by the Department. 
Permittee means the person to whom the VSMP Authority Permit is issued. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Point source means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel, or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 USC § 2011 et seq.)), heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. It does not mean: 
1.  Sewage from vessels; or 
2.  Water, gas, or other material that is injected into a well to facilitate production of oil or gas, or water derived in association with oil and gas production and disposed of in a well if the well used either to facilitate production or for disposal purposes is approved by the Board and if the Board determines that the injection or disposal will not result in the degradation of ground or surface water resources. 
Pollutant discharge means the average amount of a particular pollutant measured in pounds per year or other standard reportable unit as appropriate, delivered by stormwater runoff. 
Pollution means such alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of any state waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters (a) harmful or detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or to the health of animals, fish or aquatic life; (b) unsuitable with reasonable treatment for use as present or possible future sources of public water supply; or (c) unsuitable for recreational, commercial, industrial, agricultural, or other reasonable uses, provided that (i) an alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological property of state waters, or a discharge or deposit of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes to state waters by any owner which by itself is not sufficient to cause pollution, but which, in combination with such alteration of or discharge or deposit to state waters by other owners, is sufficient to cause pollution; (ii) the discharge of untreated sewage by any owner into state waters; and (iii) contributing to the contravention of standards of water quality duly established by the State Water Control Board, are "pollution" for the terms and purposes of this chapter. 
Post-development refers to conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract of land. 
Pre-development refers to the land use that exists at the time that plans for the land development are submitted. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing land use at the time the first item is submitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Regional (watershed wide) stormwater management facility or regional facility means a facility or series of facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from a large contributing area, although only portions of the watershed may experience land development. 
Regional stormwater management plan or regional plan means a document containing material describing how runoff from open space, existing development and future planned development areas within a watershed will be controlled by coordinated design and implementation of regional stormwater management facilities. 
Regulations means the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations (9 VAC 25-870). 
Runoff volume or stormwater runoff volume means that portion of precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one (1) or more waterways. 
Site means the land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity. Areas channelward of mean low water in tidal Virginia shall not be considered part of a site. 
State means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
State Board means the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board. 
State construction general permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the State Board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the State Board for stormwater discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the Commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the Regulations. 
State project means the construction of any facility or expansion of an existing facility including, but not limited to land clearing, soil movement, or land development, which is undertaken by any state agency, board, commission, authority or any branch of state government, including state supported institutions of higher learning. 
State Water Control Law means Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
Stormwater means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater detention basin or detention basin means a stormwater management facility which temporarily impounds runoff and discharges it through a hydraulic outlet structure to a downstream conveyance system. To achieve stormwater pollution control, the detention basin may include a permanent pool of water or some other treatment component specified in the Design Criteria Manual. 
Stormwater management facility means a device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the peak flow rate and pollution discharges, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Stormwater management plan or plan means a document containing material for describing how existing runoff characteristics will be maintained by a land development project and comply with the requirements of this article. 
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan or SWPPP means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this article. In addition the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
Subdivision means the division of a parcel of land into three (3) or more lots or parcels of less than five (5) acres each for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
Total Maximum Daily Load or TMDL means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Act or Act means Chapter 3.1, Article 2.3, §§ 62.1-44.15:24 through 62.1-44.15:66, of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP means a program approved by the State Board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Program Authority or Authority means an authority approved by the State Board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
Water quality volume means the volume equal to the first one-half (0.5) inch of runoff multiplied by the new impervious surface area of the land development project. 
Watershed means the total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-33. - General criteria. 
(a)  Proposed residential, commercial, or industrial subdivisions or other projects shall apply these stormwater management criteria to the land development as a whole. Individual phases in new subdivisions or other projects shall not be considered separate land development projects, but rather the entire subdivision or other projects shall be considered a common plan of development or sale. Individual lots in new residential, commercial or industrial developments shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities. Hydrologic parameters shall reflect the ultimate land development and shall be used in all engineering calculations. 
(b)  Construction of stormwater management facilities or modifications to channels shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations. 
(c)  The design of impounding structures that are not covered by the Virginia Dam Safety Regulations shall be checked by the applicant for structural integrity and floodplain impacts for the one hundred-year storm event. 
(d)  Land development projects shall comply with Article VII of this article and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:51-66, et seq.) and attendant regulations. 
(e)  When appropriate, safety measures should be incorporated into the design of stormwater management facilities. These may include but are not limited to, safety ledges, warning signs, anti-vortex devices, stadia rod indicating depth at the lowest point, and outlet structures designed to limit public access. 
(f)  Outlets from stormwater management facilities shall be designed to function without manual, electrical or mechanical controls. 
(g)  Detention facilities shall be designed to minimize propagation of insects, particularly mosquitoes. 
(h)  New construction of onsite stormwater management facilities in floodplains should be avoided. When this is unavoidable, a special examination to determine adequacy of proposed stormwater management facilities shall be conducted as determined by the city manager, or designee. Such new construction shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(i)  Basic requirements for water quality and quantity control need not be satisfied solely by means of structural methods. Non-structural practices including, but not limited to, cluster land use development, minimization of impervious surface, open space acquisition, floodplain management, and protection of wetlands, steep slopes and vegetation should be coordinated with structural requirements. Such changes in land use often decrease the runoff coefficients, thus reducing the number, size and cost of structural practices; however all methods to meet water quality and quantity control shall be selected and designed in accordance with the Virginia Stormwater Best Management Practice (BMP) Clearinghouse to the extent these standards do not conflict with more stringent City requirements in effect as of January 1, 2013. 
(j)  Land disturbance shall be limited to the area necessary to provide for the desired use or development. 
(1)  In accordance with an approved site plan, the limits of land disturbance, including clearing or grading shall be clearly shown on submitted plans and physically marked on the development site. 
(2)  Where feasible, ingress and egress during construction shall be limited to one (1) access point, unless otherwise approved by the city manager, or designee. 
(k)  Indigenous vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible consistent with the use and development permitted and in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as adopted in Chapter 37.1, Article VI, of the Newport News City Code. 
(1)  Existing trees more than five (5) inches in diameter four and one-half (4.5) feet above existing grade shall be preserved outside the limits of land disturbance. Trees that are diseased or that have been weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury may be removed. 
(2)  Clearing shall be allowed only to provide necessary visual and vehicular access, positive site drainage, water quality stormwater management control facilities, and the installation of utilities as approved by the city manager, or designee. 
(3)  Prior to clearing or grading, suitable protective barriers, such as fencing, shall be erected five (5) feet outside of the dripline of any tree or stand of trees to be preserved. These protective barriers shall remain so erected throughout all phases of construction. The storage of equipment, materials, debris or fill shall not be allowed within the area protected by the barrier unless otherwise authorized by the city manager, or designee. 
(l)  Land development shall minimize impervious cover to promote infiltration of stormwater into the ground consistent with the use or development permitted. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-34. - Regional stormwater management. 
The applicant shall comply with the requirements of any regional stormwater management plan for the watershed in which the proposed land development is located. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-35. - Technical criteria. 
(a)  Unless otherwise exempt, all land development projects shall comply with stormwater quantity and quality technical design criteria specified in this article or contained in the City of Newport News Design Criteria Manual as of January 1, 2013; whichever is more stringent. 
(b)  To protect the quality and quantity of state water from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, the city hereby adopts the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities set forth in Part II B of the Regulations, 9 VAC 25-870-62 through 9 VAC 25-870-92, as amended, expressly to include 9 VAC 25-870-63 [water quality design criteria requirements]; 9 VAC 25-870-65 [water quality compliance]; 9 VAC 25-870-66 [water quantity]; 9 VAC 25-870-69 [offsite compliance options]; 9 VAC 25-870-72 [design storms and hydrologic methods]; 9 VAC 25-870-74 [stormwater harvesting]; 9 VAC 25-870-76 [linear development project]; and, 9 VAC 25-870-85 [stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities], which shall apply to all land-disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this article, except as expressly set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Until June 30, 2019, any land-disturbing activity for which a currently valid proffered or conditional zoning plan, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of development, or any document determined by the city manager, or designee, as being equivalent thereto, was approved by the director of engineering, or designee, prior to July 1, 2012, and for which no coverage under the general permit has been issued prior to July 1, 2014, and for which no land disturbance has occurred prior to July 1, 2014 shall be considered grandfathered in accordance with 9 VAC 25-870-48 and shall not be subject to the technical criteria of Part II B of the Regulations [9 VAC 25-870-62 through 92], but shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C of the Regulations [9 VAC 25-870-93 through 99] for those areas that were included in the approval, provided that the city manager, or designee, finds that such proffered or conditional zoning plan, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of development, or any document determined by the city manager, or designee, as being equivalent thereto, 
(i)  provides for a layout as defined in 9 VAC 25-870-10, and 
(ii)  the resulting land-disturbing activity will be compliant with the requirements of Part II C. 
In the event that the approved development plan is subsequently modified or amended in a manner such that there is no increase over the previously approved plat or plan in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge of the land-disturbing activity through stormwater runoff, and such that there is no increase over the previously approved plat or plan in the volume or rate of runoff, the grandfathering shall continue as before. 
(i)  Until June 30, 2019, for local, state, and federal projects for which there has been an obligation of local, state, or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or for which the Department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012, such projects shall be considered grandfathered by the City of Newport News and shall not be subject to the technical requirements of Part II B of the Regulations, but shall be subject to the technical requirements of Part II C of the Regulations for those areas that were included in the approval. 
(ii)  For land-disturbing activities grandfathered under this subsection, construction must be completed by June 30, 2019, or portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to the technical requirements of subsection (b) above. 
(d)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical requirements Part IIC of the Regulations, as adopted by the Locality in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Beginning with the General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities issued July 1, 2009, all land-disturbing activities that receive general permit coverage shall be conducted in accordance with the Part II C of the Regulations and shall remain subject to those criteria for an additional two (2) permit cycles. After the two (2) additional state permit cycles have passed, or should state permit coverage not be maintained, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted since original state permit coverage was issued. For land-disturbing projects issued coverage under the July 1, 2009 state permit and for which coverage was maintained, such projects shall remain subject to the technical criteria of Part II C for an additional two (2) state permits. 
(f)  The city manager, or designee, may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of Part II B or Part II C of the Regulations, provided that, 
(i)  The exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, 
(ii)  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the Act, the Regulations, and this ordinance are preserved, 
(iii)  Granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and; 
(iv)  Exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Exceptions to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required VSMP authority permit shall not be given by the city manager, or designee, nor shall the city manager, or designee, approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website, or any other control measure duly approved by the Department unless such BMP is contained in the City of Newport News Design Criteria Manual as of January 1, 2013 and is identified as being more stringent than state minimum requirements at the time of program submittal to the Department for review. 
(2)  Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9 VAC 25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at their discretion. 
(h)  Land development projects located in Chesapeake Bay Preservation or Reservoir Protection areas shall comply with the ordinance provisions affecting those respective ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-36. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided for in section 37.1-31(b) of this article, no land-disturbing, grading, building, or other permit shall be issued for land development unless a stormwater management plan or executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan has been submitted to and approved by the city manager, or designee, a permit has been issued by the City or proof of coverage under the state stormwater construction general permit has been submitted. For an individual residential, commercial or industrial parcel within larger common plan of development or sale where a stormwater management plan has been approved by the city manager or designee that addresses the water quality and quantity control requirements of that parcel, such parcel, whether developed by the initial owner or a subsequent owner, may incorporate that approved stormwater management plan by reference and design in accordance with such plan. 
(b)  The following information, where applicable, shall be required for each proposed project subject to review under this article. All maps, plans, designs, narratives and calculations shall be certified by a professional engineer or Class III B surveyor. The city manager, or designee, may require additional information as may be necessary to properly review the land development plan. 
(1)  General narrative description of the project. 
(2)  General description of the erosion and sediment controls. 
(3)  General description of temporary and permanent stormwater management facilities. 
(4)  Project schedule, including a sequence of construction. 
(5)  General description of maintenance plan for stormwater management facilities. 
(6)  A boundary map of the drainage area tributary to the project site. 
(7)  A narrative description of the location of the project relative to significant features in the general surroundings such as roads, pedestrian ways, access to the site, adjacent land uses, property lines, existing manmade structures, public facilities, landmarks, and places of architectural and historical significance and information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged, including surface waters and pre-development and post-development drainage areas. The narrative description include a description of current site conditions and final site conditions, or, if allowed by the City, the information provided and documented during the review process that addresses the current or final site conditions. 
(8)  Existing contours at two-foot intervals, extending a minimum of two hundred (200) feet beyond the limits of the proposed development. 
(9)  Streams, lakes, ponds, existing drainage swales, wetlands, forested areas and other physical features within or adjacent to the project area. 
(10)  A consideration of all sources of surface and subsurface flow and groundwater converted to stormwater runoff. 
(11)  Unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(12)  Locations of existing and proposed utilities, sewers and water lines. 
(13)  Soil types and boundaries and locations of areas with steep slopes or highly erodible soils. 
(14)  Alterations in the natural terrain, cover, and grade including lawns and other landscaping. 
(15)  Areas to be cut or filled. 
(16)  The location of proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, and other permanent structures. 
(17)  Final contours at two-foot intervals, extending a minimum of two hundred (200) feet beyond the limits of the proposed development. 
(18)  All stormwater management facilities must be shown on the plan as required by Chapter 33.02 Site Regulations Article II Site Plan Form and Content, including details; geographic coordinates based on the City of Newport News datum (NAD83 Virginia State Plane) reported in degrees, minutes, seconds; plan, profile, and cross sections; acres treated and the receiving water or watershed into which they discharge. 
(19)  If infiltration facilities are proposed, the locations of existing and proposed wells and septic system drain fields must be shown. 
(20)  Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations, including all assumptions and criteria, for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this article verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of section 37.1-35 of this article. 
(21)  A soils report and boring logs. 
(22)  A maintenance plan indicating the person responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facilities and a maintenance program for the proposed stormwater management facilities. 
(23)  An analysis showing the pre-existing total amount of phosphorous, nitrogen and sediment in the runoff from the developed area. 
(24)  An analysis showing onsite or offsite facilities that are calculated to result in reduction of phosphorous, nitrogen and sediment to bring the total within the limits of the Virginia Stormwater Regulation and the Chesapeake Bay Total Maximum Daily Load. 
(25)  If the calculations indicate that required water quality compliance cannot be achieved onsite, a proposal for purchase of stormwater nonpoint nutrient offsets, as set out in section 37.1-37.3 below. 
(26)  Contact information including name, address, telephone number and parcel number of the property or properties affected. 
(c)  If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements set forth in section 37.1-35 of this ordinance through the use of off-site compliance options other than the purchase of non-point nutrient offsets as set out in section 37.1-37.3, below, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant's land-disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by § 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia. 
(d)  Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(e)  A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan, unless the city manager, or designee, determines pursuant to 9 VAC 25-870-112 that such drawing is not necessary. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-36.1. - Pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  Pollution prevention plan, required by 9VAC25-870-56 [of the Virginia Administrative Code], shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and, 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(b)  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and, 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(c)  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-36.2. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) required by the state stormwater construction general permit shall include the content specified by section 9VAC25-870-54 [of the Virginia Administrative Code] and must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in section 9VAC25-880-70, Section II (stormwater pollution prevention plan) [of the Virginia Administrative Code] of the general permit and amendments thereto. 
(b)  The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
(c)  The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-37.1. - Hearings. 
(a)  Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to the requirements of this Chapter, aggrieved by any action of the city taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the city, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the city manager, or designee, of such grievance, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the city manager, or designee, within 30 days after notice of such action is given by the city manager, or designee. 
(b)  The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the city manager, appointed in writing. 
(c)  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be taken and retained by the city manager, or designee, pending an appeal. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law. 
(d)  The hearing officer, shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or to produce documents shall be acted upon by the local governing body, or its designated member, whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursement for mileage as in civil actions. 
(e)  The hearing officer, shall issue a decision in the matter in writing. This written decision will be retained as part of the record. 
(f)  The applicant may appeal to the Wetlands Board by filing a notice of appeal with the city manager, or designee, within thirty (30) days after the rendering of the written decision. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-37.1:1. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to the requirements of this Chapter, aggrieved by any decision of the city manager, or designee, after a formal hearing, may demand in writing an appeal to the Wetlands Board, provided a petition for appeal is filed with the city manager, or designee, within thirty (30) days after the date of the written decision in the formal hearing. 
(b)  The appeals held under this section shall be conducted by the Wetlands Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting following the notice of appeal, unless good cause is shown for a continuance of the appeal to another regularly scheduled meeting, 
(c)  The appeal shall be based upon a review of the record from the formal hearing and argument of the parties to the appeal. The Wetlands Boards determination shall be in writing. 
(d)  The determination of the Wetlands Board may be appealed to the Circuit Court of the City of Newport News for a review in accordance with the standards established in Virginia Code § 2.2-4027, and the decisions of the circuit court shall be subject to review by the Court of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-37.2. - Fees. 
Fees to cover costs associated with implementation of a VSMP related to land disturbing activities and issuance of general permit coverage and VSMP authority permits shall be imposed in accordance with the below flowchart. Fifty (50) percent of the total fee shall be paid upon plan submittal. Fees for permit issuance of a VSMP Authority permit shall be paid in full prior permit issuance. 
 
Individual CGP Issued to Independent Storm Sewer System 	Total Fee Applicant Pays to City 	Portion of Fee City Retains 	Portion of Fee City Remits to State 
<1 acre 	$ 15,209.00 	$ 209.00 	$ 15,000.00 
1 to < 5 acres 	$ 16,994.00 	$ 1,994.00 	$ 15,000.00 
5 to < 10 acres 	$ 17,448.00 	$ 2,448.00 	$ 15,000.00 
10 to < 50 acres 	$ 18,240.00 	$ 3,240.00 	$ 15,000.00 
50 to < 100 acres 	$ 19,392.00 	$ 4,392.00 	$ 15,000.00 
>> = 100 acres 	$ 21,912.00 	$ 6,912.00 	$ 15,000.00 
 
(b)  Generally, fees for the modification of registration statements from the general permit issued by the state will not be separately assessed. If, however, the general permit modifications result in an increase in total disturbed acreage, the Applicant shall pay the difference in the initial state permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have been due the state for the total disturbed acreage in Table 1. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be assessed for all transfers of general permits from one operator to another operator. 
(c)  The fees, which are to be paid prior to the issuance of the VSMP permit, set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above, shall apply to: 
(1)  All persons seeking coverage under the general permit. 
(2)  All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration statement for coverage under a general permit. 
(3)  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the Department for an Individual Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities. 
(4)  Permit and permit coverage modification fees outlined under sections 37.1-37.2(a) and (b) may apply to each general permit holder. 
(d)  No general permit application fees will be assessed to: 
(1)  Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in section 37.1-35 of this article. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the city manager, or designee, shall not be exempt pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the Department, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the city manager, or designee, or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
(e)  All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in § 58.1-15 of the Code of Virginia and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten (10) percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over ninety (90) days past due) account. The city shall be entitled to all remedies available under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-37.3. - Stormwater nonpoint nutrient offsets. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
Nonpoint nutrient offset means nutrient reductions certified as nonpoint nutrient offsets under the Chesapeake Bay Watershed Nutrient Exchange Program (§ 62.1-44.19:12 et seq. [of the Code of Virginia]). 
Tributary has the same meaning as in Virginia Code § 62.1-44.19:13. 
(b)  The City of Newport News, through its approval of the stormwater management plan, may allow compliance with stormwater nonpoint nutrient runoff water quality criteria established pursuant to Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:28, in whole or in part, through the use of acquisition of nonpoint nutrient offsets in the same tributary. 
(c)  Nonpoint nutrient offsets will not be allowed to address water quantity control requirements. Nonpoint nutrient offsets or other off-site options shall not be used in contravention of local water quality-based limitations: (i) consistent with determinations made pursuant to subsection B of Virginia Code § 62.1-44.19:14, (ii) adopted pursuant to Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:33 or other applicable authority,, (iii) deemed necessary to protect public water supplies from adverse nutrient impacts, or (iv) as otherwise may be established or approved by the State Water Control Board. Where such a limitation exists, other off-site options may be used provided that such options do not preclude or impair compliance with the local limitation. 
(d)  Nonpoint nutrient offsets off-site options may only be used in the stormwater management plan when the: 
(1)  The applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city manager, or designee, that (i) alternative site designs have been considered that may accommodate on-site best management practices, (ii) on-site best management practices have been considered in alternative site designs to the maximum extent practicable, (iii) appropriate on-site best management practices will be implemented, and (iv) full compliance with post-development nonpoint nutrient runoff compliance requirements cannot practicably be met on site. For purposes of this subdivision, if an applicant demonstrates on-site control of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the required phosphorous nutrient reductions, the applicant shall be deemed to have met the requirements of clauses (i) through (iv); 
(2)  Less than five (5) acres of land will be disturbed; or 
(3)  The post-construction phosphorous control requirement is less than 10 (ten) pounds per year. 
(e)  Documentation of the acquisition of nonpoint nutrient offsets by the person proposing the stormwater management plan shall be provided to the permit issuing authority in a certification from an offset broker documenting the number of phosphorus nonpoint nutrient offsets acquired and the associated ratio of nitrogen nonpoint nutrient offsets at the offset generating facility. 
(f)  Nonpoint nutrient offsets used pursuant to subsection (b) shall be generated in the same or adjacent eight-digit hydrologic unit code as defined by the United States Geological Survey as the permitted site. Nonpoint nutrient offsets outside the same or adjacent eight-digit hydrologic unit code may only be used if it is determined by the city manager, or designee, that no nonpoint nutrient offsets are available within the same or adjacent eight-digit hydrologic unit code when the permit issuing authority accepts the final site design. In such cases, and subject to other limitations imposed in this section, nonpoint nutrient offsets generated within the same tributary may be used. In no case shall nonpoint nutrient offsets from another tributary be used. 
(g)  For that portion of a site's compliance with stormwater nonpoint nutrient runoff water quality criteria being obtained through nonpoint nutrient offsets, the city manager, or designee, shall (i) use a one-one-one (1:1) ratio of the nonpoint nutrient offsets to the site's remaining post-development nonpoint nutrient runoff compliance requirement and (ii) assure that the nonpoint nutrient offsets are secured in perpetuity. 
(h)  The city may not grant an exception to, or waiver of, post-development nonpoint nutrient runoff compliance requirements unless off-site options have been considered and found not available. 
(i)  Until July 1, 2014, priority was to be given to the use of nonpoint nutrient offsets unless the city manager, or designee, requires a pro-rata share payment plan pursuant to the Code of the City of Newport News, Appendix B—Subdivision Regulations, Section 4.01.7 or to the Regional BMP Water Quality Banking Program Policy, as revised, adopted by Resolution No. 9418-99 adopted by the city council. In the case of a phased project, the permittee may acquire or achieve the off-site nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of each phase of the land-disturbing activity in an amount sufficient for each such phase. 
(j)  The city manager, or designee, will allow incorporation into or amendment to the stormwater management plan to reflect full or partial substitution of nonpoint nutrient offsets for existing on-site nutrient controls when (i) the nonpoint nutrient offsets will compensate for ten (10) or fewer pounds of the annual phosphorous requirement associated with the original land-disturbing activity or (ii) existing on-site controls are not functioning as anticipated after reasonable attempts to comply with applicable maintenance agreements or requirements and the use of nonpoint nutrient offsets will account for the deficiency. The party responsible for maintenance shall be released from maintenance obligations related to the on-site phosphorous controls for which the nonpoint nutrient offsets are substituted. 
(k)  To the extent available, with the consent of the proposer of the stormwater management plan, the city manager, or designee, may include the use of nonpoint nutrient offsets or other off-site measures in resolving enforcement actions to compensate for (i) nutrient control deficiencies occurring during the period of noncompliance and (ii) permanent nutrient control deficiencies. 
(l)  This section shall not be construed as limiting the authority established under Virginia Code § 15.2-2243; however, under any pollutant loading pro rata share program established thereunder, the subdivider or developer shall be given appropriate credit for nutrient reductions achieved through nonpoint nutrient offsets or other off-site options.  
Sec. 37.1-38. - Construction inspections. 
(a)  The city shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and, 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(b)  The applicant shall notify the city manager, or designee, forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of any activity covered by this article so that appropriate inspections can be made to insure compliance with this article. 
(c)  Inspection reports shall be maintained as part of the land development project file. 
(d)  The city may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter to the extent allowed by applicable law. 
(e)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the city manager or any duly authorized agent of the city manager may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified to the extent allowed by applicable law. 
(f)  Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:40 of the Code of Virginia, the city manager or any duly authorized agent of the city manager may require every VSMP authority permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP authority permit requirements under this Chapter, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this Chapter. 
(g)  Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be conducted by the city pursuant to city adopted and State Board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five (5) years except as may otherwise be provided for in section 37.1-39, below. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-39. - Maintenance. 
(a)  Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor or owner. If portions of the land are to be sold, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the basic responsibility to successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each parcel the property owner, governmental agency, or other legally established entity to be permanently responsible for maintenance. The documents prepared to accomplish the requirements of this subsection shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney and be recorded in the land records. 
(b)  In the case of developments where subdivision lots are to be sold, permanent arrangements satisfactory to the city manager, or designee, shall be made to insure continued performance of these obligations. 
(c)  In the event that the stormwater management facilities are in need of maintenance or become a danger to public safety or public health, the property owner shall be notified in writing, advised of the corrective measures required, and given a reasonable period of time to take necessary action. If the property owner fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the city has the authority to perform the work and to recover the costs from the responsible person. 
(d)  To ensure proper performance of the stormwater management facility between scheduled maintenance operations, the owner is responsible for inspecting the stormwater management facility on a semi-annual basis and after any storm which causes the capacity of the facility to be exceeded. All such inspection reports shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia and submitted to the city manager, or designee, within thirty (30) days of the inspection. 
(e)  Right-of-entry agreements or easements shall be required from the applicant for purposes of inspection and maintenance by the city manager, or designee. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-40. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If it is determined that there is a failure to comply with the approved plan, notice shall be served upon the property owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the application or plan certification, or by delivery at the land development site to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
(b)  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. 
(c)  Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the permit or approval may be revoked and the property owner shall be deemed to be in violation of this article. 
(d)  Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment for each violation, or both, as provided for in § 62.1-44.15:49 of the Code of Virginia. 
(e)  The city may apply to the circuit court to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article as provided for in §§ 62.1-44.15:42 and 62.1-44.15:49 of the Code of Virginia without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. 
(f)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, the city may bring a civil action against any person for violation of this article, or any condition of the permit or approval, or any provision of the local program. The action may seek to impose of a civil penalty of not more than thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) per day for each violation as provided for in § 62.1-44.15:49 of the Code of Virginia. 
(g)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey this article or any condition of the permit or approval or any provision of the local program, the city may issue an order against or to such person for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (f) of this section as provided for in § 62.1-44.15:49 of the Code of Virginia. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (f). 
(h)  The City may employ an informal procedure to address any dispute or violation, however, failure to abide by the terms of such informal procedure will result in the City going forward with one or more of the provisions listed in subparagraphs (a) through (g) above. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Secs. 37.1-41—37.1-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CHESAPEAKE BAY PRESERVATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, effective on and after July 1, 2014, repealed the former art. V, §§ 37.1-46—37.1-57, and enacted a new art. V as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 5991-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6097-05; Ord. No. 6517-08, § 1. 
 
Sec. 37.1-46. - Findings of fact. 
The Chesapeake Bay and its perennial tributaries constitute one (1) of the most important and productive estuarine systems in the world, providing economic and social benefits to the citizens of Newport News and the Commonwealth of Virginia. The health of the bay is vital to maintaining Newport News' economy and the welfare of its citizens. 
The industrialized portion of Newport News' waterfront constitutes one (1) of the most important industrial areas in the Commonwealth of Virginia. It provides economic and social benefits to Newport News, the Commonwealth of Virginia and the United States of America. The continued economic health of the waterfront industrial areas is vital to maintaining Newport News' economy and the welfare of its citizens as a whole; however, protection of the economic health of these areas and improving the health of the Chesapeake Bay are not mutually exclusive. Measures consistent with the continued industrial use of Newport News' industrial waterfront areas are available and are used for the protection of the Chesapeake Bay. 
The Chesapeake Bay waters have been degraded significantly by many sources of pollution, including nonpoint source pollution from land uses and development. Existing waters are worthy of protection from degradation to guard against further pollution. Certain lands that are proximate to shorelines have intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform. Other lands have severe development constraints from flooding, erosion, and soil limitations. With proper management, these lands offer significant ecological benefits by providing water quality maintenance and pollution control, as well as flood and shoreline erosion control. 
There also exist, however, certain lands at or near the shoreline that, due to their intense development, installation of sea walls, riprap and impervious surface, have little or no remaining intrinsic water quality value. Although these lands must be monitored to ensure that there is no deterioration of existing water quality protection as a result of the continued intensive use of these properties, the regulations and application of this article to these lands must be tempered by a recognition of the existing intense use and landowners' rights to continue that use. Measures consistent with the current uses of these lands must be employed to protect the quality of the water of the Chesapeake Bay. 
All of these lands together, designated by the city council as Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, are important in connection with the protection of the quality of water in the bay and consequently the quality of life in the City of Newport News and the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-47. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  This article is adopted to implement the requirements of §§ 62.1-44.15:67-79 et seq. of the Code of Virginia (The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act). The intent of the city council and the purpose of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect existing state and community waters. 
(2)  Restore state waters to a condition or quality that will permit all reasonable public uses and will support the propagation and growth of all aquatic life, including game fish, which might reasonably be expected to inhabit them. 
(3)  Prevent any further increase in nonpoint source pollution. 
(4)  Reduce existing nonpoint source pollution in state and community waters in order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the present and future citizens of the City of Newport News. 
(b)  A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map has been prepared and adopted by city council that overlay's the city's 1:200 scale real estate assessment maps, so that any parcel of land lying in these areas can be generally identified. Site specific delineation of Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas shall be required as provided in section 37.1-50. Unless otherwise stated in this article, the review and approval procedures provided for in Chapter 13, Building Regulations; Article VII of this Chapter; Chapter 44, Wetlands; and, Chapter 45, Zoning Ordinance; Appendix B, Subdivision Regulations; Chapter 33.02, Site Plan Ordinance; and, all other applicable ordinances shall be followed in reviewing and approving development, redevelopment, and uses governed by this article. 
(c)  Future revisions to this article shall require approval from the City's Regulations Committee and Planning Commission, as well as from City Council. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-48. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this article have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Agricultural lands means those lands used for the planting and harvesting of crops or plant growth of any kind in the open, pasture, horticulture, dairying, floriculture, or in the raising of poultry and/or livestock, except land used for gardening or landscaping. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
Buffer area means an area of natural or established vegetation managed to protect other components of a resource protection area and state waters from significant degradation due to land disturbances. This buffer area consists of three (3) trophic layers: trees, shrubs and ground cover. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area means any land designated as such on the map adopted by the city council subject to the determination of the city manager, or designee, on a site-specific basis. A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall consist of a resource protection area, a resource management area and any designated industrial waterfront intensely developed areas. 
Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree measured outside its bark at a point four and one-half (4.5) feet above the existing grade. 
Disturbed land area means an area cleared or graded as necessary for the construction of improvements including, but not limited to, buildings, roads and drives, parking areas, and sidewalks. 
Dripline means a vertical projection to the ground surface from the furthest tips of a tree's leaf canopy. 
Highly erodible soils means soils which have an erodibility index of eight (8) which is the generally accepted threshold at which the rate of soil loss becomes critical in relation to soil replacement, resulting in severe soil erosion. The equation for the erodibility index is EI=RKLS/T, where: R = the rainfall and runoff factor; K = the soil susceptibility to water erosion; LS = the combined effects of slope length and steepness; and T = the soil loss tolerance. The identified highly erodible soils in the City of Newport News are: 16D Craven-Uchee Complex, 16C Craven-Uchee Complex, 21B Slagle fine sandy loam, and 9B Craven fine sandy loam. 
Impervious cover. A surface composed of any material which significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil including, but not limited to: buildings and other structures and their components, streets, parking, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
Industrial waterfront intensely developed area (industrial waterfront IDA or IWIDA) means any portion of Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area so designated by the city council. Industrial waterfront IDAs are industrial areas located along the shoreline that, because of the intensity of their use, are characterized by an absence of natural environmental features and a preponderance of impervious surface and bulkheaded or riprapped shoreline. 
Landward fifty (50) feet of resource protection area (RPA) buffer means the fifty (50) feet of the RPA 100-foot buffer which resides between the seaward fifty (50) feet of RPA and resource management area (RMA) components identified in section 37.1-49(a)(2). 
Map means the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map. 
Nonpoint source pollution means pollution consisting of constituents such as sediment, nutrients, and organic and toxic substances from diffuse sources, such as runoff from agriculture, silviculture and urban land development and use. 
Nontidal wetlands means those wetlands other than tidal wetlands that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, in 33 C.F.R. 328.3b, dated November 13, 1986. 
Noxious weeds means weeds that are difficult to control effectively, including, but not limited to Johnson Grass, Kudzu, and multiflora rose. 
Plan of development means the process for site plan or subdivision plan review to ensure compliance with § 62.1-44.15:74 of the Code of Virginia and this article, prior to any clearing or grading of a site or the issuance of a building permit. 
Public roads means a publicly-owned road designed and constructed in accordance with water quality protection criteria at least as stringent as requirements applicable to the Virginia Department of Transportation, including regulations promulgated pursuant to (i) the Erosion and Sediment Control Law (§§ 62.1-44.15:51-66 of the Code of Virginia) and (ii) the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (§§ 62.1-44.15:24-50 of the Code of Virginia). This definition includes those roads where the Virginia Department of Transportation exercises direct supervision over the design or construction activities, or both, and cases where secondary roads are constructed or maintained, or both, in accordance with the City of Newport News standards. 
Redevelopment means the process of developing land in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, except for industrial waterfront intensely developed areas, that is currently or has been previously developed; provided that, to be considered developed a parcel must be or have been covered by at least sixty (60) percent impervious improvements within the five (5) years preceding the proposed development. 
Resource management area (RMA) means that component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area that is not classified as the resource protection area. RMAs include land types that, if improperly used or developed, have the potential for causing significant water quality degradation or for diminishing the functional value of a resource protection area. 
Resource management area components. See section 37.1-49(a)(2). 
Resource protection area (RPA) means that component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area comprised of lands adjacent to water bodies with perennial flow that have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or are sensitive to impacts which may result in significant degradation to the quality of state and local waters. 
Resource protection area components. See section 37.1-49(a)(1). 
Seaward fifty (50) feet of resource protection area buffer means the fifty (50) feet of the RPA 100-foot buffer adjacent to RPA components identified in section 37.1-49(a)(1)a., b. and c. 
Silvicultural activities means forest management activities, including but not limited to the harvesting of timber, the construction of roads and trails for forest management purposes, and the preparation of property for reforestation that are conducted in accordance with the silvicultural best management practices developed and enforced by the state forester pursuant to § 10.1-1105 of the Code of Virginia and are located on property defined as real estate devoted to forest use under § 58.1-3230 of the Code of Virginia. 
Tidal shore means the area of land between mean low water level and mean high water level. 
Tidal wetlands means vegetated and non-vegetated wetlands as defined in § 28.2-1300 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
Usable land area means not less than eighty (80) percent of the minimum lot area required by the zoning ordinance (chapter 45 of the City Code) shall be usable land by reason of elevation above flood level and not less than fifty (50) percent of such required minimum lot area shall be usable by reason of absence of easements or servitudes; provided, however, that all of the minimum area required for the building itself together with its required front, side and rear yard lines shall be usable land landward of the resource protection area (RPA). 
Water-dependent facility means a development of land that cannot exist outside the resource protection area and must be located on the shoreline by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operation. These facilities include: 
(1)  Beaches and other public water-oriented recreation areas. 
(2)  Dry docks. 
(3)  Fisheries or other marine resource facilities. 
(4)  Fueling areas associated with marinas or marine vessels. 
(5)  Intake and outfall structures of power plants, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants, and storm sewers. 
(6)  Loading, unloading and freight staging areas necessary for the convenient and efficient operation of ports and marinas (including staging areas for dry and liquid bulk and "high and dry" automated boat storage equipment). 
(7)  Marinas and other boat docking structures (including all utility lines necessary for convenient and efficient operations). 
(8)  Mooring slips, docks, piers, ports, buoys, launch ramps, access roads and paths necessary to conveniently and efficiently serve these facilities. 
(9)  Nature study and passive recreation facilities with no structures or impervious surfaces. 
(10)  Rail lines, conveyor systems and other related facilities necessary for convenient and efficient servicing and loading or unloading water-transported goods. 
(11)  Seafood off-landing, handling or processing for water-transported seafood. 
(12)  Shipbuilding, repair and maintenance yards. 
(13)  Water-dependent portions of research facilities operated by educational institutions. 
Wetlands. Any tidal or nontidal wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-49. - Areas of applicability. 
(a)  The general location of resource protection areas, resource management areas, and industrial waterfront and residential intensely developed areas are shown on the designated map adopted by city council. The map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, as adopted by the city council shall be a part of this article. 
(1)  The components of a resource protection area are: 
a.  Tidal wetlands; 
b.  Nontidal wetlands which are connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or water bodies with perennial flow; 
c.  Tidal shores; and 
d.  A buffer area not less than one hundred (100) feet in width, located adjacent to and landward of the components listed in subsections a. through c. above, and along both sides of any water body with perennial flow. The full buffer area shall be designated as the landward component of the resource protection area notwithstanding the presence of permitted uses, encroachments and permitted vegetation clearing in compliance with section 37.1-51. 
(2)  The components of a resource management area shall consist of all lands within one hundred (100) feet landward of the landward boundary of the resource protection area buffer and in addition includes all land containing slopes greater than fifteen (15) percent, all areas within the one hundred (100) year floodplain and highly erodible soils. Council may designate other lands it deems important to maintenance of water quality as resource management area. 
(3)  Industrial waterfront intensely developed areas (IWIDAs) are those portions of Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas so designated by the city council because of the intensity of industrial land uses located along the shoreline that are characterized by an absence of natural environmental features and a preponderance of impervious surface and bulkheaded or riprapped shoreline. 
Industrial waterfront IDAs are areas further characterized as areas where little of the natural environment remains and development has severely altered the natural state of the area. 
(b)  The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map is hereby declared to delineate the general location of Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. Site specific delineation of Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas shall be required as provided in section 37.1-50. The city manager, or designee, shall have the final authority in cases of uncertainty to determine the extent of these areas by application of criteria set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-50. - Interpretation of Chesapeake Bay Preservation areas. 
(a)  Delineation by the applicant. The site-specific boundaries of the resource protection area shall be determined by the applicant through the performance of an environmental site assessment, subject to review and approval by the city manager, or designee, in accordance with section 37.1-52, plan of development. The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Map shall be used as a guide to the general location of resource protection areas and resource management areas. However, a reliable on site evaluation shall be conducted to determine whether water bodies on or adjacent to the site have perennial flow and the resource protection area boundaries for the site shall be adjusted, as necessary, based upon the findings of the on site evaluation. The specific boundaries of the industrial waterfront are designated by the city council on the adopted Chesapeake Bay Area Map. The boundaries of the industrial waterfront IDA overlay the boundaries of the underlying resource protection area and resource management area. 
(b)  Delineation by the city manager, or designee. The city manager, or designee, when requested by an applicant wishing to construct a single-family residence or addition or accessory structure, may waive the requirement for an applicant performed environmental site assessment and the city shall perform the delineation. The applicant is responsible for incorporating this information into an application for a building permit. 
(c)  Where conflict arises over delineation. Where, when required pursuant to the terms of this article, the applicant has provided a site-specific delineation of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, the city manager, or designee, will verify the accuracy of the boundary delineation. In determining the site-specific RPA boundary, the city manager, or designee, may render adjustments to the applicant's boundary delineation, in accordance with section 37.1-52, plan of development. In the event the adjusted boundary delineation is contested by the applicant, the applicant may seek relief, in accordance with the provisions of section 37.1-52(i), denial of plan, appeal of conditions or modifications. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-51. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of these requirements, as set forth in section 37.1-47(a), is to establish criteria to implement the following objectives: prevent a net increase in nonpoint source pollution from development; achieve a ten (10) percent reduction in nonpoint source pollution from redevelopment; and achieve a forty (40) percent reduction in nonpoint source pollution from agricultural and silvicultural uses. 
The performance standards recognize that diverse local circumstances require varying methods for protecting water quality. The performance standards establish the means to minimize erosion and sedimentation potential, reduce land application of nutrients and toxins, and maximize rainwater infiltration. Where land is undeveloped and not actively used, natural ground cover, especially woody vegetation, is most effective in holding soil in place and preventing site erosion. Indigenous vegetation, with its adaptability to local conditions without the use of harmful fertilizers or pesticides, filters stormwater runoff. Minimizing impervious cover enhances rainwater infiltration and effectively reduces stormwater runoff potential. 
Industrial waterfront intensely developed areas do not lend themselves to compliance with the performance standards set forth above. Industrial waterfront IDAs are characterized by the absence of indigenous vegetation, the preponderance of impervious cover and the presence of intense industrial activities. The performance standards for industrial waterfront IDAs have been implemented in recognition that the remaining natural ground cover may not be effective in holding soil in place and preventing site erosion in areas subject to more intense activity and that infiltration of surface waters into the ground in these areas may lead to groundwater contamination. 
(b)  General performance standards for development and redevelopment. Performance standards for development and redevelopment within all Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, except within industrial waterfront IDAs, are set forth in subsection (1). Performance standards for development and redevelopment within all resource protection areas, except within Industrial Waterfront IDAs, are set forth in subsection (2). Performance standards for development and redevelopment within industrial waterfront IDA's are set forth in subsection (3). 
(1)  Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. The following performance standards for development and redevelopment apply in all Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas except industrial waterfront IDAs and as otherwise hereinafter set forth. 
a.  All development and redevelopment (i.e. land disturbance) exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of land disturbance in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas shall be subject to a plan of development process, including the approval of a site plan in accordance with the provisions of the site plan ordinance and a stormwater management plan in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
b.  Development in resource protection areas may be allowed subject to approval by the city manager, or designee, only if it is (1) water dependent or constitutes redevelopment; (2) constitutes development or redevelopment within a designated intensely developed area; (3) is a new use established pursuant to subsection (b)(2)b and (b)(2)c of this section; (4) is a road or driveway crossing satisfying the conditions set forth in subdivision d. below; or (5) is a flood control or stormwater management facility satisfying the conditions set forth in subdivision (b)(1)m of this section. 
1.  A new or expanded water-dependent facility may be allowed provided that: 
i.  It does not conflict with the city's comprehensive plan. 
ii.  It complies with the performance criteria set forth in this part. 
iii.  Any non-water-dependent component is located outside of resource protection areas. 
iv.  Access will be provided with the minimum disturbance necessary. Where practicable, a single point of access will be provided. 
2.  Redevelopment outside designated intensely developed areas shall be permitted in the resource protection area only if there is no increase in the amount of impervious cover and no further encroachment within the resource protection area, and it shall conform to applicable erosion and sediment control and stormwater management criteria set forth within this article as well as all applicable stormwater management requirements. 
c.  A water quality impact assessment shall be required for any proposed land disturbances within any resource protection area and may be required within resource management areas as deemed necessary by the city manager, or designee, due to the unique characteristics of the site or based upon the intensity of development and in accordance with the provisions of section 37.1-52, plan of development. 
d.  Roads and driveways not exempt under section 37.1-54(a) of this chapter may be constructed in or across resource protection areas if the city manager, or designee, finds that: 
1.  There are no reasonable alternatives to aligning the road or driveway in or across the resource protection area. 
2.  The alignment and design of the road or driveway minimizes encroachment in the resource protection area and adverse effects on water quality. 
3.  The design and construction of the road or driveway satisfies all applicable criteria in this article, including submission of a water quality impact assessment as appropriate. 
4.  The plan for the road or driveway proposed in or across the resource protection area has been reviewed through the site plan or subdivision plan review process. 
e.  Land disturbance shall be limited to the area necessary to provide for the proposed use or development. 
1.  In accordance with an approved site plan, the limits of land disturbance, including clearing or grading shall be clearly shown on submitted plans and physically marked on the development site. 
2.  Where feasible, ingress and egress during construction shall be limited to one (1) access point, unless otherwise approved by the city manager, or designee. 
f.  Indigenous vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable consistent with the use or development proposed and in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as adopted by article VII of this chapter. 
1.  Existing trees shall be preserved outside the limits of land disturbance. Diseased trees or trees weakened by age, storm, fire, or other injury may be removed, pursuant to section 37.1-51(b)(2)a. 
2.  Clearing shall be allowed only to provide necessary vehicular access, positive site drainage, water quality BMPs, and the installation of utilities as approved by the city manager, or designee. 
3.  Prior to clearing or grading, suitable protective barriers, such as fencing shall be erected five (5) feet outside of the dripline of any tree or stand of trees to be preserved. These protective barriers shall remain so erected throughout all phases of construction. The storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill shall not be allowed within the area protected by the barrier unless otherwise authorized by the city manager, or designee. 
g.  Land development shall minimize impervious cover to promote infiltration of stormwater into the ground consistent with the proposed use or development. 
1.  Pervious surfaces, such as grid and modular pavements, shall be considered for any required parking area, alley, or other low traffic driveway and approved by the city manager, or designee. 
2.  Parking requirements shall be otherwise governed by the zoning ordinance. 
h.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or exceptions or exemptions thereto, including gardening, landscaping and maintenance activities, any land disturbing activities exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall comply with the requirements of article VII of this chapter, soil removal and other land-disturbing activities. 
i.  For any development or redevelopment that exceeds those land disturbance levels identified in subsection h, above, stormwater runoff shall be controlled in accordance with article IV of this chapter. 
j.  Prior to initiating grading or other on-site activities on any portion of a lot or parcel, all wetlands permits required by federal, state, and local laws and regulations shall be obtained and evidence of such submitted to the city manager, or designee, in accordance with section 37.1-52, plan of development. In lieu of the aforesaid permits, the applicant may present a letter from a licensed engineer certifying that in his opinion no such permits are required. A copy of said letter shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee. 
k.  Stormwater management criteria consistent with the water quality protection provisions of section 37.1-35 of article IV stormwater control regulations. 
1.  The following stormwater management options shall be considered to comply with this subsection of this chapter: 
i.  Incorporation on the site of best management practices that meet the water quality protection requirements set forth in this subsection. [For the purposes of this subsection, the "site" may include multiple projects or properties that are adjacent to one (1) another or lie within the same HUC where a single best management practice will be utilized by those projects to satisfy water quality protection requirements]; 
ii.  Compliance with a locally adopted regional stormwater management program, which may include a Virginia Pollution Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit issued by the department of environmental quality to a local government for its municipally owned separate storm sewer system discharges, that is reviewed and found by the board to achieve water quality protection equivalent to that required by this subsection; and 
iii.  Compliance with a site-specific VPDES permit issued by the department of environmental quality, provided that the local government specifically determines that the permit requires measures that collectively achieve water quality protection equivalent to that required by this subsection. 
2.  Any maintenance, alteration, use or improvement to an existing structure that does not degrade the quality of surface water discharge as determined by the city manager, or designee, may be exempted from the requirements of this subsection. 
Stormwater management criteria for redevelopment shall apply to any redevelopment, whether or not it is located within an intensely developed area designated by the city. 
l.  Where best management practices utilized require regular or periodic maintenance in order to continue their functions such maintenance shall be ensured by a maintenance agreement between the owner or developer and the city or some other effective mechanism that achieves an equivalent objective as determined by the city manager, or designee. 
m.  Flood control and stormwater management facilities that drain or treat water from multiple development projects or from a significant portion of a watershed may be allowed in resource protection areas provided that (1) the city has conclusively established the location of the facility within the resource protection area is the optimum location; (2) the size of the facility is the minimum necessary to provide necessary flood control and stormwater treatment, or both; (3) the facility must be consistent with the design standards contained in the Virginia BMP Clearinghouse or the City of Newport News Design Standards Manual, whichever is more stringent; (4) if all applicable permits for construction in state or federal waters are obtained from the appropriate state and federal agencies; (5) approval must be received from the city manager, or designee, prior to construction and (6) routine inspections and any maintenance required are to be performed on such facilities by the owner to assure that they continue to function as designed and such evidence of inspections and any maintenance is provided to the city manager, or designee, as set forth in sections 37.1-38 and 37.1-39 of this chapter. It is not the intent of this subsection to allow a best management practice that collects and treats runoff from only an individual lot or some portion of the lot to be located within a resource protection area. 
(2)  Resource protection area buffer requirements. Except as hereinafter set forth, the following requirements shall apply within all resource protection areas. Development and redevelopment within industrial waterfront IDAs is exempt from these requirements. 
To minimize the adverse effects of human activities on the other components of resource protection areas, state waters, and aquatic life, it is recognized that a one hundred-foot vegetative buffer area is effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. A vegetated buffer area not less than one hundred (100) feet in width shall be established where it does not exist and retained where already present. 
The buffer area shall be located adjacent to and landward of all RPA components and along both sides of any water body with perennial flow. The full buffer area shall be designated as the landward component of the RPA, in accordance with sections 37.1-49, areas of applicability and 37.1-52, plan of development. 
The one hundred-foot buffer area shall be deemed to achieve a seventy-five (75) percent reduction of sediments and a forty (40) percent reduction of nutrients. The buffer area shall be maintained to meet the following additional performance standards: 
a.  In order to maintain the functional value of the buffer area, indigenous vegetation may be removed subject to approval by the city manager, or designee, only to provide for reasonable sight lines, access paths, general woodlot management and best management practices, as follows: 
1.  Trees may be pruned or removed as necessary to provide for reasonable sight lines and vistas, provided that where they are removed, they shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. 
2.  Any path shall be constructed and surfaced so as to effectively control erosion. 
3.  Dead, diseased, or dying trees or shrubbery and noxious weeds may be removed, and thinning of trees allowed pursuant to sound horticultural standard, subject to approval of the city manager, or designee. 
4.  For shoreline erosion control projects, trees and woody vegetation may be removed, necessary control techniques employed, and appropriate vegetation established to protect or stabilize the shoreline in accordance with the best available technical advice and applicable permit conditions or requirements. 
b.  When the application of the buffer areas would result in the loss of a buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989 the city manager, or designee, may allow encroachment into the buffer area in accordance with section 37.1-52, plan of development and the following criteria: 
1.  Encroachments into the buffer area shall be the minimum necessary to achieve a reasonable buildable area for a principal structure and necessary utilities. 
2.  Where practicable, a vegetated area that will maximize water quality protection, mitigate the effect of buffer encroachment, and is, equal to the area of encroachment into the buffer area shall be established elsewhere on the lot or parcel. 
3.  The encroachment may not extend into the seaward fifty (50) feet of the buffer area. 
c.  When the application of the buffer area would result in the loss of a buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded between October 1, 1989 and March 1, 2002, encroachments into the buffer area may be allowed through an administrative process in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  The lot or parcel was created as a result of a legal process conducted in conformity with the city's subdivision regulations; 
2.  Conditions or mitigation measures imposed through previously approved exceptions shall be met; 
3.  If the use of a best management practice (BMP) was previously required, the BMP shall be evaluated to determine if it continues to function effectively and, if necessary, the BMP shall be re-established or repaired and maintained as required; and 
4.  The criteria in subdivision (2)b. of this section shall be met. 
(3)  Industrial waterfront intensely developed areas. For the purpose of this article, industrial waterfront IDAs shall serve as redevelopment areas in which development is concentrated. For the purposes of this subsection, development and redevelopment are subject to the same requirements and are collectively referred to as "development." Any development within industrial waterfront IDAs shall require a water quality impact assessment pursuant to section 37.1-52(f). Development within industrial waterfront IDAs shall be subject only to the requirements set forth below. 
a.  For development of land where all stormwater runoff is governed by a site specific Virginia Pollution Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit, compliance with the permit shall satisfy the performance standards of this subsection, provided that the city manager, or designee, specifically determines that the permit requires measures that collectively achieve water quality protection equivalent to that provided by this section; provided, further, that all land disturbing activities exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall comply with the requirements of article VII of this chapter and the owner obtains a state construction general permit, as required. A copy of such permit shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee. 
b.  For development of land where all stormwater runoff is not governed by a VPDES permit the following performance standards shall apply: 
1.  All development exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of land disturbance shall be subject to a plan of development process in accordance with the provisions of the site plan ordinance. 
2.  All land disturbing activities exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall comply with the requirements of article VII of this chapter. 
3.  Where best management practices utilized require regular or periodic maintenance in order to continue their functions, such maintenance shall be ensured by a maintenance agreement between the owner or developer and the city or some other effective mechanism that achieves an equivalent objective as determined by the city manager, or designee, as set forth in section 37.1-39 of this chapter. 
4.  For any development, stormwater runoff shall be controlled to satisfy performance standards contained in section 37.1-35 of this chapter. 
5.  Prior to initiating grading or other land disturbing activities exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, all wetlands permits required by federal, state, and local laws and regulations shall be obtained and evidence of such submitted to the city manager, or designee. In lieu of the aforesaid permits, the applicant may present a letter from a licensed engineer certifying that in his opinion no such permits are required. A copy of said letter shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee. 
6.  Prior to initiating grading or other land disturbing activities exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, the owner obtains coverage under and complies with the requirements of a state construction general permit, as applicable. A copy of such permit shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7592-19)  
Sec. 37.1-52. - Plan of development. 
(a)  Required information. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 33.02, Site Plan Ordinance, or the requirements of Appendix B, Subdivision Ordinance, of the City Code, all development in the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas shall follow the plan of development process consisting of the additional plans and studies identified below. These required plans and studies may be coordinated or combined, as deemed appropriate by the city manager, or designee. The city manager, or designee, may determine that some of the following information is unnecessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed development. 
The following plans or studies shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee, unless otherwise noted in each subsection: 
(1)  An environmental site assessment; 
(2)  A landscaping/tree preservation plan; 
(3)  A stormwater management plan in accordance with section 37.1-36; 
(4)  An erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as adopted by Article VII of this Chapter; and 
(5)  A water quality impact assessment as necessary under the requirements of subsection (f). 
(b)  Environmental site assessment. An environmental site assessment shall be prepared, based upon reliable on site investigation, and shall be submitted for any development or redevelopment. 
(1)  The environmental site assessment shall be drawn to scale and clearly delineate the following environmental features: 
a.  Tidal wetlands; 
b.  Tidal shores; 
c.  Nontidal wetlands connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or water bodies with perennial flow; and 
d.  A buffer area not less than one hundred (100) feet in width located adjacent to and landward of the components listed in subsection (a) through (c) above, and along both sides of any water body with perennial flow. 
(2)  Wetlands delineations shall be performed consistent with the procedures specified in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands. 
(3)  The environmental site assessment shall delineate the site-specific geographic extent of the resource protection area. 
(4)  The environmental site assessment shall be drawn at the same scale as the preliminary site plan or subdivision plat, and shall be certified as complete and accurate by a professional engineer or a certified land surveyor. 
(c)  Landscaping and tree preservation plan. A landscaping/tree preservation plan shall be submitted in conjunction with site plan approval or as part of subdivision plat approval. No clearing or grading of any lot or parcel shall be permitted without an approved landscaping/tree preservation plan. No landscaping/tree preservation plan shall be required in connection with development in Industrial Waterfront IDAs. 
Landscaping/tree preservation plans shall be prepared and certified by design professionals practicing within their areas of competence as prescribed by the Code of Virginia. 
(1)  Contents of the plan. 
a.  The landscaping plan shall be drawn to scale and clearly delineate the location, size and description of existing and proposed plant material. All existing trees on the site five (5) inches or greater DBH shall be shown on the landscaping plan. Where there are groups of five (5) or more trees, stands may be outlined instead. The specific number of trees be preserved outside of the limits of clearing shall be indicated on the plan. Dead, diseased and dying trees to be removed shall be clearly delineated on the landscaping plan. The plan shall be consistent with Chapter 33.02 of the City Code, Site Plan Ordinance. 
b.  Any required buffer area shall be clearly delineated and any plant material to be added to establish or supplement the buffer area, as required by this article, shall be shown on the landscaping plan. 
c.  Within the buffer area, trees to be removed for sight lines, vistas, vehicular access, paths, and shoreline erosion control, as provided for in this article shall be shown on the plan. Vegetation required to replace any existing trees within the buffer area shall be also shown on the landscaping plan. 
d.  Trees to be removed for shoreline stabilization projects and any replacement vegetation required shall be shown on the landscaping plan. 
e.  The plan shall depict grade changes or other work adjacent to trees which would affect them adversely. Specifications shall be provided as to how grade, drainage, and aeration would be maintained around trees to be preserved. 
f.  The landscaping plan will include specifications for the protection of existing trees during clearing, grading, and all phases of construction, consistent with such measures as described in Article IV of Chapter 37.1 and Chapter 33.02, Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code. 
(2)  Plant specifications. 
a.  All plant materials necessary to supplement the buffer area or vegetated areas outside the disturbed land area shall be installed in accordance with the specifications referred to in Chapter 33.02, Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code. 
b.  All supplementary or replacement plant materials shall be living and in a healthy condition. Plant materials shall conform to the standards of the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
c.  When existing trees and other vegetation to be preserved, as designated on an approved landscaping plan, are encroached upon, they shall be replaced. Replacement trees shall be planted at a ratio of three (3) to one (1), at the time of planting. 
(d)  Stormwater management plan. A stormwater management plan shall be submitted as part of the plan of development process required by this article and in conjunction with site plan or subdivision plan approval; provided, however, a stormwater management plan shall not be required if discharge of stormwater from an applicant's land is governed by a VPDES Individual Industrial Stormwater permit or MS4 permit provided such permits are determined by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality to be protective of water quality and in compliance with the assumptions contained in approved TMDLs, if any, for the waters into which they discharge. In such cases, a copy of the permit shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee, in lieu of the stormwater management plan. 
(1)  Contents of the plan. The stormwater management plan shall contain maps, charts, graphs, tables, photographs, narrative descriptions, explanation, and citations to supporting references as appropriate to communicate the information required by this article. At a minimum, the stormwater management plan must be prepared in conformance with section 37.1-36 of this Chapter. 
(e)  Erosion and sediment control plan. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee, that satisfies the requirements of, and in accordance with, Article VII of this Chapter, in conjunction with site plan or subdivision plan approval. 
(f)  Resource protection area and resource management area water quality impact assessment. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the water quality impact assessment is to: 
a.  Identify the impacts of proposed development or redevelopment on water quality and lands within the resource protection areas and the resource management areas as deemed necessary by the city manager, or designee, due to the unique characteristics of the site or based upon the intensity of development; 
b.  Ensure that, where development does take place within these areas, it will be the least disruptive; 
c.  Provide for administrative relief from the terms of this article when warranted and in accordance with the requirements contained herein; and 
d.  Specify mitigation which will address water quality protection. 
(2)  Water quality impact assessment required. A water quality impact assessment is required for any proposed land disturbances within the resource protection area, including any buffer area encroachment as provided for in section 37.1-51(b)(2), resource protection area buffer requirements. There shall be two (2) levels of water quality impact assessments: a minor assessment and a major assessment. 
(3)  Minor water quality impact assessment. A minor water quality impact assessment pertains only to land disturbance, development or redevelopment within the resource protection area which causes no more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land disturbance and requires any modification or reduction of the landward fifty (50) feet of the one hundred-foot buffer area. Submission of a plan of development that demonstrates through the use of calculations provided for by section 37.1-52(d)(1)c., that the remaining buffer area and necessary Best Management Practices will result in removal of no less than seventy-five (75) percent of sediments and forty (40) percent of nutrients from post-development stormwater runoff shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirement for a minor water quality impact assessment. Best Management Practices should retard runoff, prevent erosion and filter nonpoint source pollution the equivalent of the full undisturbed one hundred-foot buffer area. 
(4)  Major water quality impact assessment. A major water quality impact assessment shall be required for any land disturbance, development or redevelopment which: (i) exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land disturbance within a resource protection area or (ii) disturbs any other component of the RPA seaward of the landward fifty (50) feet of the one hundred-foot buffer area. The information required in this section shall be considered a minimum, unless the city manager, or designee, determines that some of the elements are unnecessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed use and development of land. 
a.  A hydrogeological element that: 
1.  Describes the existing topography, soils, hydrology and geology of the site and adjacent lands. 
2.  Describes the impacts of the proposed development on topography, soils, hydrology and geology on the site. 
3.  Describes the proposed mitigation measures for the potential hydrogeological impacts which may include: 
i.  Proposed erosion and sediment controls; including minimizing the extent of the cleared area, and cut and fill, perimeter controls, reduction of runoff velocities, measures to stabilize disturbed areas, schedule and personnel for site inspection; 
ii.  Proposed stormwater management system; 
iii.  Creation of wetlands to replace those lost; and 
iv.  Minimizing cut and fill. 
b.  A landscape element that describes the potential measures for mitigation of the water quality and land impacts including: 
1.  Replanting schedule for trees and other significant vegetation removed for construction; 
2.  Demonstrating that the design of the plan will provide effective erosion control and overland flow benefits from such vegetation; and 
3.  Demonstrating the use of indigenous plants to the greatest extent possible. 
c.  As part of any major water quality impact assessment submittal, the city manager, upon his own review or the recommendation of the designee, may require a review by the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). Upon receipt of a major water quality impact assessment, the city manager, upon his own review or the recommendation of the designee, will determine if such review is warranted and may request DEQ to review the assessment and respond with written comments. Any comments by DEQ may be incorporated into the final review by the city manager, or designee, provided that such comments are provided by DEQ within ninety (90) days of the request. 
(5)  Evaluation procedure. 
a.  Upon the completed review of a minor water quality impact assessment, the city manager, or designee, will determine if any proposed modification or reduction to the buffer area is consistent with the provisions of this article and that the following criteria have been satisfied: 
1.  The proposed encroachment is necessary due to the inability to place improvements elsewhere to provide a reasonable and appropriate buildable area on the site; 
2.  Impervious surface is minimized; 
3.  Proposed Best Management Practices, where required, achieve the requisite reductions in pollutant loadings; and 
4.  The development, as proposed, meets the purpose and intent of this article. 
b.  Upon completed review of a major water quality impact assessment, the city manager, or designee, will determine if the proposed development satisfies the following criteria: 
1.  Within any RPA, the proposed development is water-dependent; 
2.  Proposed erosion and sediment control concepts are adequate to achieve the reductions in runoff and prevent off-site sedimentation; 
3.  Proposed stormwater management concepts are adequate to control the stormwater runoff to achieve the required performance standard for pollutant control; 
4.  Proposed re-vegetation of disturbed areas will provide effective erosion and sediment control benefits; and 
5.  The cumulative impact of the proposed development, when considered in relation to other development in the vicinity, will not result in a significant degradation of water quality. 
(g)  Final plan. 
(1)  Final plans for all lands in connection with all development within a resource protection area shall include the following additional information. 
a.  The delineation of the Resource Protection Area ("RPA") boundary and any Resource Management Area ("RMA") boundary. The final plan shall include a note that states that the RPA will be retained as an undisturbed and vegetated one hundred (100) foot buffer not subject to development under this Code section 37.1-51(b)(1), unless the development is a water dependent facility or redevelopment. If the area to be developed has a septic system, or other onsite sewage treatment facility, the final plan shall include a note citing to this Code section 33-91.1, indicating that there is a requirement for pump-out of the system every five (5) years and a one hundred (100) percent reserve drain field sites for onsite sewage treatment systems; 
b.  The delineation of required buffer areas; 
c.  Evidence of all wetlands permits required by law or a letter from a licensed engineer certifying that in his opinion no such permits are required. A copy of said letter shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee; and 
d.  A maintenance agreement as deemed necessary and appropriate by the city manager, or designee, to ensure proper maintenance of Best Management Practices in order to continue their functions shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee, for review and approval. 
(2)  Installation and surety requirements. 
a.  When the occupancy of a structure is desired prior to the completion of the required landscaping, stormwater management facilities, or other specification of an approved plan, a certificate of occupancy may be issued only if the applicant provides to the city manager, or designee, a form of surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the remaining plant materials, related materials, and installation costs of the required landscaping or other specifications or maintenance costs for any required stormwater management facilities. 
b.  All required landscaping shall be installed and approved by the first planting season following issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the surety may be forfeited to the City of Newport News. 
c.  All required stormwater management facilities or other specifications shall be installed and approved within eighteen (18) months of project commencement. Should the applicant fail, after proper notice, to initiate, complete or maintain appropriate actions required by the approved plan, the surety may be forfeited to City of Newport News. The City of Newport News may collect from the applicant the amount by which the reasonable cost of required actions exceeds the amount of the surety held. 
d.  After all required actions of the approved plan have been completed, the applicant must submit a written request for a final inspection. If the requirements of the approved plan have been completed to the satisfaction of the city manager, or designee, such unexpended or unobligated portion of the surety held shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the applicant's request for final inspection. The city manager, or designee, may require a certificate of substantial completion from a professional engineer or Class III B Surveyor before making a final inspection. 
(h)  Administrative responsibility. Administration of the plan of development process shall be in accordance with Chapter 33.02, Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code. 
(i)  Denial of plan, appeal of conditions or modifications. 
(1)  In the event the final plan or any component of the plan of development process is disapproved and recommended conditions or modifications are unacceptable to the applicant, the applicant may appeal such administrative decision to the city manager, or designee. Such appeals must be in writing and be filed within ten (10) working days of the decision from which appeal is sought. Prior to granting relief to an application, the city manager must find that the plan is in accordance with all applicable ordinances and includes all necessary elements to mitigate any detrimental impact on water quality. If the city manager finds that the applicant's plan does not meet the above stated criteria, he shall deny the relief sought. 
(2)  If the city manager denies the relief sought as provided herein and the applicant contends such denial was not proper, he may appeal in writing to the circuit court of Newport News, provided that such appeal is filed with the circuit court within sixty (60) days following the date of denial. Such appeal shall be heard by the court, which shall uphold the decision of the city manager unless it finds that appellant has proved by clear and convincing evidence that there exists no rational basis to support the denial. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7453-18)  
Sec. 37.1-53. - Nonconforming uses and noncomplying structures. 
(a)  The lawful use of buildings or structures and land in conjunction with improvements which existed on July 1, 1991 and which is not in conformity with these provisions may be continued. 
(b)  No expansion of existing structures shall be allowed with the exception that: 
(1)  The city manager, or designee, may grant a development waiver for the expansion of existing legal nonconforming principal structures provided it has been certified that: 
a.  There will be no net increase in nonpoint source pollution load; 
b.  Any development or land disturbance exceeding an area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet complies with all erosion and sediment control requirements and any land disturbance exceeding one (1) acre applies for and receives coverage under and complies with the requirements of the state stormwater construction general permit, as applicable and provides proof of coverage to the city manager, or designee; 
c.  The requested waiver from the criteria is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
d.  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by chapter 37.1 of the City Code to other property owners who are subject to its provisions and who are similarly situated; 
e.  The waiver is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this part and is not of substantial detriment to water quality; 
f.  The exception request is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed; 
g.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed, as warranted, that will prevent the allowed activity from causing a degradation of water quality; 
h.  Other findings, if appropriate and required by the local government, are met. 
(2)  Structures existing within the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas as of the adoption date of this article which are destroyed by casualty or act of God may be reconstructed as a matter of right, provided that reconstruction begins within two (2) years of the casualty, reconstruction is, thereafter, diligently pursued, and the new structure is constructed entirely on or within the boundary (footprint) of the original structure. 
(3)  No development waiver shall be required to perform normal maintenance on any structure within a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area. 
(4)  No development waiver shall be processed unless the applicant provides satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city which have been properly assessed against the subject property have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-54. - Exemptions for utilities, railroads, public roads and facilities. 
(a)  Construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of electric, steam, natural gas, CATV, fiber optic and telephone and data transmission lines, wireless transmission infrastructure, railroads, and public roads and their appurtenant structures in accordance with regulations promulgated pursuant to: (i) the Erosion and Sediment Control Law (§§ 62.1-44.15:51-66 of the Code of Virginia, as amended) and (ii) the Stormwater Management Act (§§ 62.1-44.15:24-50 of the Code of Virginia, as amended), or an erosion and sediment control plan and a stormwater management plan approved by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation, will be deemed to constitute compliance with this article. The exemption of public roads is further conditioned on: 
(1)  Optimization of the road alignment and design, consistent with other applicable requirements, to prevent or otherwise minimize (i) encroachment in the resource protection area and (ii) adverse effects on water quality; and 
(2)  The exemption for public roads shall apply to all public roads as defined in section 37.1-48. 
(b)  Construction, installation, and maintenance of water, sewer, steam, natural gas and underground telecommunications and cable television lines owned, permitted, or both, by a local government or regional service authority shall be exempt from the criteria in this article provided that: 
(1)  To the degree possible, the location of such utilities and facilities should be outside resource protection areas; 
(2)  No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide for the proposed utility installation. 
(3)  All such construction, installation, and maintenance of such utilities and facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local permits and designed and conducted in a manner that protects water quality. 
(4)  Any land disturbance exceeding an area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet complies with all erosion and sediment control requirements of this article. 
(5)  Any land disturbance exceeding an area of one (1) acre obtains coverage under and complies with the requirements of the state stormwater construction general permit. 
(c)  Exemption for silvicultural activities, including harvesting timber, are exempt from the requirements of this article provided such operations adhere to water quality protection procedures prescribed by the Department of Forestry in its "Virginia's Forestry Best Management Practices for Water Quality" technical guide. 
(d)  Exemptions in resource protection areas. The following land disturbances are exempt in the resource protection areas from this Article of Chapter 37.1, provided, however that land disturbances exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet shall be subject to the provisions of Article IV and Article VII of section 37.1 of the Code: 
(1)  Water wells; 
(2)  Passive recreation facilities such as boardwalks, trails, and pathways; and 
(3)  Historic preservation and archeological activities; 
(4)  Provided that for (1), (2) or (3) above it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager, or designee, that: 
a.  Any required permits, except those to which this exemption specifically applies, shall have been issued; 
b.  Any land disturbance exceeding one (1) acre applies for and receives coverage under and complies with the requirements of the state stormwater construction general permit, as applicable, and provides proof of coverage to the city manager, or designee. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-55. - Exceptions. 
(a)  A property owner may apply to the board of zoning appeals for an exception to the requirements of this article. 
(b)  No exception shall be authorized except after notice and hearing, as required by § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, except that only one (1) hearing shall be required before the board. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the notice may be given by first class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. 
(c)  The board may grant exceptions to the provisions of sections 37.1-51(b)(1)b., 37.1-51(b)(1)c., 37.1-51(b)(1)d., 37.1-51(b)(1)m. and 37.1-51(b)(2) upon its making the following findings: 
(1)  The requested exception to the criteria is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
(2)  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by this chapter to other property owners who are subject to its provisions and who are similarly situated; 
(3)  The exception is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter and is not of substantial detriment to water quality; 
(4)  The exception request is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed; 
(5)  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed as warranted that will prevent the allowed activity from causing a degradation of water quality; and 
(6)  Other conditions required by the board are met. 
(d)  Exceptions to other provisions of this article may be granted administratively by the city manager, or designee, subject to the findings required by subsection (c) herein, provided that (1) exceptions to the criteria shall be the minimum necessary to afford relief; and (2) reasonable and appropriate conditions upon any exception granted shall be imposed, as necessary so that the purpose and intent of this article is preserved. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b), additions and modifications to existing legal nonconforming principal structures may be processed through the provisions of section 37.1-53, but without a requirement for a public hearing. This subsection shall not apply to accessory structures. 
(f)  No exception shall be processed unless the applicant provides satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city which have been properly assessed against the subject property have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-55.1. - Appeals, limitations, standard. 
An aggrieved party must file any appeal in the circuit court of the city of any decision of the board of zoning appeals regarding ordinances pursuant to this article within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision of the board. On appeal in the circuit court, the decision of the board of zoning appeals shall be presumed to be correct. The aggrieved party may rebut that presumption by showing to the satisfaction of the court that the board of zoning appeals applied erroneous principles of law, or that the decision of the board of zoning appeals was plainly wrong, was in violation of the purpose and intent of this article, and is not fairly debatable. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7500-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7500-18, adopted Sept. 25, 2018, amended the title of § 37.1-55.1 to read as herein set out. The former § 37.1-55.1 pertained to appeals, limitations.  
Sec. 37.1-56. - Conflict with other regulations. 
In any case where the requirements of this article conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Newport News or existing state or federal regulations, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-57. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day's continuance of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who: (i) violates any provision of this article or (ii) violates or fails, neglects, or refuses to obey any final notice, order, rule, regulation or variance or permit condition authorized under such chapter shall, upon such finding by an appropriate circuit court, be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each day of violation. Such civil penalties may, at the discretion of the court assessing them, be directed to be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating environmental damage to or restoring Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas therein, in such a manner as the court may direct by order. 
(c)  With the consent of any person who: (i) violates any provision of this article related to the protection of water quality in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas or (ii) violates or fails, neglects, or refuses to obey any notice, order, rule, regulation, or variance or permit condition authorized under such chapter, the city may provide for the issuance of an order against such person for the one-time payment of civil charges for each violation in specific sums, not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each violation. Such civil charges shall be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating environmental damage to or restoring Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas therein. Civil charges shall be in lieu of any appropriate civil penalty that could be imposed under subsection (b) of this section. Civil charges may be in addition to the cost of any restoration required or ordered by the city. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1)  
ARTICLE VI. - FERTILIZER REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1, which added Art. VI, §§ 37.1-58—37.1-63, as set out herein, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011. 
 
Sec. 37.1-58. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
Brand means a term, design, trademark or product name under which a regulated product is distributed. 
Bulk means in nonpackaged form. 
Bulk fertilizer means a fertilizer distributed in a nonpackaged form. 
Commercial fertilizer means a fertilizer distributed for farm use, or for any other use, other than any specialty fertilizer use. 
Compost means a biologically stable material derived from the composting process. 
Composting means the biological decomposition of organic matter. It may be accomplished by mixing and piling so as to promote aerobic decay, anaerobic decay, or both aerobic and anaerobic decay. 
Contractor-applicator means any person required to hold a permit to distribute or apply any regulated product pursuant to Virginia Code § 3.2-3608. 
Custom medium means a horticultural growing medium that is prepared to the exact specifications of the person who will be planting in the medium and delivered to that person without intermediate or further distribution. 
Deficiency means the amount of nutrient found by analysis to be less than that guaranteed, which may result from a lack of nutrient ingredients, or from lack of uniformity. 
Distribute means to import, consign, manufacture, produce, compound, mix, blend, or in any way alter, the chemical or physical characteristics of a regulated product, or to offer for sale, sell, barter, warehouse or otherwise supply regulated product in the Commonwealth. 
Distributor means any person who distributes. 
Fertilizer means any substance containing one (1) or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its plant nutrient content, and which is designed for use, or claimed to have value, in promoting plant growth. Fertilizer does not include unmanipulated animal and vegetable manures, marl, lime, limestone, and other products exempted by regulation. 
Fertilizer material means a fertilizer that: (i) contains important quantities of no more than one (1) of the primary plant nutrients: Nitrogen (N), phosphate (P205) and potash (K20); (ii) has eighty-five (85) percent or more of its plant nutrient content present in the form of a single chemical compound; or (iii) is derived from a plant or animal residue, a by-product, or a natural material deposit that has been processed or conditioned in such a way that its content of plant nutrients has not been materially changed, except by purification and concentration. 
Grade means the percentage of total nitrogen (N), available phosphate (P205) and soluble potash (K20), stated in whole numbers in the same terms, order, and percentages as in the guaranteed analysis, except that fertilizer materials, specialty fertilizers, bone meal, manures and similar raw materials may be guaranteed in fractional units. 
Guaranteed analysis means that information required by this chapter to be displayed on the label of a regulated product. 
Guarantor means the person whose name appears on the label of a regulated product. 
Horticultural growing medium means any substance or mixture of substances that is promoted as or is intended to function as an artificial soil for the managed growth of horticultural crops. 
Industrial co-product means a product derived from an industrial process that meets the definition of fertilizer, soil amendment, soil conditioner or horticultural growing medium. 
Investigational allowance means an allowance for variations, inherent in the taking, preparation, and analysis of an official sample. 
Label means the display of all written, printed, or graphic matter, upon the immediate container, or a statement accompanying a regulated product, including an invoice. 
Labeling means all written, printed, or graphic matter, upon or accompanying any regulated product, including invoices, advertisements, brochures, posters, and television and radio announcements, used in promoting the sale of the regulated product. 
Lawn fertilizer means any fertilizer intended for nonagricultural use on newly established turf areas from sod or seed during the first growing season, turf areas being repaired or renovated, and turf areas where soil tests performed within the past three (3) years indicate a nutrient deficiency. 
Lawn maintenance fertilizer means any fertilizer intended for the nonagricultural routine maintenance of turf. 
Licensee means the person who receives a license to distribute any regulated product under the provisions of this chapter. 
Manipulated manure means animal or vegetable manure that is ground, pelletized, mechanically dried, packaged, supplemented with plant nutrients or other substances other than phosphorus, or otherwise treated in a manner to assist with the sale or distribution of the manure as a fertilizer or soil or plant additive. 
Manufacturer means any person who manufactures, produces, compounds, mixes, blends, or in any way alters the chemical or physical characteristics of any regulated product. 
Mixed fertilizer means a fertilizer containing any combination or mixture of fertilizer materials. 
Official analysis means the analysis of an official sample, made by the commissioner. 
Official sample means the sample of regulated product taken by the commissioner, and designated as "official" by the board. 
Percent or percentage means the percentage by weight. 
Primary nutrient includes total nitrogen (N), available phosphate (P205), and soluble potash (K20). 
Quantity statement means the net weight (mass), net volume (liquid or dry), count or other form of measurement of a commodity. 
Registrant means the person who registers regulated products, under the provisions of this chapter. 
Regulated product means any product governed by this chapter, including any fertilizer, specialty fertilizer, soil amendment, soil conditioner, and horticultural growing medium. 
Soil amendment means any substance or mixture of substances, imported, manufactured, prepared or sold for manurial, soil enriching, or soil corrective purposes, or intended to be used for promoting or stimulating the growth of plants, increasing the productivity of plants, improving the quality of crops, or producing any chemical or physical change in the soil. The following are exempt from the definition of "soil amendment": fertilizer, unmanipulated or composted animal and vegetable manures, soil conditioners, horticultural growing media, agricultural liming materials, unmixed mulch and unmixed peat. 
Soil conditioner means any substance or mixture of substances imported, manufactured, prepared or sold for soil corrective purposes including polyelectrolytes such as complex vinyl and acrylic compounds and certain cellulose and lignin derivatives. 
Specialty fertilizer means a fertilizer distributed for nonfarm use, including use on home gardens, lawns, shrubbery, flowers, golf courses, municipal parks, cemeteries, greenhouses and nurseries. 
Stop sale, use, removal, or seizure order means an order that prohibits the distributor from selling, relocating, using, or disposing of a lot of regulated product, or portion thereof, in any manner, until the commissioner or the court gives written permission to sell, relocate, use or dispose of the lot of regulated product or portion thereof. 
Ton means a unit of two thousand (2,000) pounds avoirdupois weight. 
Turf means nonagricultural land that is planted as closely mowed, managed grass and includes golf courses, parks, cemeteries, publicly owned lands, and residential, commercial, or industrial property. 
Unmanipulated manure means substances composed of the excreta of domestic animals, or domestic fowls, that has not been processed or conditioned in any manner including processing or conditioning by drying, grinding, pelleting, shredding, addition of plant food, mixing artificially with any material or materials (other than those that have been used for bedding, sanitary or feeding purposes for such animals or fowls), or by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-59. - Regulation of fertilizer; authority. 
The city imposes the following prohibition of fertilizer in conjunction with requirements of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act (Virginia Code § 10.1-2100 et seq. and Chapter 37.1, Article V of the Code of the City of Newport News), the Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Virginia Code § 10.1-560 et seq. and Chapter 35 of the Code of the City of Newport News), the Stormwater Management Act (Virginia Code § 10.1-603.1 et seq. and Chapter 37.1, Article III of the Code of the City of Newport News), or other nonpoint source regulations adopted by the department of conservation and recreation or the soil and water conservation board. The provisions of this section shall not preempt the adoption, amendment, or enforcement of the Statewide Fire Prevention Code pursuant to Virginia Code § 27-97 and Title 16 of the Code of the City of Newport News and the Uniform Statewide Building Code pursuant to Virginia Code § 36-98 et seq. and Chapter 13 of the Code of the City of Newport News. 
(Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-60. - Regulation of sale and distribution of fertilizer; exemptions. 
(a)  Any person whose name is on the label of and who distributes in the City of Newport News any specialty fertilizer packaged in containers of fifty (50) pounds or less dry net weight, or five (5) gallons or less liquid net volume, shall provide evidence that the person has: (i) applied for registration for such specialty fertilizer with the commissioner of the department of agriculture and consumer services ("commissioner") on forms furnished or approved by the commissioner; (ii) paid to the commissioner by July 1 of each registration year a registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each grade under a given brand prior to distributing the fertilizer in the Commonwealth; and (iii) provided labels for each grade under a given brand with the application. 
(b)  Any person who distributes in the City of Newport News a soil amendment, soil conditioner, or horticultural growing medium shall provide evidence that he has: (i) applied for registration for such soil amendment, soil conditioner, or horticultural growing medium with the commissioner on forms furnished or approved by the commissioner; (ii) paid to the commissioner by July 1 of each registration year a registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each product name or brand of soil amendment, soil conditioner or horticultural growing medium prior to distributing the product in the Commonwealth; and (iii) provided labels for each product name or brand with the application. 
(c)  Any such person who distributes any product mentioned in subsections (a) or (b) above must obtain and display upon request a copy of the registration provided by the commissioner to the applicant after approval of the registration. 
(d)  Verification of any labeling claims for any regulated product may be required. 
(e)  Custom-media and horticultural growing media planted with live plant material are exempt from labeling and registration requirements and inspection fees. 
(f)  Beginning December 31, 2013, no lawn maintenance fertilizer containing more than zero percent phosphorus or other compounds containing phosphorus, such as phosphate, shall be offered for sale, distribution, or use in the City of Newport News. This prohibition does not include lawn fertilizer, manipulated manure, yard waste compost, products derived from sewage sludge, soils containing fertilizer, fertilizer products intended primarily for gardening, tree, shrub, and indoor plant application, including nurseries, or reclaimed water. The provisions of this section shall not restrict the continued sale by retailers of any prohibited fertilizer from any existing inventories in stock on December 31, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-61. - Exception for contractor-applicators, licensees regulated by the state, and golf courses. 
Contractor-applicators and licensees in full compliance with state regulations shall not be subject to local ordinances governing the use or application of lawn fertilizer and lawn maintenance fertilizer. Golf courses in compliance with this Virginia Code § 10.1-104.5. shall not be subject to any part of these ordinances governing the use or application of fertilizer. 
(Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-62. - Sale of deicing agents. 
Beginning December 31, 2013, it is unlawful for any person to offer for sale any deicing agent containing urea or other forms of nitrogen or phosphorus intended for application to parking lots, roadways, and sidewalks or other paved surfaces in the City of Newport News. The provisions of this section shall not restrict the continued sale by retailers of any deicing agent from any existing inventories in stock on December 31, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-63. - Labeling. 
(a)  The manufacturer or guarantor of any regulated product distributed in the City of Newport News shall affix a label to the container or provide an invoice at the time of delivery for a bulk regulated product that states in clear, legible and conspicuous form, in the English language, the following information: 
(1)  The quantity statement; 
(2)  The grade under a given brand. The grade shall not be required when no primary nutrients are claimed; 
(3)  The guaranteed analysis, which shall: 
a.  For fertilizers, conform to the following, with the percentage of each plant nutrient stated as follows: 
1.  Total Nitrogen (N) .....___% 
Available Phosphate (P205) .....___% 
Soluble Potash (K20) .....___% 
2.  For unacidulated mineral phosphate materials and basic slag, bone, tankage, and other organic phosphate materials, the available phosphate (P205), or the degree of fineness, or both, may also be guaranteed; 
3.  Guarantees for plant nutrients other than nitrogen (N), phosphate (P205), and potash (K20) shall be expressed in the form of the element. A statement of the sources of nutrients including oxides, salt, and chelates, may be required on the application for registration of specialty fertilizers, and may be included as a parenthetical statement on the label. Degree of acidity or alkalinity (pH), beneficial substances, or compounds determinable by laboratory methods also may be guaranteed by permission of the commissioner and with the advice of the Director of the Virginia Experiment Station. When any degree of acidity or alkalinity (pH), beneficial substances, or compounds are guaranteed, they shall be subject to inspection and analysis in accord with the methods and regulations prescribed by the board of agriculture and consumer services; 
b.  For soil amendments, consist of a list of ingredients, and may include a statement of naturally occurring nutrient levels; 
c.  For soil conditioners, including polyelectrolytes, contain the following information in the following form: 
1.  Name of active ingredient .....___% 
(name and list all) 
2.  Total other ingredients .....___% 
d.  For horticultural growing media, include a list of ingredients and other guarantees as required by regulation; 
e.  When compost derived from sewage sludge, hazardous materials, unrendered animals or poultry or their parts, or other source material specified in regulations established by the board of agriculture and consumer services is used as an ingredient, identify the source material of the compost; and 
f.  Include a list of such other ingredients as may be required by the board through regulation. 
(4)  The name and address of the registrant or licensee. 
(b)  A commercial fertilizer that is formulated according to specifications provided by a consumer prior to mixing, or any fertilizer formulated for a consumer, shall be labeled to show: (i) the quantity statement; (ii) the guaranteed analysis; and (iii) the name and address of the distributor or the licensee. 
(c)  For horticultural growing media, a statement of added fertilizers, if any, shall be listed on the registration document and customer sales invoice. 
(d)  Beginning December 31, 2013, lawn fertilizer and lawn maintenance fertilizer shall be labeled as follows: 
"DO NOT APPLY NEAR WATER, STORM DRAINS, OR DRAINAGE DITCHES. DO NOT APPLY IF HEAVY RAIN IS EXPECTED. APPLY THIS PRODUCT ONLY TO YOUR LAWN/GARDEN, AND SWEEP ANY PRODUCT THAT LANDS ON THE DRIVEWAY, SIDEWALK, OR STREET, BACK ONTO YOUR LAWN/GARDEN." 
(Ord. No. 6807-11, § 1)  
ARTICLE VII. - SOIL REMOVAL AND OTHER LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions of this article were previously codified as Ch. 35. 
 
Sec. 37.1-66. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the plan approving authority and the owner that specifies conservation measures which must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the plan approving authority in lieu of a formal site plan or an erosion and sediment control plan. 
Applicant means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan or an agreement in lieu of a plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, where required, authorizing land-disturbing activities to commence. 
Board means The Virginia State Water Control Board. 
Certified inspector means an employee or agent of the City of Newport News who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of project inspection, or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one (1) year after enrollment. 
Certified plan reviewer means an employee or agent of the City of Newport News who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review, (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one (1) year after enrollment, or (iii) is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1, Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950, as amended). 
Certified program administrator means an employee or agent of the City of Newport News who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of program administration, or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one (1) year after enrollment. 
Channel means a natural stream or waterway. 
Code of Virginia means the laws adopted by the Virginia General Assembly embraced in titles, chapters, articles and sections made effective February 1, 1950, as amended thereafter. 
Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
Dike means an earthen embankment constructed to confine or control water, especially one built along the banks of a river to prevent overflow of lowlands; levee. 
Erosion and sediment control plan, conservation plan or plan means a document containing material relating to the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or a group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory and management information with needed interpretations, and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions to ensure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. 
Erosion impact area means an area of land not associated with current land-disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
Land-disturbing activity means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into waters or onto adjacent properties. 
Local erosion and sediment control program or local control program means an outline of the various methods employed by the city to regulate land-disturbing activities and thereby minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program and may include such items as local ordinances, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement, and evaluation. 
Natural stream means nontidal waterways that are part of the natural topography. They usually maintain a continuous or seasonal flow during the year and are characterized as being irregular in cross-section with a meandering course. Constructed channels such as drainage ditches or swales shall not be considered natural streams. 
Owner means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
Permittee means the person to whom the VSMP authority permit is issued. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative or any other legal entity. 
Plan-approving authority means the city manager, or designee, who is responsible for determining the adequacy of a conservation plan submitted for land-disturbing activities on a unit or units of lands and for approving plans. 
Post-development means conditions that may be reasonably expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract of land. 
Pre-development means conditions at the time the erosion and sediment control plan is submitted to the VESCP authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time the erosion and sediment control plan for the initial phase is submitted for approval shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Responsible land disturber means the responsible land disturber can be anyone from the project team or development team holding a responsible land disturber certificate who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity for the project. In the absence of a specific responsible land disturber certificate issued by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation, persons having the following are automatically considered to be responsible land disturbers: (1) persons holding combined administrator, administrator, plan reviewer, inspector, or contractor certificates issued by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation, and (2) persons holding a valid professional engineer, land surveyor, landscape architect, or architect license issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia. The responsible land disturber cannot be an employee of any local department of conservation and recreation program authority or of the City of Newport News, Virginia (the local permit issuing authority). 
Shore erosion control project means an erosion control project approved by local wetlands boards, the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality or the United States Army Corps of Engineers and located on tidal waters and within nonvegetated or vegetated wetlands as defined in Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
Stabilized means land that has been treated to withstand normal exposure to natural forces without incurring erosion damage. 
State erosion and sediment control program or state program means the program administered by the board as it relates to this chapter, including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
State waters means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the Commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
Subdivision means the land subdivided; and, when appropriate to the context, the process of subdividing or re-subdividing. To subdivide means the division of a parcel of land by the owner thereof into lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development and shall specifically include the division of a lot or parcel of land by an owner in order to create within, on, or through that lot or parcel of land a street meeting the specifications of the Subdivision Ordinance of Newport News, Virginia to be dedicated to the public. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-67. - Conflict with other regulations. 
This article is intended to be supplemental to the subdivision ordinance, the zoning ordinance, the site plan ordinance, the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance, the stormwater ordinance and any other city regulation or policy governing the development of land, the removal of soil or other land-disturbing activity. The most restrictive standards imposed by any city ordinance, regulation or policy enacted prior to January 1, 2013 shall have precedence. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-68. - Exemptions from article. 
The following specific uses and activities shall be excluded from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work. 
(2)  Individual service connections. 
(3)  Installation, maintenance or repair of any underground public utility lines, when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road, street or sidewalk, provided such land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced. 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields, unless included in an overall plan for a land-disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system. 
(5)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted pursuant to Title 45.1 of the Virginia Code. 
(6)  Tilling, planting or harvesting agricultural, horticultural or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations; including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, de-silting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing land drainage and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (section 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of section 10.1-1163 of the Code of Virginia. 
(7)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company. 
(8)  Agricultural engineering operations including but not limited to, the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Virginia Dam Safety Act, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation. 
(9)  Disturbed land areas of less than twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet in size. 
(10)  Installations of fence and sign posts, telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles. 
(11)  Shore erosion control projects on tidal waters when all of the land-disturbing activities are within the regulatory authority of and approved by the Newport News Wetlands Board, the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; however, any associated land that is disturbed outside of this exempted area shall remain subject to this article. 
(12)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property and emergency repairs; however, if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan if the activity had not been an emergency, the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-69. - Violations of article—Generally. 
(a)  Any person who engages in any land-disturbing activity regulated by this article without first obtaining a permit for such activity as prescribed by this article shall be in violation of this article. 
(b)  Any person who violates any condition of any permit for land-disturbing activity or exceeds the scope of approval of any such activity shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-70. - Same—Notice. 
(a)  The city manager, or designee, upon determination of a violation of this article, shall immediately serve upon the violator, either delivered to the site of the land-disturbing activity to the agent or employee supervising such activities or by registered or certified mail, a notice to comply. Such notice shall set forth the conditions of noncompliance and shall specify the time within which measures of compliance must be completed. Failure to comply with such notice shall also be a violation of this article and may also be grounds for revocation of the permit, if applicable. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a violation of this article, the city manager, or designee, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this article, shall issue an order requiring that all or part of the land-disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken or, if land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan as provided in this article, requiring that all of the land-disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits are obtained. Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the Commonwealth, or where the land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan or any required permits, such an order may be issued whether or not the alleged violator has been issued a notice to comply as specified in this article. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the alleged violator has failed to comply with a notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for seven (7) days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority or alleged violator for appropriate relief to the Circuit Court of Newport News, Virginia. If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven (7) days from the date of service of the order, the city manager, or designee, may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the locality in which the site is located. The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the Circuit Court of Newport News, Virginia. Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by the city manager, or designee, may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Circuit Court of Newport News, Virginia to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective action or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city manager, or designee, from taking any other action specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-70.1. - Same—Right of entry 
(a)  The city manager, or any duly authorized agent of the city manager may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement approved by the city attorney, the city manager or any duly authorized agent of the city manager may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-71. - Same—Penalty; injunctive relief. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article is a class I misdemeanor. 
(b)  The city may apply to the circuit court for the city for injunctive relief to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article, without the necessity of showing that there does not exist an adequate remedy at law. 
(c)  In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this article, any person who violates any provision of this article may be liable to the city, in a civil action, for damages. 
(d)  In lieu of criminal sanctions, civil penalties may be imposed for violation of this article as follows: 
(1)  A civil penalty in the amount of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation shall be assessed for failure to provide, implement, maintain or properly install any of the following erosion and sediment control measures required by an approved plan. 
a.  Vegetative controls including, but not limited to, permanent or temporary soil stabilization. 
b.  Structural controls including, but not limited to, construction entrances, storm drain inlet and outlet protection, sediment traps and basins. 
c.  Transporting sediment or debris onto paved public road by vehicular traffic or runoff. 
d.  Perimeter controls including, but not limited to, straw bales or silt fences. 
e.  Commencement of land disturbing activities without a permit. 
(2)  Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) except that a series of violations arising from the commencement of land-disturbance activities without a city approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(e)  Without limiting the remedies provided in this article, any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this article shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. 
(f)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation, or any condition of a permit or any provision of this article, the city may provide, in an order issued by the city manager, or designee, against such person, for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limits specified in this article. 
(g)  Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met and the complaining party shall be required to prove negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(h)  Such civil penalties, as shall be imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to this article, shall be deposited into the stormwater management revenues of the city's treasury, as defined by section 37.1-11(11). 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-72. - Appeals from decisions under chapter. 
Final decisions of the city manager, or designee, under this article shall be subject to review by the circuit court for the city, provided an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the pertinent written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties, privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Secs. 37.1-73—37.1-82. - Reserved.  
Sec. 37.1-83. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall undertake any land-disturbing activity, except as exempted in this article, without first having submitted to the city manager, or designee, four (4) copies of an erosion and sediment control plan with certification that the plan will be followed and unless such plan has been approved as in compliance with the intent and requirements of this article and a permit certifying such approval has been issued as provided in this article. The city manager, or designee, may execute an agreement in lieu of a plan for construction of a single-family residence or disturbed areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. No permits that authorize land-disturbing activities shall be issued without an approved erosion control plan or an executed agreement in lieu of a plan. 
(b)  An erosion and sediment control plan shall be filed for a land-disturbing activity and the buildings constructed within, regardless of the phasing of construction. 
(c)  If individual lots or sections in a residential development are being developed by different property owners, all land-disturbing activities related to the building construction shall be covered by an erosion and sediment control plan or an agreement in lieu of a plan signed by the property owner. 
(d)  The city manager, or designee, may require an erosion and sediment control plan if in his opinion an agreement in lieu of a plan will not provide sufficient detail to determine the effectiveness of erosion and sediment transport control measures that may be required for the site. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-84. - Responsibility of property owner when work to be done by contractor. 
When any land-disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the required plan submissions and the obtaining of the permit required by this article shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-85. - Preparation of plan. 
(a)  The plan required by this article shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer or land surveyor duly licensed by the Commonwealth and shall be developed in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(b)  In the absence of an approved site plan issued pursuant to the site regulations of this code, an undisturbed buffer area as described in this subsection shall be accurately located on the erosion and sediment control plan. In such cases, the buffer area, which will function as an erosion control measure, shall be retained and remain undisturbed as follows, except as otherwise approved in the plan for ingress and egress: 
(1)  For parcel sizes less than one (1) acre, an undisturbed buffer area on the parcel twenty (20) feet in width, parallel and adjacent to all property lines shall be retained. For parcel sizes from one (1) acre but less than five (5) acres, an undisturbed buffer area on the parcel forty (40) feet in width parallel and adjacent to all property lines shall be retained. For all parcel sizes from five (5) acres but less than ten (10) acres, an undisturbed buffer area on the parcel sixty (60) feet in width parallel and adjacent to all property lines shall be retained. For all parcel sizes ten (10) acres or greater, an undisturbed buffer area on the parcel one hundred (100) feet in width parallel and adjacent to all property lines shall be retained. 
(2)  All vegetation within a buffer area as defined in the zoning ordinance, plus an additional ten-foot strip within the parcel and adjacent to but outside of such buffer area, shall be retained and remain undisturbed. If a buffer area is adjacent to a property line, the greater of the requirements of the preceding subsection (1) or this subsection shall apply. 
(c)  All areas of vegetation, including ground cover, trees, shrubs, grass and other plants, to be retained in accordance with chapter 33.02, Site Regulations of this Code, shall be marked in the field prior to clearing taking place. One temporary point of access no greater than twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be allowed for site clearance. 
(d)  Land disturbance shall be limited to the area necessary to provide for the desired use or development. 
(1)  In accordance with an approved site plan, the limits of land disturbance, including clearing or grading shall be clearly shown on submitted plans and physically marked on the development site. 
(2)  Where feasible, ingress and egress during construction shall be limited to one access point, unless otherwise approved by the city manager, or designee. 
(e)  Indigenous vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible consistent with the use and development permitted and in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. 
(1)  Existing trees more than five (5) inches in diameter four and one-half (4.5) feet above existing grade shall be preserved outside the limits of land disturbance. Trees that are diseased or that have been weakened by age, storm, fire or other injury may be removed. 
(2)  Clearing shall be allowed only to provide necessary visual and vehicular access, positive site drainage, water quality stormwater management control facilities, and the installation of utilities as approved by the city manager, or designee. 
(3)  Prior to clearing or grading, suitable protective barriers, such as fencing, shall be erected five (5) feet outside of the dripline of any tree or stand of trees to be preserved. These protective barriers shall remain so erected throughout all phases of construction. The storage of equipment, materials, debris or fill shall not be allowed within the area protected by the barrier unless otherwise authorized by the city manager, or designee. 
(f)  Land development shall minimize impervious cover to promote infiltration of stormwater into the ground consistent with the use or development permitted. 
(g)  As a prerequisite to approval of the plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide, in a note placed on the plan, the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, as provided by law and set forth in the Code of Virginia, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-86. - Approval or disapproval of plan. 
(a)  The city manager, or designee, shall review plans submitted to him and grant written approval within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the plan if he determines that the plan meets the requirements of the guidelines and standards prescribed in this article and if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the conservation measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions of this article. In addition, as a prerequisite to engaging in the land-disturbing activities shown on an approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plans shall provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence to the city manager, or designee, as provided by § 62.1-44.15:52 of the Code of Virginia, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity. However, the city manager, or designee, may waive the certificate of competence requirement for an agreement in lieu of a plan for construction of a single family residence. If a violation occurs during the land-disturbing activity, then the person responsible for carrying out the agreement in lieu of a plan shall correct the violation and provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, issued by the board, as provided by § 62.1-44.15:52 of the Code of Virginia. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence prior to engaging in land-disturbing activities may result in revocation of the approval of the plan and the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(b)  When a plan is determined to be inadequate, written notice of disapproval stating the specific reasons for disapproval shall be communicated to the applicant within forty-five (45) days. The notice shall specify the modifications, terms and conditions that will permit the approval of the plan. If no action is taken by the city manager, or designee, within the time specified above, the plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(c)  Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one local control program, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to comply with the program of the jurisdiction wherein any portion of the land is located. However, an erosion and sediment control plan may, at the option of the applicant, be submitted to the board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. Regardless of the procedure followed by the applicant for plan approval, land-disturbing activity which takes place within the municipal boundaries of the City of Newport News shall be inspected by an inspector employed by the city and the charge set forth in this article for a land-disturbing permit shall be paid to the city before any land-disturbing activities will be allowed to commence. 
(d)  In order to prevent further erosion, the city manager, or designee, may require approval of a plan for any land identified in the local control program as an erosion impact area. 
(e)  Electric, natural gas and telephone utility companies, interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline companies and railroad companies shall file a general erosion and sediment control specifications annually with the board for review and approval. The specifications shall apply to: 
(1)  Construction, installation or maintenance of electric transmission, natural gas and telephone utility lines and pipelines; and 
(2)  Construction of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communications facilities and other related structures and facilities of the railroad company. 
(f)  A state agency shall not undertake a project involving a land-disturbing activity unless (i) the state agency has submitted annual specifications for its conduct of land-disturbing activities which have been reviewed and approved by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation as being consistent with the state program, or (ii) the state agency has submitted a conservation plan for the project which has been reviewed and approved by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-87. - Amendment of approved plan. 
An erosion and sediment control plan approved under this article may be amended by the city manager, or designee, in the following cases: 
(1)  Where inspection has revealed that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulatory provisions; or 
(2)  Where the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this article, are agreed to by the city manager, or designee, and the person responsible for carrying out the plan. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-88. - Variances. 
The city manager, or designee, may waive or modify any of the regulations that are deemed inappropriate or too restrictive for site conditions, by granting a variance. A variance may be granted under these conditions: 
(1)  At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request a variance to become part of the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall explain the reasons for requesting variances in writing. Specific variances which are allowed by the city manager, or designee, shall be documented in the plan. 
(2)  During construction, the person responsible for implementing the approved plan may request a variance in writing from the city manager, or designee. The city manager, or designee, shall respond in writing either approving or disapproving such a request. If the city manager, or designee, does not approve a variance within ten (10) working days of receipt of the request, the request shall be considered to be disapproved. Following disapproval, the applicant may resubmit a variance request with additional documentation. 
(3)  The city manager, or designee, shall consider variance requests judiciously, keeping in mind both the need of the applicant to maximize cost effectiveness and the need to protect offsite properties and resources from damage. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-89. - Aggressive, constant action required. 
Should a land-disturbing activity not begin during the one hundred eighty (180) day period following plan approval or cease for more than one hundred eighty (180) days, the city manager, or designee, may evaluate the existing approved erosion and sediment control plan to determine whether the plan still satisfies local and state erosion and sediment control criteria and to verify that all design factors are still valid. If the city manager, or designee, finds the previously filed plan to be inadequate, a modified plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the resumption of land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Secs. 37.1-90—37.1-92. - Reserved.  
Sec. 37.1-93. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to undertake any land-disturbing activity, except as exempted in this article, without first obtaining a permit for such land-disturbing activity from the city manager, or designee. No permit shall be issued by the city manager, or designee, until proof of coverage under the state stormwater construction general permit, as may be applicable, has been submitted. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-94. - Application; fee. 
All fees are addressed in section 37.1-37.2. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7088-14, § 1)  
Sec. 37.1-95. - Issuance and term of permit; bond. 
(a)  In the case of approval of a plan submitted under this article, the city manager, or designee, shall issue a permit certifying approval of the land-disturbing activity. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall provide to the city a performance bond or other security in the form of a cash escrow, letter of credit, corporate surety bond, or other such legal arrangement as may be approved by the city attorney. Such bond or security shall be in an amount to be determined by the city manager, or designee, and shall be sufficient to ensure that emergency measures may be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should the applicant fail, after proper notice and within the time specified, to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation action which may be required as a result of such land-disturbing activity. The bond minimum shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) or five hundred dollars ($500.00) per acre of disturbed area, whichever is greater. If the city takes such conservation action upon such failure by the permittee, the permittee shall pay to the city the difference between the amount of the security and the actual cost of such action if it exceeds the amount of the security held. Within sixty (60) days after the completion of the land-disturbing activity, as indicated by the issuance of a certificate of completion under this article, such security or the unexpended or un-obligated portion thereof shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated as the case may be. 
(b)  A bond shall not be required for an agreement in lieu of a plan. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-96. - Standards for land-disturbing activities and control practices. 
Land-disturbing activities controlled by this article shall be designed and conducted in a manner consistent with the standards described in 9VAC25-870-40 [of the Virginia Administrative Code]. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-97. - Periodic inspections of land-disturbing activities. 
The city manager, or designee, shall make such periodic inspections of land-disturbing activities as provided in the state program to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation resulting from the land-disturbing activity. The right of inspection shall be inherent in the issuance of the permit under this article. The owner, occupier or operator shall be given an opportunity to accompany the city manager, or designee, on the inspections. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 37.1-98. - Final inspection and certificate of completion of land-disturbing activity. 
Upon completion of a land-disturbing activity, the permittee shall notify the city manager, or designee, who shall make a final inspection of the project. Upon finding satisfactory evidence of compliance with the approved plan and the achievement of adequate stabilization, the city manager, or designee, shall issue a certificate of completion. "Adequate stabilization" of a site shall be determined by the city manager, or designee. 
(Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7017-13, § 1, adopted November 26, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Chapter 38 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Responsibilities of department of public works relative to streets, § 2-387; restrictions on posting, distribution, etc., of advertising matter on or near streets and sidewalks, § 3-3 et seq.; depositing dead animals on streets or sidewalks, § 6-11; leaving maimed or diseased animal in street, § 6-61; streets and sidewalks abutting automobile graveyards to be kept clean and clear, §§ 8-11, 8-12; Bicycles, motorized scooters or electric power-assisted bicycles and mopeds, Ch. 10; building regulations, Ch. 13; use of streets by ice cream vendors, § 17-99 et seq.; duty of property owners to keep sidewalks free of litter, § 19-26; expectorating on sidewalks, § 20-6; streets and street lights in mobile home parks, §§ 25-34, 25-35; traffic, Ch. 26; disorderly conduct in responsibility of division of recreation and parks relative to street trees, § 29-4; streets, § 28-11; parks, squares and recreational facilities, Ch. 29; discharge of firearms along, across or near streets, § 43-9; location of gunnery ranges near streets, § 43-22; zoning ordinance, Ch. 45; design standards for streets and required street and sidewalk improvements in subdivisions, App. B, §§ 8-03, 9-01, 9-02; street lights in subdivisions, App. B, § 9-07; city's acceptance of streets in subdivisions, App. B, § 9-11. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to streets and sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2000 et seq.; official map, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2233; local authority over highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-224 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Certain ordinances relating to streets and alleys not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the city; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 38-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 38-3. - Obstructions generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or have placed or installed on any sidewalk, street, alley or public right-of-way or easement in the city any fence, gate, porch, step, post, barrel, bench, bar, table, box, cart, trailer, vehicle, merchandise, goods, wares or other fixtures or articles whatsoever, whether they be for sale, exhibition or any other purpose. This section shall be subject, however, to exceptions, limitations and provisions set out in this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy at law, the city manager or his designee may compel the abatement or removal of all items, fixtures or articles identified in subparagraph (a) herein, and hereinafter referred to as an "obstruction" on a sidewalk, street, alley or public right-of-way or easement. 
(c)  Any person who shall cause or permit the existence of any obstruction governed by this section and not otherwise provided for in the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor for each day the obstruction may continue, after due notice shall have been given to remove, correct or abate the same. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee may mail notices of violations of this section to the owner or owners of record of the property at the address maintained by the real estate assessor for the mailing of tax assessments and/or to the occupant or occupants of the property. The notices shall advise the owner or owners or the occupant or occupants of the requirements of this ordinance and that failure to remove, correct or abate the obstruction shall result in the city removing, correcting or abating that obstruction with the person or persons to whom notice was sent being responsible for the costs thereof as provided below. 
(1)  Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any person to whom notice of abatement was given or who is responsible for removing, correcting or abating an obstruction, the city manager or his designee is authorized to have the removal, correction or abatement performed by city forces or by contract. The actual costs of such removal, correction or abatement, plus a charge for administrative costs of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be charged to the person or persons to whom the notice was directed. 
(2)  Whenever the city or its agent has work done pursuant to subsection (1) above, the cost and expenses of such work shall be determined and collected as provided below: 
a.  When the notice required by this section was directed to a person other than the owners of the property, the person to whom the notice was directed shall be billed for the actual costs of such work plus the charge for administrative costs. If such bill is not paid within thirty (30) days, legal action may be instituted for its collection. 
b.  When the notice required by this section was directed to the owner or owners of the property, the city manager or his designee shall certify to the city treasurer the amount of the actual cost of such work, plus the administrative costs; and the city treasurer shall include such total amount in the next regular tax bill for payment, and such amount shall be collected by the treasurer as other taxes and levies are collected. Every charge over two hundred dollars ($200.00) assessed under this section which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such real property. 
c.  Liens established in accordance with subsection (2)b. shall have the same priority as other unpaid local taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner as provided in Articles 3 and 4 of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1, or as those articles are subsequently amended. The city manager may waive such liens in order to facilitate the sale of the property; provided, however, such liens may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner and who has not business association with the owner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 33; Code 1961, § 36-16; Ord. No. 6055-04. § 1)  
Sec. 38-3.1. - Dumpsters on public streets, public rights-of-way and public easements of right-of-way. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in the City Code, it shall be unlawful to place dumpsters, which term includes similar commercial or privately owned containers but not residential-use containers, on a public street or in a public right-of-way or public easement of right-of-way. The term "right-of-way" specifically includes public sidewalks, pedestrian pathways and bicycle paths. 
(b)  Upon proper application by the property owner to the department of engineering, a permit may be issued that authorizes the placement of a dumpster to serve the applicant's property on a public street, public right-of-way and public easement right-of-way, conditioned upon the following criteria: 
(1)  There must be no other practicable location for the dumpster on the applicant's private property as determined by the department of engineering. 
(2)  If determined necessary by the director of engineering or his designee, the applicant shall construct or reconstruct necessary portions of the street, public right-of-way or public easement of right-of-way as required in order to withstand the additional weight and pressure of the dumpster itself and any vehicle that would be used to empty the dumpster. 
(3)  The dumpster shall be placed as determined by the director of engineering or his designee so as to be the last obstructive to the street, public right-of-way or public easement of right-of-way. 
(4)  The applicant shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city and its employees from and against all claims of personal injury, including death, and property damage alleged to have arisen as a result of the placement of the dumpster in the public street, public right-of-way or public easement right-of-way. The applicant shall provide and maintain liability insurance covering the placement of the dumpster in the street, public right-of-way or public easement of right-of-way, which insurance shall include a separate endorsement adding the city as additional insured thereon. The insurance shall be of a "per occurrence" type and shall be in a combined single limit amount of at least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). The insurance required by this section shall be approved by the city attorney's office prior to issuance of the relevant permit. 
(c)  Each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by the payment of a non-refundable processing fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(d)  Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire three (3) years to the day from the date of its issuance unless sooner terminated by the director of engineering or his designee as a result of a violation of the conditions of the permit by the permittee. 
(e)  In the event any of the conditions of the permit are violated, the director of engineering or his designee, in his or her sole discretion, may terminate the permit. In the event the permit is terminated, notice shall be provided the permittee at the address provided on the permit application. Such notice shall be deemed delivered whether by hand or by certified mail and shall direct the permittee to immediately remove the dumpster from the street, public right-of-way or public easement of right-of-way and properly relocate the dumpster. If the dumpster is not removed in accordance with the termination notice, the director of engineering or his designee shall cause the dumpster to be removed and the costs therefor shall be a debt of, charged to and collected from the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 4616-94, § 1)  
Sec. 38-3.2. - Permit for sidewalk use in Hilton Village Historic District commercial area. 
(a)  Permit required. The director of engineering may issue a permit authorizing the use of the special sidewalk easement area within the Hilton Village Historic District commercial area for certain items of street furniture, which is defined as chairs, tables, awnings, umbrellas, planters, and other outdoor furniture related to the operation of a business that is adjacent to the special sidewalk easement. The special sidewalk easement area is that area for which individual property owners granted sidewalk easements to the city, in addition to the right-of-way for Warwick Boulevard which pre-existed those grants. When issuing a permit the director of engineering shall consider the recommendations of the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board. 
(b)  Application; architectural review board recommendation. Persons wishing to place any item(s) of street furniture in the special sidewalk easement area shall make application to the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board prior to requesting a permit from the director of engineering. The board shall review and recommend to the director of engineering the placement, number, character, color, size, decorative features and construction of such street furniture for use in the special sidewalk easement area identified in subsection (a). The board then shall recommend to the director of engineering whether or not a permit should be issued, and under what conditions, if any. 
(c)  Guidelines for street furniture. All items placed in the special sidewalk easement area shall be constructed of materials and have colors appropriate and compatible to the historic district. Tables, benches and chairs shall be made of wood, wrought iron, or other materials determined to be appropriate or compatible by the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board. Awnings and umbrellas shall be made of canvas or other fabric determined to be compatible and appropriate by the board, and shall have a size and color approved by the board. Planters shall be made of terra cotta, concrete, wood or other material determined by the board to be appropriate and compatible to the historic district, and shall have a size and color approved by the board. The items of street furniture listed in Table 1 have been preapproved by the board as to color, size and material. 
The requirements to make application to the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board or to utilize street furniture previously approved by said Board or materials, designs or colors required by this subsection shall not apply to those applicants for a permit authorizing the use of the special sidewalk easement who desire to utilize street furniture that has been used since March 12, 1997. This exception notwithstanding, on and after May 1, 1997, the other requirements of this ordinance must be complied with before the grandfathered street furniture may be used in the special sidewalk easement area. Any street furniture so grandfathered must be maintained in good, safe condition and be serviceable for the purpose for which it was designed; and any street furniture that is removed from use due to wear and tear or its inability to serve the purpose for which it was designed may not be replaced by items of street furniture that do not meet all requirements of this ordinance. 
Items placed in the special sidewalk easement area shall be located in the running bond paver sections of sidewalks adjacent to buildings. Items shall not be placed on the herring bone patterned paver fields or the adjoining soldier course borders. 
(d)  Insurance required. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, the applicant, the street furniture owner, or the property owner shall file with the city attorney evidence of general comprehensive liability insurance insuring against claims, demands or actions arising out of or in connection with the existence of the items to be placed within the special sidewalk easement area. The policy of insurance shall require the insurer to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all claims for injury or damage, and shall pay all judgments, costs or expenses which the city may incur or suffer by reason of granting a permit in connection with the erection, alteration, maintenance, repair, removal or existence of such items. Such policy of insurance shall provide liability coverage for bodily injury, death and property damage of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limit during any one (1) occurrence for injury to or death of any one (1) or more persons and for property damage or destruction suffered as a result of the existence of such street furniture and shall name the City of Newport News as an additional insured. All such insurance required to be carried by the permit holder shall be with an insurance company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia and approved by the Newport News City Attorney's Office. Such insurance (i) shall contain an endorsement that such policy shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding that the insured has released its right of action against any party before the occurrence of a loss; (ii) shall name the City of Newport News as an additional insured party; and (iii) shall provide that the policy shall not be canceled, terminated or materially amended without at least forty-five (45) days' prior written notice [fifteen (15) days if due to nonpayment of premium] to the City of Newport News. Prior to the issuance of the permit, evidence satisfactory to the Newport News City Attorney's Office of the payment of all premiums for such policy, shall be delivered to the Newport News City Attorney's Office for review. As a condition subsequent to the issuance of the permit, the permit holder shall maintain the required insurance at all times during which the permitted item or items are located in the special sidewalk easement area. 
TABLE 1 
Wrought Iron Furniture 
Arm Benches 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Victor Stanley 	Classics 	4 ft. C - 10 
		6 ft. C - 10 
		8 ft. C - 10 
Victor Stanley 	Classics 	4 ft. CL - 40 
		6 ft. CL - 40 
		8 ft. CL - 40 
Columbia Cascade 	TimberForm 	#2118-6 
		#2814-AT 
King River Casting 	Victorian 	*VBS 48" 
		*VBP 60" 
 
*Black Only 
Backless Benches 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Victor Stanley 	Classics 	4 ft. C-7 
		6 ft. C-7 
		8 ft. C-7 
Columbia Cascade 	TimberForm 	#2123-6 
 
Loveseats 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
King River Casting 	Victorian 	VBLS 40" 
 
Backed Chairs 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Landscape Forms 	Traverse 	*TR3001 BS-20 
	Firenze 	*FZ3001-BS-21 
Smith & Hawken 	Bristro 	M4159 Green 
		M4358 Black 
Hauser 	Erin Mills 	#1465 
 
*Red Chairs Not Allowed. 
Wrought Iron Furniture 
Backed Chairs With Armrest 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Landscape Forms 	Traverse 	*TR3001-BA-20 
	Tables 	
Victor Stanley 	Classics 	4 ft. C-9 
		6 ft. C-9 
		8 ft. C-9 
Smith & Hawken 	Bristro 	26 in. M4158 Green 
		26 in. M4495 Black 
		38 in. M392324 Black 
 
Wood Furniture 
Arm Benches 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Country Casual 	Windermere 	4 ft. #4501 
		5 ft. #4502 
		6 ft. #4503 
		8 ft. #4504 
Country Casual 	Windsor 	4 ft. #4401 
		5 ft. #4402 
		6 ft. #4403 
Country Casual 	Mendip 	4 ft. #4601 
		5 ft. #4602 
		6 ft. #4603 
		8 ft. #4604 
Country Casual 	Clifton 	4 ft. #4201 
		5 ft. #4202 
Kingsley Bate 	Evanston 	66 in. TR66 
DSF 	Evenlode 	4 ft. #420 
		5 ft. #421 
		6 ft. #422 
DSF 	Gloster 	5 ft. #409 
		6 ft. #410 
		8 ft. #412 
 
*Red Chairs Not Allowed 
Wood Furniture 
Arm Benches 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Smith & Hawken 	Gloucester 	5 ft. M496919 
		6 ft. M496927 
		8 ft. M496935 
DSF 	Mata Hari 	5 ft. #290 
Landscape Forms 	Cumberland 	CU3005-BS-72 
Landscape Forms 	Prairie 	PR30005-BS-72 
 
Backless Benches 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Country Casual 	Banbury 	4 ft. #4310 
		5 ft. #4311 
		6 ft. #4312 
DSF 	Brunel 	6 ft. #428 
Kingsley Bate 	Evanston 	ET 50 
		ET 60 
 
Loveseats 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Country Casual 	Brittany 	4½ ft. #6302 
		5½ ft. #6303 
 
Armchair 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Country Casual 	Amberley Carver 	#4844 
	Windermere 	#4505 
	Windsor 	#4405 
	Brittany 	#6305 
	Devon Carver 	#4826 
	Clifton 	#4205 
DSF 	Evenlode 	#425 
Smith & Hawken 	Giverny 	M5281 
	Inverness 	M5932 
Kingsley Bate 	Dunbarton 	DN25 
		MDN25 
 
Wood Furniture 
Sidechairs 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Country Casual 	Amberley 	#4845 
	Devon 	#4825 
Smith & Hawken 	Inverness 	M5932 
 
Tables 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Country Casual 	Arundel 	3 ft. sq. #4855 
	Chelmsford 	43 in. #4882 
		52 in. #4880 
		59 in. #4881 
	Kendall 	3 ft. #4860 
	Kingston 	3 ft. #4854 
	Minton 	6 ft. #4886 
Smith & Hawken 	Hawthorn 	M5913 
DSF 	Thornbury 	3 ft. #660 
		4 ft. #661 
		5 ft. #662 
		3 ft. sq. #663 Oak 
		6 ft. sq. #680 Oak 
Smith & Hawken 	Sussex 	4 ft. M5666 
		6 ft. M498006 
 
Umbrellas 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Country Casual 	Octagonal 	8 ft. Oyster #4890OY 
		8 ft. Green #4890GR 
		10 ft. Oyster #4895OY 
		10 ft. Green #4895GR 
Landscape Forms 	Bristro 	6 ft. UM7002-BR-72 
	Morgan 	8 ft. UM7002-MG-90 
	Market Place 	6 ft. octag. UM7008-MK-72 
		8 ft. octag. UM7008-MK-96 
		11 ft. octag. UM7008-MK-132 
		12½ ft. UM7008-MK-150 
		7 ft. sq. UM7001-MK-84 
		9½ ft. sq. UM7001-MK-114 
		11 ft. sq. UM7001-MK-132 
 
*Umbrellas may be one (1) solid dark color or two (2) dark colors only. 
TRASH RECEPTACLES 
Manufacturer 	Brand Name 	Model Number 
Victor Stanley 	Ironsites 	S-20 
		S-35 
		S-42 
Victor Stanley 	Economy 	ES-135 
		ES-142 
		ES-235 
		ES-242 
		ES-335 
		ES-342 
 
(Ord. No. 4996-97, § 1)  
Sec. 38-3.3. - Permit for outdoor dining. 
(a)  Permit required. The director of engineering may issue a permit authorizing the use of the right of way for outdoor dining when the outdoor dining does not adversely impact pedestrian and vehicular flow and safety. 
(b)  Application. Application for outdoor dining must be filed with the department of engineering on forms provided by that department. The non-refundable application fee is fifty dollars ($50.00). The annual permit fee is five hundred dollars ($500.00). Permits must be renewed annually. 
(c)  Guidelines. The following provisions will be applicable to all operators of outdoor dining facilities who have obtained a permit: 
(1)  The business must be a properly zoned and licensed food or beverage establishment located on the interior first floor of a structure adjacent to the sidewalk area where the outdoor dining is proposed. 
(2)  The permit shall be revocable at any time by the director of engineering or his designee. 
(3)  The outdoor dining area shall be temporary, such that posts, chairs, tables, planters and other equipment, referred to herein as "dining equipment," can be removed when not in use and the interior food and beverage establishment is closed. 
(4)  The outdoor dining area may extend into the right of way a maximum of one-half (½) of the sidewalk width from the property line of the permittee, provided that no less than five (5) feet of clear and unobstructed sidewalk width remains for pedestrian use. 
(5)  The director of engineering may reduce the outdoor dining area based upon right of way flow and safety concerns. 
(6)  The outdoor dining area, when not in use, shall be maintained in a useable state and chairs, tables and other appurtenances and dining equipment shall not be stacked or stored outdoors. The outdoor dining area shall not be enclosed. 
(7)  The permittee agrees to maintain in good condition all appurtenances and dining equipment placed in the city right of way or on city property and must protect sidewalk finishes and surfaces from damage. 
(8)  Dining equipment must be located in the public right of way immediately adjacent to the permittee's food and beverage establishment and may not extend beyond the street frontage of same. 
(9)  The applicant shall submit and if a permit is issued shall adhere to an outdoor dining layout identifying the number, type and location of tables, chairs, umbrellas and other dining equipment. 
(10)  The number, type, size and location of outdoor dining equipment is subject to the approval of the director of engineering or designee. 
(11)  The hours of operation of the outdoor dining area may not exceed those of the permittee's food and beverage establishment. 
(12)  The permit is not transferable or assignable without written approval of the director of engineering or his designee. 
(13)  The permittee shall comply with all applicable codes, ordinances, policies and regulations of the federal, state and local governments and shall obtain and maintain all necessary licenses and permits. 
(d)  Insurance required. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, the permittee shall file with the city attorney evidence of general comprehensive liability insurance insuring against claims, demands or actions arising out of or in connection with the existence of the dining equipment to be placed within the outdoor dining area. The policy of insurance shall require the insurer to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all claims for injury or damage, and shall pay all judgments, costs or expenses which the city may incur or suffer by reason of granting a permit in connection with the erection, alteration, maintenance, repair, removal or existence of such items. Such policy of insurance shall provide liability coverage for bodily injury, death and property damage of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit during any one (1) occurrence for injury to or death of any one (1) or more persons and for property damage or destruction suffered as a result of the existence of such street furniture and shall name the City of Newport News as an additional insured. All such insurance required to be carried by the permittee shall be with an insurance company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia and approved by the City of Newport News City Attorney's Office. Such insurance shall: (i) contain an endorsement that such policy shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding that the insured has released its right of action against any party before the occurrence of a loss; (ii) name the City of Newport News as an additional insured party; and (iii) provide that the policy shall not be cancelled, terminated or materially amended without at least forty-five (45) days prior written notice (fifteen (15) days if due to nonpayment of the premium) to the City of Newport News. Prior to the issuance or renewal of the permit, evidence satisfactory to the City of Newport News City Attorney's Office of the payment of all premiums of such policy, shall be delivered to the city attorney's office for review. As a condition subsequent to the issuance of the permit, the permit holder shall maintain the required insurance at all times during which the permitted item or items are located in the sidewalk area. 
(Ord. No. 6080-05)  
Sec. 38-4. - Temporary fence or barricade for protection of newly seeded or sodded grass plots in sidewalk area. 
(a)  A permit for the erection of a temporary fence or barricade, for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, in the sidewalk area in front of any premises, for the protection of newly sodded or seeded grass plots, may, upon application to the director of engineering, be issued to the owner of such premises. Such fence or barricade shall conform to the specifications therefor on file in the office of the director of engineering, but in no event shall such fence or barricade be less than twenty-four (24) inches or more than thirty (30) inches in height above the level of the grade of the sidewalk, and shall be constructed of well dressed lumber, not less than one (1) inch nor more than two (2) inches square, and shall consist of only one (1) rail and the necessary posts supporting the same, and shall not extend beyond the building line further than within six (6) inches of the walkway or paved sidewalk in front of the premises. 
(b)  The granting of a permit under this section and the acceptance and use thereof by the owner of the premises shall not be deemed or taken to be a release from liability of the owner or person installing or maintaining such fence or barricade for damages to persons or property occasioned by its installation or maintenance, but such owner or person, by accepting the permit and constructing and maintaining the fence or barricade, assumes all liability for damage that may be occasioned thereby and agrees to save the city harmless from all loss, cost, damage and expense that may accrue to it or to any person by reason of the construction and maintenance of the fence or barricade. 
(Ord. No. 297; Code 1961, § 36-17; Ord. No. 5839-02)  
Sec. 38-5. - Removal of fixtures and appliances, interfering with public improvements. 
The owner of any pipes, poles, wires or other fixtures or appliances located or erected under or upon any of the streets of the city shall remove the same, within a reasonable time, to such place as may be approved by the city manager, when so notified by the manager that such pipes, poles, wires or other fixtures and appliances are in the way of, interfere with or retard the erection and construction of any public improvement in the city. Should the owner of such pipes, poles, wires or other fixtures and appliances fail or refuse to remove the same within a reasonable time after having been so notified by the city manager, the city manager shall proceed to have the same removed to such place as the manager may approve, and collect the cost of such removal from the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 32; Code 1961, § 36-15)  
Sec. 38-6. - Obstruction by loitering or gathering of persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or needlessly be and remain upon the streets or sidewalks of the city, thereby obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause to gather in crowds, or for persons to gather in crowds, upon the streets or sidewalks of the city, so as to obstruct the free and unimpeded use of the streets and sidewalks for travelers or pedestrians upon such streets or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 31; Code 1961, § 36-1)  
Sec. 38-7. - Packing and unpacking on sidewalks. 
No person receiving or shipping goods, wares or merchandise in boxes, crates or other packing shall pack, unpack, store or otherwise place the same upon the sidewalk or street, unless such package, crate or box is too large to enter the door of the building through which the contents of such package, crate or box are to be carried, in which case, such package, crate or box or container received or to be shipped may be packed or unpacked upon the sidewalk without unreasonable delay, and all packing material, trash and boxes shall be immediately removed by the owner or proprietor receiving or shipping the goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 31; Ord. No. 1408, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-14)  
Sec. 38-8. - Street sales generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or use any part of the streets or public places of the city as a stand for the sale of trinkets, wares, merchandise, patent medicines or other articles, except flowers and articles used for food. The commissioner of the revenue shall issue no licenses for any activity that would violate this section. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 27; Code 1961, § 36-9)  
Sec. 38-9. - Sale of Christmas trees and other decorative greens; exhibits and sales of arts and crafts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or offer for sale Christmas trees or other decorative greens upon the streets or sidewalks of the city or to exhibit and sell arts and crafts on such streets and sidewalks without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city manager. Application for such permit shall be in writing, stating the location desired, and shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner of the property on which such location abuts. The city manager, in passing on such application, shall take into consideration the desired location, the traffic on the street and the public safety and convenience and accordingly grant or refuse the application, as to the manager may seem best. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 36; Code 1961, § 36-21; Ord. No. 3010-83)  
Sec. 38-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4436, adopted April 13, 1993, repealed § 38-10, which pertained to sale of flowers or food. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 38-11. - Sidewalk photographers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, on any street or sidewalk in the city, to take any picture, photograph or snapshot, by any process whatsoever, of any person and offer to furnish to such person or to any other person a copy of the picture so taken, for a consideration in any form. The passing out of written, printed, typewritten or mimeographed matter, or giving information orally, concerning the means by which a copy of the picture taken may be obtained, is hereby defined to be an offer to furnish a copy of the picture taken for a consideration. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the taking of a picture solely for the purpose of reproducing it in a book, newspaper, magazine or periodical. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 62; Code 1961, § 36-10)  
Sec. 38-12. - Visibility of drive-in theater screen to motorists. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a drive-in motion picture theater in the vicinity of any public street or highway in such a manner that the surface of the theater screen upon which pictures are being projected is visible to any person operating a motor vehicle upon such street or highway. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1753; Code 1961, § 36-18)  
Sec. 38-13. - Playing on through streets. 
No person shall play on a through street in the city. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 24; Ord. No. 2235, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-2)  
Sec. 38-14. - Streets constituting quiet zones. 
(a)  Those portions of all streets within three hundred (300) feet of any church or hospital shall constitute a "quiet zone" and it shall be unlawful for any person to make any unnecessary or loud noise within such a zone adjacent to any church from 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., and from 7:30 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sundays, and within such a zone adjacent to a hospital at any time. 
(b)  The churches and hospitals to which this section applies shall keep upon such streets the necessary signs to notify the public that such constitutes a "quiet zone." 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 26; Code 1961, § 36-8)  
Sec. 38-15. - Mixing or depositing mortar or cement or placing building material on street. 
(a)  No person shall mix, place or deposit any mortar or cement upon any paved street or avenue, unless the same is mixed, placed or deposited in watertight boxes, which boxes must be placed upon barriers or sleepers, leaving under them an air space of at least four (4) inches. 
(b)  Any person placing building material of any kind, to be used in erecting or repairing any building, upon any street, shall rack or pile the same in as small a space as possible near the curb. 
(Ord. No. 166, §§ 1, 2; Code 1961, § 36-4)  
Sec. 38-16. - Entrances from sidewalks to basements to be lighted at night. 
The owners of all buildings, where there are areaways or steps leading from the sidewalks into the basement of such buildings, shall keep and maintain an electric light over such entrance, which light shall burn every night and all night. Each night's failure to so maintain a light shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 19; Code 1961,§ 36-5)  
Sec. 38-17. - Removal of snow from sidewalks. 
(a)  The tenant or occupant, and in case there is no tenant, the owner or any person having charge of any building or lot of land bordering on a street, lane, court, square or public place within the city where there is any paved sidewalk shall, after snow ceases to fall in the daytime within six (6) hours, and if in the nighttime before noon of the following day, cause the snow to be removed from that portion of the sidewalk between the building line and a line five (5) feet distant from and parallel to the curb line. Where the paved portion of such sidewalk in front of a residence does not cover the entire area between the curb line and the building line, the snow may be removed from only that portion of the sidewalk which is paved. In all blocks where fifty (50) percent or more of the abutting lots are occupied by buildings or structures, the snow shall be removed from all unpaved sidewalks in such blocks for a width of five (5) feet in the center of the sidewalk area. 
(b)  Snow removed under this section shall be deposited on that portion of the sidewalk in front of the abutting property immediately adjacent to the curb, but more than five (5) feet therefrom. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any snow from the sidewalk into the street, except employees of the public works department in the performance of their duties in cleaning the streets. 
(Ord. No. 167, §§ 1, 2; Code 1961, § 36-3)  
Sec. 38-18. - Flag pole sockets in sidewalks—Use generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except upon permission first obtained from the city manager, to use any of the flag pole sockets placed at the sidewalks by the city for any purpose whatever, other than the display of the American national flag or the state flag of Virginia, and no American national flag or other flag, except a flag four (4) feet by six (6) feet upon poles twelve (12) feet in length, shall be displayed from such sockets and then only between the hours of sunrise and sunset on national or state holidays or on such other days as shall be designated by the city manager. No person not the owner or having control of any flag placed in any of the sockets shall interfere with, tear, soil, injure, damage or remove such flag or pole. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 37; Code 1961, § 36-22)  
Sec. 38-19. - Same—Removal of caps. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, or cause to be removed, any cap or covering placed on or over any hole in any sidewalk made for the placement of flag poles; provided, that the owner or occupant of any premises opposite such opening may remove such cap or covering for the purpose of placing flag poles, but only upon condition that, on removal of such flag, the cap or covering shall be immediately replaced, and failure to so replace shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 38; Code 1961, § 36-23)  
Sec. 38-20. - Removing street barriers; driving on barricaded street. 
No person shall remove barriers or other guards placed across the streets of the city, while paving, grading, macadamizing or any other public improvement is in progress. No person shall ride or drive over such street so barricaded or guarded. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 40; Code 1961, § 36-25)  
Sec. 38-21. - Vacation of street on request—Fee for processing application; taxing of publishing notice to applicant. 
On each and every application to alter or vacate a public street or alley pursuant to Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, there shall be a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), payable at the time of application, for processing and administration of such application. The fee shall be in addition to the sum allowed each viewer pursuant to Title 15.2. The applicant shall also be taxed the actual cost of publishing the newspaper notice of the street or alley vacation hearing held by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1738, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-26.2; Ord. No. 2950-82; Ord. No. 5308-99) 
State Law reference— Authority for above fee, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2007.  
Sec. 38-22. - Same—Payment of cost of relocation or removal of utilities. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated or abandoned by the city at the request of any private individual, association, corporation or public authority, the cost of any necessary relocation or removal of public utility facilities, including those of public service corporations, located in such street, alley or other public way shall be paid by the private individual, association, corporation or public authority requesting such vacation or abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 1189; Code 1961, § 36-26.1)  
Sec. 38-23. - Liability insurance for signs overhanging public right-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any sign overhanging any sidewalk, street or other public right-of-way, unless such person shall file and maintain with the codes compliance administrator evidence of public liability insurance covering the existence of such sign. Such insurance shall have liability limits for bodily injury not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person, two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for each accident and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage, and shall indemnify and save harmless the city as an additionally insured party from any and all damages, judgments, costs or expense which the city may incur or suffer by reason of granting a permit in connection with the erection, alteration, maintenance, repair, removal or existence of such sign. It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises upon which such sign is located to notify the codes compliance administrator of any change, expiration, renewal or claim that shall occur with respect to such insurance. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1890, § 1; Code 1961, § 10-25) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3.  
Sec. 38-24. - Entrance signs. 
Signs located at the entrance of (i) residential developments;(ii) business and/or industrial development parks; (iii) publicly managed business and/or industrial development parks; or (iv) publicly managed mixed-use developments may be erected in the public right-of-way as permanent markers provided that a permit is first obtained from the director of engineering as provided for in section 38-25. For the purposes of this section and section 38-25, "publicly managed" means public control in the form of covenants and restrictions applicable to property of the development enforced by a public body. The provisions of sections 38-24 and 38-25 shall govern in any instance of conflict between those sections and other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2607-79; Ord. No. 3028-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 4012-90; Ord. No. 6096-05; Ord. No. 7495-18)  
Sec. 38-25. - Entrance sign rules and regulations and permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct a sign authorized by section 38-24 unless such person shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the director of engineering. Signs for (i) business and/or industrial development parks; (ii) publicly managed business and/or industrial development parks; or (iii) publicly managed mixed-use developments shall be limited to those developments of one hundred (100) acres or more. 
(b)  Entrance sign regulations. 
(1)  General regulations. 
a.  Entrance signs shall not be permitted in medians on arterial streets designated in the city's transportation plan; 
b.  Entrance signs shall be constructed under the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code; and 
c.  Entrance signs shall be authorized only at the primary entrances consistent with the type of development and use. 
(2)  Residential development entrance signs shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Such sign shall not exceed three (3) feet in height measured from top of nearest curb; 
b.  Such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in width; 
c.  No more than two (2) signs shall be located at any one (1) entrance; and 
d.  Signs other than those in medians shall be located within a twenty-five-foot square whose sides shall be measured by starting at a point at the intersection of the paved portion of the street and the paved portion of the entranceway involved. 
(3)  Business and/or industrial development parks entrance signs shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Such sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height measured from top of nearest curb; 
b.  Such sign shall not exceed ninety (90) square feet in area; 
c.  The location and setback of the sign shall be approved by the director of engineering. The director shall evaluate the sign's location and setback for traffic safety. Adequate sight distance shall exist. The evaluation shall consider existing traffic and physical conditions and programmed road improvements; 
d.  The director of planning also shall approve the sign's location. The director shall evaluate the sign's impact on signage and development at the intersection and shall determine that the sign does not substantially block the visibility of signage or development on property in the vicinity; 
e.  No more than one (1) sign shall be located at any one (1) entrance; 
f.  The intersection where the sign is to be located shall be controlled by traffic signals. 
(4)  Publicly managed business and/or industrial development parks and publicly managed mixed-use development entrance signs shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Such signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height measured from top of nearest curb; 
b.  Each sign shall not exceed three hundred twenty-five (325) square feet in area; 
c.  The location and setback of the signs shall be approved by the director of engineering. The director shall evaluate the signs' location and setback for traffic safety. Adequate sight distance shall exist. The evaluation shall consider existing traffic and physical conditions and programmed road improvements; 
d.  The director of planning also shall approve the location of the signs. The director shall evaluate the signs' impact on signage and development at the intersection and shall determine that the sign does not substantially block the visibility of signage or development on property in the vicinity; and 
e.  The intersection where the sign or signs are to be located shall be controlled by traffic signals. 
(c)  Permit application. 
(1)  Application for a permit required by this section shall be filed in the office of the director of engineering, accompanied by a fifty dollar ($50.00) nonrefundable application fee. 
(2)  Applications shall include a sketch of the sign to be erected or constructed as well as a sketch showing property lines and street right-of-way lines with reference to the proposed location of the sign. 
(3)  Application shall include a description of the proposed type of construction of the sign. Only wood, metal, plastic, or masonry shall be authorized construction material. 
(d)  Insurance. Signs not erected or constructed by the city shall be subject to the following: 
Any person maintaining such a sign shall file and maintain with the director of engineering evidence of public liability insurance covering the existence of such sign. Such insurance shall have combined liability limits for bodily injury and property damage of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate per year, and shall indemnify and save harmless the city as an additionally insured party from any and all damages, judgments, costs or expense which the city may incur or suffer by reason of granting a permit in connection with the erection, alteration, maintenance, repair, removal or existence of such sign. Said proof of insurance shall include an endorsement to provide the city with thirty (30) days advance notice of cancellation, ten (10) days for non-payment of premium. 
(e)  Removal of signs. Upon a finding by the director of engineering that the right-of-way is needed for city purposes and the location of the sign impedes that need, or that a change of condition has occurred affecting pedestrian and/or vehicular safety, said sign shall be removed, without cost to the city, upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the owner of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2607-79; Ord. No. 3028-83; Ord. No. 3060-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 3703-88; Ord. No. 4012-90; Ord. No. 6096-05; Ord. No. 7495-18)  
Sec. 38-26. - Signs in city right-of-way. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, locate, maintain or otherwise place any sign or similar structure or display on or over any street right-of-way. Such action on the part of any person shall, upon conviction, constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any permanent sign or similar structure or display existing on the effective date of this section [June 23, 1980] in contravention of subsection (a) above may continue to exist as a nonconforming display provided that: 
(1)  Any damaged or destroyed nonconforming sign requiring repairs in excess of fifty (50) percent of its initial cost shall be removed. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, a nonconforming sign shall be considered an accessory to the use that exists at the time this section becomes effective. Should such use cease to exist or change to the point of requiring modification valued in excess of fifty (50) percent of its initial cost, such nonconforming sign shall be removed. 
(3)  No nonconforming sign shall be altered, modified or changed to cause the sign to exceed the size and shape that exists at the time this section becomes effective. This shall not be construed to prohibit normal maintenance. 
(c)  Any person maintaining such a nonconforming sign shall file and maintain with the director of engineering evidence of public liability insurance with limits and necessary endorsements as required by section 38-25(d) and shall indemnify and save harmless the city as an additionally insured party from any and all damages, judgments, costs or expense which the city may incur or suffer by reason of granting a permit in connection with the erection, alteration, maintenance, repair, removal or existence of such sign. It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises upon which such sign is located to obtain an endorsement from its carrier providing thirty (30) days advance notice of cancellation and ten (10) days for non-payment of premium. 
(d)  Removal of signs. Upon a finding by the director of engineering that the right-of-way is needed for city purposes and the location of the sign impedes that need, or that a change of condition has occurred affecting pedestrian and/or vehicular safety, said sign shall be removed, without cost to the city, upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the owner of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2671-80; Ord. No. 2984A-82; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 4119-90; Ord. No. 7495-18)  
Sec. 38-26.1. - Signs for public regional transportation facilities. 
(a)  All publicly owned and operated regional transportation facilities may erect an entrance sign within the public right-of-way within one (1) block of the actual entrance to such facility. A directional sign may also be permitted in the public right-of-way within nine hundred (900) feet of the entrance to the facility. Erection and continued existence of such signs shall be at the sole discretion of the city and shall be subject to all conditions contained in this section. 
(b)  No entrance sign shall exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, nor shall it exceed one hundred (100) square feet in total sign area. No directional sign shall exceed ten (10) feet in height, nor shall it exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in total sign area. 
(c)  The location, size and set back of any such sign shall be approved by the director of engineering. The director shall evaluate the sign's location, size and setback for traffic safety. Adequate site distance shall exist. The evaluation shall consider existing traffic and physical conditions and programmed road improvements. 
(d)  The director of planning also shall approve the sign's location and size and shall, in addition, approve the materials and type of construction to be utilized. The director shall evaluate the sign's impact on signage and development at the intersection and shall determine that the sign does not substantially block the visibility of signage or development on property in the vicinity. 
(e)  Any intersection where such entrance sign may be located shall be controlled by traffic signals. 
(f)  Signs shall be constructed under the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(g)  Any person maintaining a sign allowed by this section shall file and maintain with the director of engineering evidence of public liability insurance covering the existence of any and all such signs. Such insurance must include the basic limits and an additional insured endorsement and an endorsement providing that the city will receive thirty (30) days advance notice of cancellation and ten (10) days for non-payment of premium, and shall indemnify and save harmless the city as an additionally insured party from any and all damages, judgments, costs or expense which the city may incur or suffer by reason of permitting the erection, alteration, maintenance, repair, removal or existence of such sign. It shall be the duty of the sign owner to notify the director of engineering of any change, expiration, renewal or claim that shall occur with respect to such insurance. 
(h)  Upon a finding by the director of engineering that the right-of-way is needed for city purposes and that the location of the sign impedes that need, or that a change of condition has occurred affecting pedestrian and/or vehicular safety, or for any reason advancing the city's interest, said sign shall be removed, without cost to the city, upon thirty (30) days' written notice to the owner of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 4549-93; Ord. No. 7495-18)  
Sec. 38-27. - Fences in city rights-of-way and easements of rights-of-way. 
(a)  Fences prohibited. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, locate, maintain or otherwise place any fence or like structure on any street right-of-way or easement of right-of-way. Such action on the part of any person shall upon conviction, constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Fence encroachment by permit. 
(1)  The director of engineering may permit fences to encroach into a city right-of-way or easement-of-right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. The decision of the director of engineering shall be based upon the city's needs and the impact that the fence may have on vehicular and pedestrian safety or upon adjacent property owners. 
(2)  Allowed encroachments. 
(i)  Fence encroachments may be permitted in residential zoning districts as long as those horizontal encroachments are no greater than twenty-four (24) inches, more or less, from the property line. 
(ii)  Fence encroachments may be permitted by the director of engineering within the special sidewalk easement area defined in section 38-3.2 of this Code if the encroachment is recommended by the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board (hereinafter the "board"). In the Hilton Village Historic District Commercial Area, fence types may be wood picket or other material approved by the Board. Maximum fence height above the ground level shall not exceed thirty (30) inches. Fences shall be installed with the finished side facing the adjacent property. When recommending a fence in the easement area the Board shall consider the height of the fence and its relationship to the sidewalk and street levels. Fences shall be finished and painted a color compatible with and appropriate to the historic district. 
In the special sidewalk easement area fence encroachments may be placed in the running bond paver section of sidewalks adjacent to buildings. Fences shall not be placed on the herringbone patterned paver fields or the adjoining soldier course borders of the pavement. 
(3)  Permit procedure. 
(i)  Any property owner desiring to obtain a permit to allow a fence to encroach into the city right-of-way or easement-of-right-of-way (including the special sidewalk easement area defined in section 38-3.2 of this Code) shall file an application therefore with the director of engineering. Applicants for encroachments in the Hilton Village Historic District shall first obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the board for the fence. A non-refundable application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid at the time of submission of the permit application to the director of engineering. As used in the for purposes of this section, "property owner" and "permit holder" shall be defined as the original owner/applicant of the property adjacent to a right-of-way or easement-of-right-of-way who applies or applied for a permit, as well as all subsequent fee simple owners of the subject property. Once issued, a permit shall run with the land and ensure to the benefit of the original owner/applicant and all subsequent owners of the property, and such subsequent property owners shall be subject to the provisions of this section as well as the terms of the permit and any other applicable provision of the state and city codes. 
(ii)  The property owner shall provide a plot diagram with each application showing the location of the proposed fence, the location of all adjacent right-of-way and easements-of-rights-of-way, the height of the fence, and the type(s) of material proposed to be used for the fence. 
(iii)  The property owner shall provide evidence that Miss Utility, or its successor, has been notified and that all other required permits have been obtained, specifically including a right-of-way permit. 
(iv)  It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to insure that a permitted fence is not placed or maintained on the right-of-way or easement-of-right-of-way except in strict conformity with this section and the terms of the permit. 
(c)  Building code. All fences permitted in accordance with this section shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the Virginia Uniformed Statewide Building Code and applicable provisions of the City Code related to fence construction and maintenance standards. 
(d)  Insurance. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, the property owner shall file with the city attorney evidence of general comprehensive liability insurance covering the existence of such fence. The policy of insurance shall require the insurer to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all claims for injury or damage, and shall pay all judgments, costs or expenses which the city may incur or suffer by reason of granting a permit in connection with the erection, alteration, maintenance, repair, removal or existence of such items. Such policy of insurance shall provide liability coverage for bodily injury, death and property damage of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limit during any one (1) occurrence for injury to or death of any one (1) or more persons and for property damage or destruction suffered as a result of the existence of such fence and shall name the City of Newport News as an additional insured. All such insurance required to be carried by the permit holder shall be with an insurance company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia and approved by the Newport News City Attorney's Office. Such insurance (i) shall contain an endorsement that such policy shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding that the insured has released its right of action against any party before the occurrence of a loss; (ii) shall name the City of Newport News as an additional insured party; and (iii) shall provide that the policy shall not be canceled, terminated or materially amended without at least forty-five (45) days' prior written notice [fifteen (15) days if due to nonpayment of premium] to the City of Newport News. Prior to the issuance of the permit, evidence satisfactory to the Newport News City Attorney's Office of the payment of all premiums for such policy, shall be delivered to the Newport News City Attorney's Office for review. As a condition subsequent to the insurance of the permit, the permit holder shall maintain the required insurance at all times during which the permitted fence is located in the right-of-way or easement-of-right-of-way. 
(e)  Removal of fences. Upon a finding by the director of engineering that no permit exists for a fence encroaching into a right-of-way or easement-of-right-of-way, or that a permit holder has violated the provisions of this section or of the fence permit, or that the right-of-way or easement-of-right-of-way is needed for city purposes and the location of the fence impedes that need, or that a change of conditions has occurred affecting pedestrian and/or vehicular safety, or the permit holder as failed to maintain the fence as required by other provisions of this Code, the director of engineering may cause the fence to be removed and the costs thereof charged to the permit holder and collected as taxes are collected, or by any other method provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 4113-90; Ord. No. 4997-97)  
Secs. 38-28—38-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WORK ON, OVER, UNDER OR AFFECTING STREETS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-34. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Permittee. The word "permittee" shall mean any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this article. 
Street. The word "street" shall embrace alleys, avenues, boulevards, parks, public rights-of-way and all other public places or easements. 
Structure. The word "structure" shall mean any building, pole and appurtenance thereto, fixture, post, wire, guy and tower and cable, vault, culvert, manhole or underground installation. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-27)  
Sec. 38-35. - Warning signs, lights or barricades. 
Whenever any person performs any work which might tend to affect the use of any street, whether or not a permit therefor is required by this article, appropriate warning signs, lights or barricades shall be set forth in such manner as to give effective notice thereof to the public. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 25; Code 1961, § 36-54)  
Sec. 38-36. - Inspection. 
(a)  The director of engineering shall conduct such inspections as may be necessary to assure that work being done and completed under a permit issued pursuant to the provision of this article conforms to such permit. When the permittee reports that such work is completed, the director of engineering shall inspect the work and advise the permittee of the approval or disapproval of such work. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the director of engineering, a permittee is not going forward with the work in a continuing manner and it appears that more than the normal number of inspections will therefore be necessary, the director shall give the permittee notice in writing of this fact. Should additional inspections thereafter result, the director may charge the expense thereof against the letter of credit provided for in Division 3 of this article or, where a bond has been given pursuant to section 38-69, appropriate proceedings may be carried out to recover the cost thereof. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 11; Code 1961, §§ 36-41, 36-42; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 3223-84)  
Sec. 38-37. - Notice and correction of defects. 
(a)  If work done or being done pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this article has not been done or is not being done in accordance with the permit or a street is not left in satisfactory condition, notice of such defect shall be given to the permittee in question. Such permittee shall be required to respond and correct the same according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Immediately, when a hazard exists, posing danger to the health and safety of the public. 
(2)  Within forty-eight (48) hours if condition (1) does not apply and the conditions exist within the pavement of a primary roadway. 
(3)  Within seventy-two (72) hours if condition (1) or (2) does not apply and the condition exists within the pavement of any other roadway. 
(4)  Within fourteen (14) calendar days if condition (1), (2) or (3) does not apply. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a notice given under this section, should the permittee in question refuse or fail to correct the condition referred to in such notice within the specified time, the director of engineering may cancel the permit in question and/or cause the necessary work to be done, deducting the cost thereof from the bond or letter of credit; provided that, where a bond has been given pursuant to section 38-69, appropriate proceedings shall be carried out to recover the cost thereof. Where a bond or letter of credit is not required by this article, the cost of correcting any defective work shall be recovered through legal means. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 11; Code 1961, §§ 36-43, 36-44; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 3223-84)  
Sec. 38-38. - Location of mail and newspaper boxes in street. 
Mail and newspaper boxes may be placed in the streets without obtaining a permit under the provisions of this article. No such box shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any federal or state courthouse. All such boxes shall be so located as not to interfere with or endanger public travel or maintenance on the streets. Any such box so located as to interfere with or endanger public travel or maintenance on the streets shall be moved to an approved location, upon reasonable notice from the director of engineering. Failure to remove such boxes after such notice has been given shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 18; Code 1961, § 36-50; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 7583-19)  
Sec. 38-39. - Illumination of business place from across highway. 
Illumination or floodlighting of a business place from light structures across a highway from the business place shall be unlawful and no permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 19; Code 1961, § 36-51)  
Sec. 38-40. - Access driveways and ramps; curb and gutter work. 
(a)  Vehicle access from the public street pavement to private or public property may be allowed only over an approved driveway or ramp constructed under the conditions described in this section. 
(b)  No person shall install any curb and gutter or lower the curb on any street, or create, repair or modify any driveway or ramp, either temporary or permanent, within the right-of-way lines of the city, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director of public works under the provisions of this article. All such curb and gutter, driveways or ramps shall be constructed and curbs lowered according to plans approved by the director of public works and under the supervision of the director of public works and subject to such conditions as the director may prescribe as to materials used and manner of construction. All driveways or ramps shall be fully constructed according to city standards over their entire width between the edge of the pavement of the street and the property line of the property to be served by such driveway or ramp. All driveway or ramp construction, reconstruction, replacement and repairs, where necessary, shall be done at the expense of the owner of the property being served by such driveway and it shall be such owner's responsibility at all times to keep the driveway or ramp and the sidewalk crossed by such driveway or ramp in good repair at such owner's own expense. 
(c)  When and if the use of any driveway or ramp is discontinued, the owner of the abutting property shall obtain a permit to remove the same and shall, at such owner's own expense, restore the area from the edge of the pavement to the property line in accordance with the established street and sidewalk pattern. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 25; Code 1961, § 36-7)  
Sec. 38-41. - Restoration of street surface when permit not required for disturbance thereof. 
Whenever any person disrupts or disturbs the paved or improved surface of any street used primarily for public travel and a permit therefor is not required by this article, such person shall notify the director of engineering when the paved or improved surface should be restored. The city may restore the paved or improved section and shall render to such person a statement of its costs. Such person shall reimburse the city for its costs in such restoration. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 23; Code 1961, § 36-35; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-42. - Installation of underground wiring, piping and equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install underground wiring, piping and/or equipment, including but not limited to electrical wiring, cablevision wiring, and water and sewer piping within the city right-of-way, unless such wiring, piping and/or equipment is installed at a depth of not less than eighteen (18) inches below the top of the curb or the finished grade, whichever is lower. Where it is necessary to install such wiring, piping and/or equipment at depths of less than eighteen (18) inches, such may be placed at the reduced depth upon written approval of the director of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 3085-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Secs. 38-43—38-46. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-47. - General requirements and exceptions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work in connection with the erection, construction, removal, relocation or maintenance of any surface, overhead or underground installation, or to cut, trim or spray trees, or to place construction signs or materials if such work, cutting, trimming, spraying or placing is on, under, over or in any way affects the surface or subsurface of any street, lane, alley, right-of-way or easement in the city without first having obtained a permit therefor from the director of engineering or the director's authorized representative; nor shall such work be performed after such permit shall have been revoked by the director of engineering or the director's authorized representative, or by the terms of the permit. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner disturb the surface or subsurface of any street, lane, alley, right-of-way or easement in the city without first having obtained a permit therefor from the director of engineering or the director's authorized representative; nor shall such work be performed after such permit shall have been revoked by the director of engineering or the director's authorized representative, or by the terms of the permit. 
The aforementioned permits shall not be required where the work is performed by or on behalf of a subdivision or site developer within his/its approved subdivision or site development, and where the affected surface or subsurface has not yet been accepted by the city; neither shall such permits be required where the work affects only a private street, lane, alley, right-of-way or easement which has not been nor is intended to be dedicated to and/or accepted by the city. However, nothing in this section exempts the requirement of and in fact specifically requires a permit for the installation of driveways, sidewalks or other improvements or structures which are constructed in a subdivision or site development and which are not constructed by or on behalf of the aforementioned developer, even though the affected street, lane, alley, right-of-way or easement may not yet have been accepted by the city. 
If an excavation is required in order to make emergency repairs and the emergency existing requires that excavation operations commence prior to the earliest possible issuance of a permit and within seventy-two (72) hours from the discovery of said emergency, a permit shall not be required to commence said excavation; provided, however, that an application as required by section 38-50 shall be submitted within seventy-two (72) hours after the commencement of said excavation; and provided, further, that notification of such emergency work shall be given by telephone, or other means, to the director of engineering or the director's authorized representative immediately. Such application will be made upon the same form and in the same manner as that required by section 38-50 except that it will specify the emergency condition that existed. Any person commencing an emergency excavation without a permit as allowed herein thereby implies that the person accepts all those conditions and agreements set forth in section 38-50 and elsewhere in this article and that the person will conform to the requirements set forth in sections 38-62 through 38-80. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 2; Code 1961, § 36-28; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 3134-84)  
Sec. 38-48. - Only one permit required for work of continuing nature. 
For work of a continuing nature along one (1) or more routes, only one (1) application shall be made and only one (1) permit shall be required under this division. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 22; Code 1961, § 36-40; Ord. No. 3051-83)  
Sec. 38-49. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit required by this division shall be filed in the office of the director of engineering on forms supplied by the city. Such application shall show all required information and be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. Such application shall include a description of the work to be done and a sketch showing such work, if required by the director of engineering. 
(b)  Sketches filed with an application under this section shall show the following: 
(1)  The nature of the work to be done. 
(2)  Property lines, where appropriate, and street right-of-way lines with location of the work with reference to a fixed point on the street. 
(3)  Where surface or underground work is involved, a cross section indicating conditions and proposed changes. 
(4)  Where grading operations are involved, the pavement, shoulder, ditch and slope. 
(5)  Any tree which is to be removed. 
(c)  An application for a permit involving underground installations filed as provided in this section shall be accompanied by a sketch showing: 
(1)  The exact location and dimensions of conduits, pipes, vaults, manholes, crossings and other installations. 
(2)  Type (concrete, iron, etc.). 
(3)  Depth of covering material. 
(4)  Outlets, showing type and size. 
(5)  Design and location of identification indicators. 
(d)  The following information shall be included in an application for a permit in reference to the construction of a drive-in theater entrance: 
(1)  Approximate capacity (cars) of theater. 
(2)  Location of ticket booth or booths. 
(3)  Direction in which screen will face. 
(4)  Distance from street to face of screen. 
(5)  Location and length of storage lanes. 
(Ord. No. 62, §§ 4, 5, 15, 20; Code 1961, §§ 36-29—36-32; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-50. - Issuance and term generally. 
(a)  Any person, company or corporation required to obtain a permit by section 38-47 shall make application therefor to the director of engineering on a form prescribed by him, which form shall state the type, amount and dimensions of the work to be performed; the place where such work is to be performed; the purpose of such work; the time at which the work is to be commenced; and the time at which the work is to be completed. Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the director of engineering to ascertain that all work to be done pursuant to the permit otherwise complies in all respects with prevailing planning practices, zoning regulations, appropriate construction standards and with the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city and the resolutions, policies and regulations of the city before issuing the permit. Additionally, no construction sign shall be erected and no material shall be placed in such a manner as to result in a traffic hazard or otherwise impede the normal use of the right-of-way, if any, such as walkways, bike paths, drainage ditches, etc. The director of engineering shall issue a permit when such compliance is apparent or can be assured by the terms of the permit and when all applicable requirements for obtaining the permit have been met. 
(b)  The director of engineering may prescribe a limit for the duration of such permit and may extend the same, so long as the time limitation of extension is based upon reasonable standards prevailing in the industry at the time, taking into consideration weather, availability of material and labor, as well as the applicant's own estimation of the time period needed to complete the project. In no event shall the permit exceed one (1) year, though the permit may be extended for good cause shown. The director of engineering may establish a limited period of work during the term of the permit. 
(c)  A permit as issued under this article may be revoked at any time during the period it covers by the director of engineering for failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this article or the conditions and agreements of his application by giving written notice to the permittee at his address of record. For failure to rectify such default after revocation, the former permittee shall be held to be in violation of this article for each and every day such default shall continue and each violation shall be considered a Class 4 misdemeanor, and the director of engineering may in his discretion cause such work to be performed as is necessary to rectify such default, and the costs or expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the former permittee. 
(Ord. No. 62, §§ 3, 6, 11; Code 1961, §§ 36-33, 36-39; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 3223-84; Ord. No. 7271-16, § 1)  
Sec. 38-51. - Liability insurance and bond or letter of credit prerequisite to issuance of permit. 
(a)  Before any permit shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this division to any person to cut, undermine, disrupt or disturb in any manner the paved or improved surface (including shoulders, sidewalks, curbs and gutters) of any street, and before any such permit is issued for the placement of construction signs or materials on the unimproved portion of a right-of-way or easement, evidence of public liability insurance shall be given by such person to defend, indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of the activity to be authorized by such permit in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Such insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured by separate endorsement to the policy or as otherwise approved by the city attorney's office. 
(b)  Before any permit shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this division to any person, the applicant shall submit, accompanying a properly signed application, a bond or letter of credit in a form and of a type approved by the city attorney. The bond or letter of credit shall be in an amount equal to the estimated value of the work and repairs to be performed on the right-of-way but in no case less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and shall be payable to the city and conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with this article and the conditions and agreements of his application. 
(c)  Each utility company shall furnish an annual performance bond or letter of credit with a minimum value of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), in a form acceptable to the city attorney. An additional bond or letter of credit shall be required if the estimated costs of construction and repairs, within the right-of-way, exceed the minimum amount. A larger valued minimum bond or letter of credit is an acceptable alternative to the use of several instruments. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-38; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3223-84)  
Sec. 38-52. - Prerequisite to issuance for drive-in theater entrance. 
No permit required by this division shall be issued for the construction of a drive-in theater entrance, unless adequate off-street storage lanes are provided between the street right-of-way and the theater ticket booth or entrance to the theater parking area. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 15; Code 1961, § 36-34; Ord. No. 3051-83)  
Sec. 38-53. - Issuance for logging roads, tram roads and other temporary entrances. 
The director of engineering may issue permits under this provision authorizing logging roads, tram roads and other temporary private entrances, but slash or other material shall not be permitted to block or impede drainage. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 16; Code 1961, § 36-48; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-54. - Issuance for service or frontage roads. 
The director of engineering may issue permits under the provisions of this division for service or frontage roads to be constructed by the permittee at the permittee's expense, upon such terms and conditions as may be necessary to protect the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 17; Code 1961, § 36-49; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-55. - Issuance for cutting, trimming or spraying trees. 
The director of engineering may issue a permit under this division for the cutting, trimming or spraying of trees on a street only when such work is fully justified in the public interest. Such work shall be done only in a manner prescribed in the permit so issued. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 24; Code 1961, § 36-52; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Secs. 38-56, 38-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 38-56, relating to issuance of emergency permits, derived from Ord. No. 62, § 8, and Code 1961, § 36-35, and § 38-57, relating to issuance and term of blanket permits, derived from Ord. No. 62, § 22, and Code 1961, § 36-40, were both repealed by Ord. No. 3051-83.  
Sec. 38-58. - Issuance to, and responsibilities of, contractor for work on government project. 
Where work on any government project is to be performed by a contractor, the permit required under the provisions of this division shall be issued in the name of the contractor. The contractor in such a case shall be responsible for inspection and guarantee fees under the provisions of Division 3 of this article and shall give evidence of liability insurance or bond as required in section 38-51. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 13; Code 1961, § 36-46; Ord. No. 3051-83)  
Sec. 38-59. - Contents of permits. 
Permits issued under this division shall specify the manner and the conditions under which the permitted work shall be done. Unless otherwise specified in the permit, every permit issued shall be deemed to include the following provisions: 
(1)  Public travel is to be protected by adequate lights, barricades and appropriate warning signals and signs at all times. 
(2)  Public travel is to be blocked only in the manner and as specified in the permit. 
(3)  Pavement is to be used for piling or storing of excavated material or for deposit of material and the placing of equipment only as specified in the permit. 
(4)  The maximum amount of ditch, trench or other excavation to be opened at any one (1) time shall not exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet, including the backfilled portion of any trench which is not in condition for public travel, unless the director of engineering finds reason for an exception. 
(5)  All backfilling of excavations shall be done to a ninety-five (95) percent density compaction. Excavations within the improved section of the right-of-way shall be backfilled in accordance with section 38-62 of this article. Compaction by using water is not permitted. 
(6)  On pavement cuts, the pavement shall be restored to its former dimensions, cross-section and profile with material conforming to city specifications. 
(7)  No tree roots shall be cut to the extent of rendering the tree unsafe and, if possible, tunneling through or under roots instead of cutting anchor roots shall be followed. 
(8)  Shoulders, ditches and drainage mediums shall be left in the same condition as found, or as specified in the permit. 
(9)  The permittee agrees to repair any sinks in the backfill or pavement occurring within one (1) year after the work done under the permit is completed. 
(10)  If entrances to adjacent property are affected, the permittee shall, if practical, provide temporary facilities for safe ingress and egress to such property. 
(11)  The permittee agrees to restore the street to a satisfactory condition consistent with adjoining sections of the street in accordance with this article and as specified in the permit. 
(12)  The permittee agrees, by the acceptance of the permit, to defend, indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to person or property growing out of activity authorized by the permit, whether suit is brought against the city either independently or jointly with the permittee. 
(13)  The permittee agrees, by the acceptance of the permit, upon notice in writing, to remove or relocate any structure or installation placed in, on, under or over any street, if such structure or installation interferes with the use of the street or any public improvement or repair planned or found necessary thereon. 
(14)  The permittee shall be responsible for complying with the Virginia Underground Utility Damage Prevention Act and city ordinances and state laws on erosion and sediment control. 
(15)  The permittee shall give the director of engineering or his authorized representative twenty-four (24) hours' advance notice of the time permitted work is to begin. Additionally, permittees shall give four (4) hours' advance notice of requests for inspection prior to repairs of construction openings and/or prior to concrete pouring. 
(Ord. No. 62, §§ 9, 21; Code 1961, §§ 36-36, 36-37; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 3223-84;Ord. No. 7271-16, § 1)  
Sec. 38-60. - Permit may provide for construction of entrances by city. 
Whenever in the opinion of the director of engineering it is in the public interest for the city to construct an entrance for which a permit has been requested by an application filed as provided in section 38-49, the director may provide in the permit that the city will install pavement, pipe, curb and gutter or do such other work as the director deems to be in the public interest; but in all such cases the permittee shall furnish and deliver to the site any pipe or other materials necessary for the entrance. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 14; Code 1961, § 36-47; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-61. - Authority of city when work done without permit. 
Whenever any person uses a street for any purpose for which a permit is required under the provisions of this division, without such permit, the city may remove such work and restore the street to its original condition. Where the city exercises such right, it shall have the right to recover from such person its cost and expense. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 12; Code 1961, § 36-45; Ord. No. 3051-83)  
Sec. 38-62. - Backfilling and repair. 
The permittee shall promptly refill any trenches or openings made with approved fill material in layers not to exceed six (6) inches in thickness, thoroughly tamping each layer with metal tampers having a tamping face of not more than twenty-five (25) square inches or machine compacted. The backfill materials shall be in optimum moisture content and shall be compacted within a tolerance of plus or minus twenty (20) percent as compared to the theoretical maximum density determined in accordance with Virginia Test Method I. On unimproved areas of the right-of-way, this process shall continue until such trench or opening is filled level with the adjoining surface, leaving the same smooth and ready to receive sod or seed. On improved areas of the right-of-way of primary streets, this process shall continue to within fifteen (15) inches of the surface grade where crusher run stone shall be used to complete the compaction process level with the adjoining surface, leaving the same smooth and safe for travel. On all other streets, the same shall apply, except that twelve (12) inches of crusher run stone shall be used. The designation of primary street shall be made by the director of engineering. Patching and repair of all streets shall be in accordance with city standards and as designated in the permit. 
Tunnels will be backfilled evenly and fully so that the density of the fill will not be equal to that of the surrounding surfaces. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris shall not be used in the backfill. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 3223-84)  
Secs. 38-63—38-66. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT, INSPECTION AND GUARANTEE FEES 
 
Sec. 38-67. - Schedule. 
(a)  Minimum permit and inspection fees for work for which a permit is required by this article shall be required in accordance with the following schedule except as otherwise specifically established by franchise agreement: 
Residental Apron 	$50.00 
Test Pit/Core 	$50.00 
Multiple Family/Commercial/Industrial/Utility 	$50.00 + $2.00 per linear foot of disturbance measured along the longest dimension of the cut. 
Blanket permit for tree trimming 	$200.00 
Renewal Fee—Residential 	$50.00 
Renewal Fee—MF/Comm/Ind/Util 	$1,000.00 per month or fraction thereof of extension of work period. 
 
(b)  In lieu of separate permits for tree trimming, utilities regularly performing tree trimming within the various rights-of-way and easements of the city may apply for and be issued a blanket permit by the director of engineering pursuant to stated conditions and for a period not to exceed one (1) year. Such permit shall be issued only for work which does not entail the disruption of a right-of-way or easement and may be issued upon payment of an annual inspection fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 62, § 26; Code 1961, § 36-61; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 3223-84; Ord. No. 5933-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6863-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7271-16, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7271-16 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2016.  
Sec. 38-68. - Amount of inspection fees. 
Except as to the minimum fees set forth in section 38-67, inspection fees under this article shall be the actual cost of making inspections necessary to assure that the work is done in a proper and orderly manner. For work requiring more than four (4) hours of inspection time, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hour shall be charged in addition to the minimum fee. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 7; Code 1961, § 36-59; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 6863-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7271-16, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7271-16 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2016.  
Sec. 38-69. - Payment before issuance of permit; exception. 
Fees required by section 38-67 shall be paid before the director of engineering shall issue a permit under the provisions of this article. 
No such permit and inspection fee, however, shall be required in the event any person is required to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner disturb the surface or subsurface of any street, lane, alley or public right-of-way if such actions are required by the city through its repair, alteration or widening of any such street, lane, alley or public right-of-way or any sidewalk and if such actions are to be performed within the limits of the project. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 7; Code 1961, §§ 36-56, 36-57; Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1; Ord. No. 3134-84; Ord. No. 3223-84)  
Secs. 38-70, 38-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 38-70, relating to sufficiency of guarantee fees, derived from Ord. No. 62, § 7; Code 1961, § 36-58; and Ord. No. 3051-83; and § 38-71, relating to return of the guarantee fee, derived from Ord. No. 62, § 11; Code 1961, § 36-60; Ord. No. 3051-83; and Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1, were repealed by Ord. No. 3223-84.  
Sec. 38-72. - Protective measures. 
The permittee shall, by the use of city-approved barricades, fencing, railways, passways, lights or any other necessary safety equipment, protect the public from injury. Such protective measures shall be maintained until the city or its contractor commences resurfacing such area or until the city accepts such area without further resurfacing. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83)  
Sec. 38-73. - Protection of traffic. 
The permittee shall not block or reroute traffic without the permission of the traffic engineer, which shall take the form of a sign plan submitted to and approved by the traffic engineer or his representative. Control of traffic shall be in accordance with this approved sign plan. Proper warning signs, cones, flagmen or any other necessary traffic-control device shall be in conformance with the federal manual on traffic-control devices, Virginia manual on traffic-control devices, and the Virginia Department of Highways and Transportation specifications for reflectorized sign materials and shall be provided by the permittee and maintained and positioned at such site so as to protect persons and property at all times during which traffic flow is or may be disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83)  
Sec. 38-74. - Protection of utilities. 
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the director of engineering and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across said work. In case any of said pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them; and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee; and his or its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility; and its bond or insurance carrier shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage in accordance with the Virginia Underground Utility Damage Prevention Act. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-75. - Protection of adjoining property. 
The permittee shall at all times at his or its own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out said work. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified the property owner, or in the case of public property, the appropriate city department or city official having control of such property. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83)  
Sec. 38-76. - Protection of sidewalks. 
Any excavation made along or under the length of a sidewalk run shall be provided with adequate protection for pedestrians as specified by the director of engineering or his representative. Where sidewalk areas have been removed, adequate sidewalk space shall be provided to ensure the safe passage of pedestrians. 
Any excavation of a sidewalk which disturbs any portion of the square or rectangular pattern will require the repaving of the entire square or rectangle. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-77. - Protection of watercourses. 
The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall pay all expenses experienced by the city in the proper replacement of such or shall make such provisions for them as the director of engineering may direct. The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any street but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface water. The permittee shall make provision to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations in accordance with city ordinances and state laws on erosion and sediment control, and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-78. - Protection of monuments. 
The permittee shall not remove or disturb any monuments or property line pins found on the line of the excavation work without first obtaining the permission of the director of engineering to do so. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments shall only be granted upon the condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of such monument or pin by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-79. - Return to city or replacement of bricks, materials. 
The permittee shall save and return to the city, if it so desires, all brick or other material taken up, or replace same if lost or broken. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83)  
Sec. 38-80. - Cleanup. 
As the excavation work progresses, the work area shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock or other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at such site shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the director of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 3051-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-81. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CHRISTMAS STREET DECORATIONS 
 
Sec. 38-82. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon, or to extend same across, any street or sidewalk in the city any ornamental Christmas decoration, whether illuminated or not, unless the same has been approved by the city manager and a permit therefor has been secured from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 39; Code 1961, § 36-24)  
Sec. 38-83. - Permit to state time of installation and removal. 
Permits issued under this article shall state the time when the decorations will be placed or installed and when the same will be removed. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 39; Code 1961, § 36-24)  
Sec. 38-84. - Bond and insurance. 
Before any permit is issued under this article, the applicant shall furnish bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with surety to be approved by the city manager, conditioned that the terms of the permit shall be fully complied with and to save the city harmless from any loss, cost, damage or expense resulting from such installation. A public liability insurance policy or certificate of insurance providing ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) coverage shall also be deposited by such applicant with the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 39; Code 1961, § 36-24)  
Sec. 38-85. - Installation of illuminated decorations. 
All illuminated decorations installed pursuant to this article shall be installed under the supervision of the division of codes compliance. No such illuminated decorations shall be installed except by an electrician duly qualified under the provisions of Article VI of Chapter 13 of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 39; Code 1961, § 36-24)  
Sec. 38-86. - Permission to use poles and wires of VEPCO. 
Where the use of the poles and wires of the Virginia Electric and Power Company is contemplated, the applicant for a permit under this article shall first obtain the permission of such company for such use. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 39; Code 1961, § 36-24)  
Secs. 38-87—38-96. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 38-97. - Violations of article. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor, unless otherwise specifically provided.  
Sec. 38-98. - Permit required. 
No sidewalk shall be laid or constructed until a permit therefor has been obtained from the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 21; Code 1961, § 36-119; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-99. - Lines and grades. 
No sidewalk shall be laid or constructed until lines and grades therefor shall have been obtained from the department of engineering. Sidewalk installations shall be in accordance with the lines and grades so given. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 21; Code 1961, § 36-120; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-100. - Work to be done in accord with approved plans. 
All sidewalks shall be constructed according to plans approved by the director of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-101. - Specifications generally. 
Subject to the provisions of sections 38-102 and 38-103, sidewalks constructed of brick or concrete shall be in conformity with the specifications on file in the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 21; Code 1961, § 36-125; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-102. - Specifications for concrete sidewalks, one course. 
(a)  Generally. The laying of concrete sidewalks, one (1) course, shall be in accordance with the specifications set out in the following subsections of this section. 
(b)  Subgrade; forms; etc. Subgrades shall be true and thoroughly compacted. Forms shall be four (4) inches wide and unyielding. Division plates shall be one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch thick, five (5) inches wide and five (5) feet long. Sidewalks shall have a slope of one-quarter (¼) inch per foot toward the curb. 
(c)  Cement. The cement shall meet the requirements of the current standard specifications for portland cement of the American Society for Testing Materials. A sack containing ninety-four (94) pounds of cement will be considered one (1) cubic foot. 
(d)  Fine aggregate. Fine aggregate shall consist of clean, hard, curable, uncoated particles of sand, free from all organic matter. One hundred (100) percent shall pass a one-quarter (¼) inch screen, and ninety-five (95) percent shall be retained on a one hundred (100) mesh screen. It shall be well graded from coarse to fine. 
(e)  Coarse aggregate. Coarse aggregate may be broken stone or gravel. The broken stone or gravel shall be clean, hard, durable, uncoated rock. It shall contain no vegetable or other deleterious matter and shall be free from soft, thin, elongated or laminated pieces. 
(f)  Proportioning concrete. The concrete shall consist of one (1) part portland cement, two (2) parts fine aggregate, and three (3) parts coarse aggregate. All materials shall be accurately measured in a manner approved by the director of engineering. 
(g)  Mixing concrete. The concrete shall be mixed in a bath mixer for at least one (1) minute, and enough clear water added to give a consistency that will meet the requirements of the standard slump test. 
(h)  Placing concrete. Freshly mixed concrete shall be placed immediately on the prepared subgrade and shall be struck off and lightly tamped with a straight edge. 
(i)  Joints generally. Joints shall be made over five (5) linear feet of the walk by division plates and at right angles to the surface and edge of the walk, and finished with a creaser having a one-quarter-inch turn. 
(j)  Finishing. The surface shall be lightly tamped until the air and water have been released and a sufficient amount of mortar brought to the top for finishing. The finishing shall be done with a trowel and a true plane surface made and compacted. All edges shall be finished with an edger having a one-quarter-inch turn. During very hot or dry weather the walk shall be protected by a suitable cover for seven (7) days. 
(k)  Expansion joints. Expansion joints in a sidewalk shall be left at intervals of not less than twenty-five (25) feet nor more than fifty (50) feet. The expansion joint shall extend entirely through the sidewalk, vertically, and shall be the equivalent of one-half (½) inch in width for every twenty-five (25) linear feet of sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 23; Code 1961, § 36-126; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-103. - Specifications for brick sidewalks. 
(a)  Generally. The laying of brick sidewalks shall be in accordance with the specifications set out in the following subsections of this section. 
(b)  Subgrade. Subgrades shall be true and thoroughly compacted. 
(c)  Base. There shall be a concrete base, as described in the specifications for concrete sidewalks. 
(d)  How laid. Brick shall be laid with one-quarter (¼) inch sand joints and true to line and grade. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 23; Code 1961, § 36-127)  
Sec. 38-104. - Width. 
All sidewalks, whether of brick or concrete, shall have a width of five (5) feet; provided, however, that the director of engineering may permit a lesser width but shall not permit a width of less than four (4) feet when such width is necessary to conform to the width of sidewalks already laid. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 22; Code 1961, § 36-122; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-105. - Supervision. 
The construction of sidewalks shall be under the supervision of the director of engineering and subject to such conditions as the director may prescribe as to materials and manner of construction. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 21; Code 1961, § 36-121; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-106. - Warning lights. 
While a sidewalk is being prepared for pavement and while the pavement is being laid, there shall be placed on the sidewalk, at night, a sufficient number of red lights to warn the public and prevent accident. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 24; Code 1961, § 36-123)  
Secs. 38-107—38-116. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VAULTS UNDER SIDEWALKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-117. - "Vault" defined. 
As used in this article, the word "vault" shall mean any excavation, elevator shaft, pit, well or cellar opening made or constructed in or under any sidewalk in the city. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-62)  
Sec. 38-118. - Compliance with article and other applicable ordinances. 
In the construction, maintenance and use of any vault and of all fixtures, appliances and appurtenances therein or connected therewith, the provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city in regard to vaults shall at all times be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-79)  
Sec. 38-119. - Violations of article. 
Each violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor, unless otherwise specifically provided.  
Sec. 38-120. - Beginning construction of or using vault constitutes acceptance of and assent to provisions of article. 
Whenever work on the construction of a vault shall have been begun or whenever any use shall have been made of a vault, such work or use, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be an acceptance of and assent to the terms, conditions and restrictions set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-98)  
Sec. 38-121. - Application of article to vaults constructed prior to September 13, 1960. 
Permission is hereby granted for the maintenance and use of all vaults constructed prior to September 13, 1960; provided that, all such vaults and the maintenance and use thereof shall be subject to all the provisions of this article relating to vaults, and upon the refusal or failure of the proprietor or lessee of any such vault to comply with this section, the director of engineering shall order such vault closed and the sidewalk placed in its original condition. If such order is not complied with within sixty (60) days, the director of engineering shall have the same done and paid for out of the appropriation for sidewalk repairs and shall certify the expense thereof to the city treasurer for collection from the proprietor or lessee of such vault. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 16; Code 1961, § 36-66; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-122. - General duties of director of engineering under article. 
It shall be the duty of the director of engineering to require that all the provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city in regard to vaults and all conditions for permits for the same are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 268, §§ 5, 11; Code 1961, § 36-74; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-123. - Supervision and approval of construction. 
The construction of every vault, including the retaining walls thereof, shall be under the supervision of the director of engineering; and all work thereon shall be done in a manner satisfactory to the director and shall be subject to the director's approval. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-96; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-124. - Safety precautions during construction. 
During the construction of a vault, all necessary precautions shall be observed, as prescribed by the director of engineering, in order to prevent injury to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-96; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-125. - Limitation on space. 
The space under the sidewalk which may be excavated for the construction of a vault, or used as a vault, shall be limited to the space between the building line and a line drawn four and one-half (4½) feet from and parallel to the inner side of the curb. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-75)  
Sec. 38-126. - Interference with sewer or water pipes, fire hydrants, etc. 
Vaults and all fixtures, appliances and appurtenances therein or connected therewith shall be constructed, maintained and used so as not to interfere with any sewer pipe, water pipe, fire hydrant, manhole, catch basin, conduit or other public work. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-81) 
Cross reference— Sewers and sewerage, Ch. 33; water supply, Ch. 42.  
Sec. 38-127. - Roof. 
The roof of a vault shall be constructed of glass floor lights, iron, flagging, concrete, terra-cotta or hard bricks, and shall have its crown at least six (6) inches below the established surface of the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-91)  
Sec. 38-128. - Paving of sidewalk over vault. 
(a)  The sidewalk over a vault not occupied by floor lights shall be paved with stone or concrete according to specifications of the director of engineering, and shall be laid to the grade designated by such director. All such paving shall be laid and maintained at the expense of the owner of the land abutting on such vault. 
(b)  Glass prisms or blanks may be set in the paving referred to in subsection (a) above, not exceeding two (2) inches square or two (2) inches in diameter, and not less than one and three-quarters (1¾) inches thick at the edges. Glass floor lights may be set in such paving; but the thickness of such lights and the method of setting the same shall be such as, in the judgment of the director of engineering, may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-92; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-129. - Limitation on number of sidewalk openings; size of openings generally. 
The number of openings in the sidewalk over a vault shall be limited to one for each fifty (50) feet of frontage of such sidewalk; provided that, if such fifty (50) feet of frontage shall embrace two (2) places of business, then one opening may be permitted for each place of business. No such opening, except for a lift or elevator, shall be more than sixty (60) inches square, or sixty (60) inches in diameter, if circular. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-93)  
Sec. 38-130. - Lifts and elevators and openings therefor. 
No lift or elevator shall be installed in a vault if the sidewalk over the same has a less width than six (6) feet. No opening for a lift or elevator shall be more than four (4) feet, measured perpendicular to the curb, or extend across more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the width of the sidewalk. No opening for a lift or elevator shaft shall be more than seventy-two (72) inches in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-94)  
Sec. 38-131. - Covers for openings; pit or well ventilating fans. 
(a)  Every opening into a vault from the sidewalk shall, at all times have a heavy iron cover set in a substantial iron frame and fastened thereto by noncorroding metal hinges. Such cover and the frame into which it is set shall be kept well scored, and no part of either, or of the hinges attached thereto, shall project above the established surface of the sidewalk. Such cover shall be fastened down with an iron rod or chain, except when raised to permit access to the vault. 
(b)  No opening into a vault from the sidewalk shall have a grated covering, except on well or pit openings designed to provide ventilation in the abutting basement by means of suction fans. The space between the grates of such covers shall not exceed one-half (½) inch and shall be of such construction as is approved by the director of engineering. Fans provided in pits or wells for ventilation shall be of suction type only and limited to such capacity as may be approved by the director of engineering and installed and operated under such director's supervision. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-95; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-132. - Sidewalk repairs. 
The right of the city to make any necessary repairs to the sidewalks over a vault shall not be interfered with, and the city shall not be liable for any damage done to such vault, its fixtures or appurtenances during or in consequence of any such repairs. The owner of the land abutting on a vault shall reimburse the city for all moneys expended in making repairs to the sidewalk over the same during the continuance of the permit for maintenance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-88)  
Sec. 38-133. - Change in sidewalk grade. 
Whenever any change shall be made in the grade of the sidewalk over a vault, such vault shall be made to conform to such new grade and paved over, if necessary, at the expense of the proprietor of such vault or the owner of the land abutting thereon. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-90)  
Sec. 38-134. - Changes when adjacent street widened. 
Whenever the street adjacent to a vault is widened, all necessary changes in the construction of such vault, its fixtures and appurtenances, shall be made by the owner or proprietor thereof, and if not made within a reasonable time after notice, may be made by the director of engineering, at the risk and expense of such owner or proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-85; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-135. - Warning bells; attendants. 
Each vault shall be provided, at all times, with an automatic bell device so constructed that it will ring, whenever the vault is being opened or closed, as a warning to pedestrians. Every owner or occupant of any lot in front of which any vault is located shall, immediately prior to the opening of such vault, and so long as the same shall remain uncovered or opened, cause an attendant to be stationed at such vault to warn pedestrians of the opening of such vault. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 17; Code 1961, § 36-76)  
Sec. 38-136. - Prohibited equipment, appliances, etc. 
No person shall place, locate, install, maintain or use, in any vault: 
(1)  Any boiler; 
(2)  Any engine operated by steam, gas or gasoline; 
(3)  Any tank or container for storing oil, gas or gasoline; 
(4)  Any explosive; 
(5)  Any pump, water closet or urinal; 
(6)  Any appliance or pipe for generating or emitting gas, steam or any offensive odor; 
(7)  Any fan for ejecting vitiated or superheated air; or 
(8)  Any exhaust pipe intended to open or discharge into such vault. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-89)  
Sec. 38-137. - Maintenance or use does not vest title in owner of abutting land or affect city's rights. 
The maintenance or use of a vault shall not be taken to vest any title thereto in the owner of the abutting land, or to abridge in any manner the rights of the city therein. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-86)  
Sec. 38-138. - City not liable for losses, damages, etc., resulting from construction, maintenance or use. 
The city shall not be liable for any loss, damage, injury, cost or expense incurred by any person by reason of the construction, maintenance or use of a vault or any fixture therein or any appliance or appurtenance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-87)  
Sec. 38-139. - Installation of public work in, under or through vault. 
The director of engineering shall have the right at any time, without making compensation therefor, to install and maintain any public work in, under or through a vault; and the owner or proprietor of the land abutting on such vault, upon being notified by the director of engineering, by registered mail addressed to such owner or proprietor at his or her last-known post office address, to the effect that it is desired to make any such installation, or any extension or alteration of any such installation, shall, without cost to the city, at once remove from such vault any pipe, wall, beam, fixture or other part, appurtenance or appliance therein or connected therewith, which in the opinion of such director should be removed, so as to leave a clear space in such vault sufficient of the installation, operation, maintenance or extension of such public work. Upon failure of such owner or proprietor to comply with such notice, such removal may be made by the director of engineering at the risk and expense of the person so in default, or the permit for such vault may be revoked by the director of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-83; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-140. - Right of entry of city agents or employees. 
The agents and employees of the city shall at all times have the right to enter a vault for the purpose of inspecting the same or installing, inspecting, extending or repairing any public works therein. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-84)  
Secs. 38-141—38-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 38-146. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any vault, without first obtaining a permit so to do from the director of engineering. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or use any vault constructed after September 13, 1960, without first obtaining a permit for such purpose from the director of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 268, §§ 2, 3; Code 1961, §§ 36-63, 36-64; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-147. - Application. 
Application for a permit for the construction of a vault shall be filed with the director of engineering by the owner of the land fronting on the sidewalk under which the vault is to be constructed. Such application shall state the purposes for which the vault is intended, the nature of all fixtures, machinery and appliances to be installed therein, and such other information as the director of engineering may require. Such application shall be accompanied by plans and specifications showing the dimensions of the vault, the character of the proposed construction, the method of draining the same, the number, size and location of all openings therein from the street, the method proposed for protecting such openings and any other facts that may be required by the director of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 268, §§ 5, 8; Code 1961, § 36-67; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-148. - Compliance with article and other applicable ordinances prerequisite to grant. 
No permit required by this division shall be granted until, in the judgment of the director of engineering, all the provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city have been complied with, insofar as they apply to the vault involved. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 7; Code 1961, § 36-70; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-149. - Not to be granted if construction, maintenance or use would create nuisance or danger. 
No permit required by this division shall be granted when, in the opinion of the director of engineering, the construction, maintenance or use of the vault involved would result in creating a nuisance or a menace to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 6; Code 1961, § 36-68; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-150. - Not to be granted if vault interferes with or injures public works. 
No permit shall be granted for the construction, maintenance or use of any vault which will interfere with or injure any water main, sewer main, gas main, fire hydrant, catch basin, manhole, underground conduit, police or fire alarm post or any other public works. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 13; Code 1961, § 36-69)  
Sec. 38-151. - Approval of plans and specifications prerequisite to grant of construction permit. 
No permit shall be granted for the construction of a vault until the plans and specifications provided for in section 38-147 have been approved by the codes compliance administrator, as making sufficient provision for the safety of the public and adjoining property, and by the director of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 268, §§ 5, 8; Code 1961, § 36-67; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-152. - Abutting owner's agreement prerequisite to grant of construction permit. 
No permit shall be granted for the construction of any vault until the owner of the land abutting on the sidewalk under which such vault is to be constructed has, by means of a writing in the nature of a covenant running with such land and intended to bind all future owners thereof, duly executed and admitted to record, stipulated and agreed that the rights and privileges conferred by such permit shall be at all times subject to all and singular the terms, conditions and restrictions imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 12; Code 1961, § 36-71)  
Sec. 38-153. - Bond or insurance prerequisite to grant of construction permit. 
(a)  No permit shall be granted for the construction of any vault until a bond, with good and sufficient surety approved by the city manager, in the sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to one (1) person and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) maximum for injuries arising out of one (1) accident, the form of which bond shall be approved by the city attorney, and the surety on which shall be a surety company authorized to do business in the state, has been filed with the city clerk, or until an insurance indemnity policy in like amounts, the form of which shall be approved by the city attorney, has been filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  The bond or insurance policy filed pursuant to this section shall be with condition to indemnify the city against any and all loss, damage, injury, cost or expense that may be incurred by the city by reason of any defect in the vault to be constructed or the covering thereof or the sidewalk over or adjacent thereto, or of the construction, maintenance or use of such vault or any appurtenance or appliance thereof, or any fixture or machinery therein, or in closing such vault or removing any fixture or machinery therefrom, or in doing anything in or about such vault which should have been done by the owner or proprietor thereof, or by the applicant for the permit therefor. Such bond or policy shall be further conditioned that if any person shall be aggrieved by the fault, negligence, omissions or commissions of the owner, proprietor or occupant of the land adjoining such vault, with reference to the use, maintenance or operation thereof, and shall recover judgment against the owner, proprietor or occupant of such land, such person may, after the return unsatisfied, either in whole or in part, of any execution or fieri facias upon any judgment so recovered, maintain an action in such aggrieved person's own name, or in the name of the city for such person's use, upon the bond or insurance policy, in any court having jurisdiction for the amount then remaining due and unsatisfied upon such judgment, execution or fieri facias. 
(c)  No bond or insurance policy shall be accepted under this section which is so drawn that the liability thereon is limited to such claim, loss, damage, cost or expense as may arise or be incurred during any specific period of time. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 9; Code 1961, § 36-72)  
Sec. 38-154. - To be granted subject to provisions of article. 
All permits for the construction, maintenance or use of any vault shall be granted subject to the terms, conditions and restrictions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-78)  
Sec. 38-155. - Revocation—Grounds. 
(a)  A permit for the construction, maintenance or use of a vault may be revoked by the director of engineering whenever it shall be shown that the proprietor of such vault, or the owner of the land abutting thereon, has failed to comply with any provisions of this article or other ordinances of the city in regard to vaults, or any condition of the permit for the same, or that such vault, or any part thereof, is required for any public work or that such vault is in a condition of nuisance or is a menace to persons or property. 
(b)  A permit for the construction, maintenance or use of a vault may be revoked by the director of engineering whenever any bond or insurance policy required by section 38-153 shall, in the judgment of the city manager, cease to be in effect, or shall not furnish the necessary protection to the city. 
(c)  The director of engineering may revoke any permit for the construction, maintenance or use of any vault whenever the director shall ascertain that the vault is not being or has not been constructed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by him. 
(Ord. No. 268, §§ 5, 10, 14; Code 1961, §§ 36-73, 36-82, 36-97; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-156. - Same—Procedure. 
Whenever a permit for the construction, maintenance or use of a vault shall be revoked, notice of such revocation shall be given by the director of engineering, by registered mail addressed to the owner or proprietor of the land abutting on such vault at such owner's or proprietor's last known post office address. Such vault shall be closed within ten (10) days from the date such letter is mailed, and all fixtures, appliances and appurtenances therein or connected therewith shall be removed and the sidewalk over such vault shall be immediately restored to a safe and proper condition by such owner or proprietor and, in default thereof, such work may be done by order of the director of engineering at the risk and expense of such owner or proprietor. 
(Ord. No. 268, § 10; Code 1961, § 36-80; Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Secs. 38-157—38-166. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SIDEWALK BENCHES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-167. - Compliance with article. 
No person shall place any bench on the sidewalk of the city, unless such person complies with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-102)  
Sec. 38-168. - Location, size, etc.; rules and regulations of city manager governing use. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate the location of benches placed on the sidewalks of the city pursuant to the provisions of this article, as well as the character, color, size and construction of such benches, and shall formulate reasonable rules and regulations governing the use thereof and providing for the public safety. All persons placing benches on the sidewalks shall comply with such rules and regulations. 
(b)  The city manager may relocate any bench after the grant of a permit therefor pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 36-99, 36-102, 36-110)  
Sec. 38-169. - Fastening to sidewalk or wall of adjacent building. 
The city manager may require that the benches placed on the sidewalks of the city pursuant to the provisions of this article be fastened to the sidewalk or to the wall of the adjacent building. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-100)  
Sec. 38-170. - Advertising matter may be permitted. 
The city manager may permit advertising matter to be painted or printed on benches placed on the sidewalks of the city pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-101) 
Cross reference— Advertising, Ch. 3.  
Secs. 38-171—38-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 38-176. - Required. 
No person shall place any bench on the sidewalks of the city, without first obtaining a permit so to do from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-104)  
Sec. 38-177. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall make application therefor to the city manager. Such application shall be in such form and contain such information as may be required by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-105)  
Sec. 38-178. - Applicant's bond or liability insurance. 
No permit shall be granted under this division until the applicant therefor has deposited with the city manager a liability insurance policy approved by the city attorney, conditioned to indemnify the city against any and all loss, damage, injury, costs or expense that may be caused by any bench to be authorized by the permit, including injury to persons or property occasioned by the placing of such bench on the sidewalks, for which the city may be held liable. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-107)  
Sec. 38-179. - Consent of owner or occupant of abutting property prerequisite to grant. 
No permit required by this division shall be granted by the city manager unless the owner or occupant of the property abutting the sidewalk upon which the bench is to be placed shall consent, in writing, to the placing of the bench on such sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-108)  
Sec. 38-180. - Grant. 
Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this division, and when sections 38-178 and 38-179 have been complied with, the city manager may grant the permit pursuant to which benches may be placed on the sidewalks at designated locations in the city, if in the interest of public safety and public welfare, subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-106)  
Sec. 38-181. - Creates no vested right. 
No permit granted under this division shall create any vested right. 
(Ord. No. 264, § 2; Code 1961, § 36-109)  
Sec. 38-182. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the right, in the interest of public safety and public welfare, to revoke any permit granted under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Any permit granted under the provisions of this division may at any time be revoked by resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 264, §§ 1, 2; Code 1961, §§ 36-111, 36-112)  
Secs. 38-183—38-192. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - INSTALLATION OR REPAIR OF UNDERGROUND UTILITIES PRIOR TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 38-193. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Person. The word "person" shall also embrace public utility corporations, firms, associations, corporations, governmental agencies, political subdivisions and receivers and other fiduciaries; provided, however, that in the case of the Chesapeake & Potomac Telephone Company of Virginia, the word "person" shall mean the district plant engineer and the commercial manager of the Newport News branch. 
Street. The word "street" shall also embrace alleys, avenues, boulevards, parks, public rights-of-way and all other public places or easements. 
Structure. The word "structure" shall mean fixtures, wires, cables, vaults, culverts, manholes and other underground installations. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-113)  
Sec. 38-194. - Notice of intention to improve street. 
Whenever the city shall determine to pave or surface any street in the city, the director of engineering shall notify, in writing, at the time plans are completed and prior to advertisement for bids and award of contract, if the work is not performed by city forces, at least one hundred twenty (120) days in advance of actual construction, all utility companies, corporations, firms, associations, receivers and other fiduciaries, governmental agencies and political subdivisions of the state operating in the city of the intention of the city to pave or surface or otherwise to improve such street. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 2; Code 1961, § 36-114, Ord. No. 3111-83, § 1)  
Sec. 38-195. - Installation of new pipes, wires, etc. 
A person receiving the notice provided for in section 38-194 shall, within such period of one hundred twenty (120) days, at such person's own expense and cost, lay, install, construct and complete new underground pipes, mains, wires, conduits, equipment and utilities where none are then installed, including house services for each lot abutting a residential street, in advance of the street improvements contemplated by the city; provided, however, that this section is not intended to require utility companies and corporations to place existing overhead wires or cables underground, nor is it intended to hold a utility company in default where, pursuant to the terms of this article, house services have been installed, but the size of the services is found to be inadequate within the one-year period referred to in section 38-197. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 2; Code 1961, § 36-115)  
Sec. 38-196. - Repair of existing pipes, wires, etc. 
Where the mains, pipes, conduits, wires, equipment and utilities necessary to render adequate and proper service to the abutting property are already in the street at the time a person receives the notice provided for in section 38-194, such person shall examine the same carefully and repair or replace the same wherever needed, at such person's own expense and cost, in a proper and satisfactory order and condition and install the house service for each lot abutting on such street. All repairs, including the installation of the house service, shall be made and completed by the person so notified within one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 3; Code 1961, § 36-116)  
Sec. 38-197. - Subsequent street openings by persons failing to comply with section 38-195 or 38-196. 
If any person shall fail to comply with the requirements of section 38-195 or 38-196 within the time specified, and subsequently, within one (1) year from the date of such notice, shall, without reasonable excuse satisfactory to the director of public works or in event of an emergency, install new underground pipes, mains, wires, conduits, equipment and utilities, including house services, and in so doing cuts into the street surface or in any manner disrupts the street pavement or hard surface, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each street opening shall constitute a separate offense, and, in addition thereto, such person shall restore the pavement or hard surface required under existing city ordinances at such person's own cost and expense. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 4; Code 1961, § 36-117)  
Sec. 38-198. - Work by city. 
When the city is confronted with monetary loss or damage caused by delay of any person receiving notice as provided in section 38-194, by the failure to install underground pipes, mains, wires, conduits, equipment and utilities, as provided for in this article, within the specified time, the city manager shall, when ordered by the city council, cause the work to be done and charge all the cost and expense thereof to the person in default, to be collected as any other debt due the city. 
(Ord. No. 194, § 5; Code 1961, § 36-118)  
Secs. 38-199—38-208. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - STREET NUMBERS FOR BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 38-209. - Supervision of numbering. 
All numbering of houses and other buildings in the city shall be under the direction and supervision of the city manager or the manager's authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 2; Code 1961, § 36-128)  
Sec. 38-210. - Determination and notice of number. 
The city manager or the manager's authorized representative shall ascertain and determine the proper number for each house and other buildings in the city, in accord with the plan adopted by the council, and shall inform the owner, the owner's agent or the occupant of such house or building of such number. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 1; Code 1961, § 36-129)  
Sec. 38-211. - Display and size of number. 
Within thirty (30) days after the owner, the owner's agent or the occupant has received a designated street number for a structure, such person shall cause the number so designated to be securely inscribed and fixed conspicuously in or on the front of the house or building so that the number is easily observed and readable from the public right-of-way. All numbers shall be in arabic figures, which figures shall be at least three (3) inches (76 mm) high and one-half (½) inch (13 mm) wide. 
(Ord. No. 263, § 2; Code 1961, § 36-130; Ord. No. 3924-89)  
Secs. 38-212—38-214. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - STREET NAMES 
 
Sec. 38-215. - Street names required; displayed. 
All streets within the city, both public and private, shall be designated by street names, and said street names shall be prominently displayed on easily readable signs located at all street intersections. 
(Ord. No. 4107-90, § 1)  
Sec. 38-216. - Naming of streets; approval. 
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of private streets to choose names therefor; and in the absence of such a request, a name shall be chosen by the city manager or his designee. Public streets shall hereafter be named by ordinance passed by city council, or by designation upon subdivision plats which have been approved and recorded in accordance with the City Code. 
All street names within the city, both public and private, shall first be requested from and approved by the city manager or his designee. The criteria for approval or disapproval of a requested name shall be that such names shall not sound like, be spelled like or be easily confused with existing street names and that such names shall not contain more than ten (10) letters exclusive of such symbols as St., Ave., or other abbreviations. This section shall not apply to street names existing on the date of the adoption of the ordinance first setting forth this section for which signs had been previously erected displaying such names. 
(Ord. No. 4107-90, § 1)  
Sec. 38-217. - Street identification signs; maintenance of street name signs. 
(a)  Street identification signs shall be installed at each public or private street intersection at the expense of the owner. Such signs shall be provided by the city and the owner shall be charged the city's cost for producing the signs. 
(b)  Street name signs shall be maintained to ensure that they are easily readable. Unless otherwise provided, maintenance of signs designating private street names shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of the private street. Public street name signs and private street name signs at intersections with public streets will be maintained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4107-90, § 1)  
Secs. 38-218—38-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - STREET AND SIDEWALK VENDORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7076-14, § 1, adopted July 8, 2014, effective September 1, 2014 amended the title of Ch. 38, Art. X to read as herein set out. Formerly said article was entitled Sidewalk Vendors. 
 
Sec. 38-221. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Cart. Any portable vending device, pushcart or other wheeled vehicle or device which may be moved without the assistance of a motor and which is not required to be licensed or registered by the department of motor vehicles, used for the displaying, storing or transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor. 
City manager. Where used in this article, the term "city manager" shall refer to the city manager or his designee. 
Designated parking space. A space or series of spaces within the public right-of-way along the edge of a paved, vehicular roadway that is approved by the city manager pursuant to section 38-226, below, as a location where a food truck vendor is permitted to operate in accordance with a vendor permit or where a food vendor is permitted to park a vehicle while vending from a designated sidewalk space. 
Designated sidewalk space. An area or series of areas within the public right-of-way outside of the paved, vehicular roadway that is approved by the city manager pursuant to section 38-226, below, as a location where a food vendor is permitted to operate in accordance with a vendor permit. 
Food truck vendor. Any vendor who sells or offers for sale food, other than a vendor operating exclusively as an ice cream vendor as that term is defined pursuant to section 17-99 of this Code, from a motor vehicle or a trailer licensed to be operated on the highway by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles. 
Food vendor. Any vendor who sells or offers for sale food from a cart, but not including a food truck vendor. 
Sidewalk shall mean any portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line which is used or intended for use by pedestrians. 
Street vendor district shall mean those areas in the city specifically designated for street and sidewalk vending. 
Vendor shall mean any person engaged in the selling, or offering for sale, of food or beverage on public streets or sidewalks within the city. 
(Ord. No. 4435-93; Ord. No. 7076-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7216-15, § 1)  
Sec. 38-222. - Vendor permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, or offer for sale, food or beverage on streets or sidewalks in the city without first obtaining a vendor permit. 
(b)  Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vendor operating outside of the public right-of-way and on property where the applicable zoning regulations permit such activity; 
(2)  Special events or festivals for which a permit has been issued by the city; 
(3)  The sale or distribution of newspapers or other publications from vending machines; 
(4)  Solicitors regulated by Chapter 36 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4435-93; Ord. No. 7076-14, § 1)  
Sec. 38-223. - Street vendor districts; number of vendors. 
(a)  The following areas of the city are hereby designated as street vendor districts: 
(1)  Downtown street vendor district: that area of the city bounded on the north by 50 th Street, on the east by Huntington Avenue, on the south by 23 rd Street, and on the west by the James River. 
(2)  Oakland Industrial Park street vendor district: that area of the City commonly known as Oakland Industrial Park, including Enterprise Drive and all streets that intersect Enterprise Drive west of Warwick Boulevard. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized and directed to determine on an annual basis the maximum number of vendor permits to be issued for a street vendor district. This determination will be based upon demand for vendor services, available space, and public health and welfare considerations. If conditions so warrant, the number of vendor permits may be altered during the course of the year, so long as that alteration does not result in the revocation of an otherwise valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 4435-93; Ord. No. 4504-93; Ord. No. 4945-96; Ord. No. 5886-03; Ord. No. 7076-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7149-15, § 1; 7216-15, § 1)  
Sec. 38-224. - Application for permit; permit issuance; annual fee. 
(a)  All applications and renewal applications will be submitted in the format designated by the city manager. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, home and business address of the applicant; 
(2)  A description of the type of food or beverage to be sold; 
(3)  The names and addresses of all officers of a corporate applicant, and the names, addresses and percentage interest of each partner in a partnership applicant; and 
(4)  Such other information as the city manager may require in the application form. 
(b)  Permit issuance. 
(1)  Permits will be issued in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the city manager, which shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  A time line and date for an annual permit issuance process; 
b.  Application deadlines; 
(2)  Permits shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the annual permit issuance date established by the city manager. 
(c)  No vendor permit will be issued prior to the applicant securing a business license and submitting insurance that meets the requirements set forth in section 38-225. 
(d)  Vendor permits will be issued for breakfast, lunch and dinner shifts, the timing of which shifts shall be established in rules and regulations adopted by the city manager. An annual permit fee of one hundred fifty dollars per shift ($150.00) shall be paid in advance for the whole year or any part of the year, prior to a vendor permit being issued. 
(e)  Vendor permits may not be leased, sold, or otherwise transferred without written authorization from the city manager. 
(f)  A vendor desiring to relocate to a vacant designated vending location may apply to do so. Such relocations will be permitted on a first-come-first-served basis, subject to a one hundred dollar ($100.00) administrative processing fee. 
(Ord. No. 4435-93; Ord. No. 7076-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7216-15, § 1)  
Sec. 38-225. - Vendor regulations. 
No vendor shall: 
(a)  Leave any location without first picking up, removing and disposing of all trash or refuse attributable to his vending; 
(b)  Solicit or conduct business with persons in a motor vehicle while such person's vehicle is on that portion of a public street intended for vehicular travel or parking. 
(c)  Use any loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier or other sound device to attract the attention of the public; 
(d)  Vend without conspicuously displaying any business license, insurance certificate and health permit required by the city or the department of public health; 
(e)  Use any form of lighting to attract the attention of the public; 
(f)  Use any form of lighting for illumination purposes which is red, amber, yellow or green; or which projects into the traveled portion of the streets; 
(g)  Vend upon the sidewalks of the city without first procuring an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury to or death of any person or persons in any one incident and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage in any one incident. Said policy must include an endorsement naming the city as an additional insured thereon and must be approved by the city attorney's office prior to conducting vending operations on the street or sidewalk; 
(h)  Load or unload vehicles while such vehicle is located on the portion of a public street intended for vehicular travel; 
(i)  Vend from any table, stand or cart, or any collection of the same, which exceeds in the aggregate four (4) feet in width (perpendicular to the street), twelve (12) feet in length (parallel to the street) or eight (8) feet in height; 
(j)  Leave his vending table, stand, cart or other vending equipment unattended on a sidewalk for longer than fifteen (15) minutes; 
(k)  Block or impede use of the sidewalk or ingress or egress to or from any building or gate or use of any trash receptacle, mail box, parking meter or other public facility on the sidewalk; or 
(l)  Vend upon the streets or sidewalks of the city from any place other than their assigned location as designated by the city manager pursuant to section 38-226. 
(m)  Vend upon the streets or sidewalks of the city outside of the hours of operation established by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4435-93; Ord. No. 4504-93; Ord. No. 7076-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7216-15, § 1)  
Sec. 38-225.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7076-14, § 2, adopted July 8, 2014, effective September 1, 2014, repealed § 38-225.1 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained vending prohibited and derived from Ord. No. 4559-94.  
Sec. 38-226. - Designation of vending locations within street vendor district. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to designate one or more designated parking spaces within the public right-of-way of any street vendor district where a food truck vendor may operate. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to designate one or more designated sidewalk locations where a food vendor may operate and to designate one or more designated parking spaces within the public right-of-way of any street vendor district where a food vendor may park a vehicle while vending from a designated sidewalk space. 
(c)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized and directed to locate and designate "food truck parking" spaces, not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in length, at locations identified by the city manager as locations where a food truck vendor may operate. The traffic engineer is also authorized and directed to locate and designate "food vendor" parking spaces at locations identified by the city manager as locations where a food vendor may park a vehicle while vending from a designated sidewalk space. The traffic engineer may designate and mark such spaces as a "no parking" zone for the exclusive use of food trucks or food vendors. 
(d)  The city manager is authorized to adopt rules and regulations concerning the use of designated spaces, including but not limited to the assigning of spaces to vendors. The city manager is authorized to establish hours of operation for vendors which may vary depending upon the type of vendor and whether the vendor is operating in conjunction with a special event. The city manager is also authorized to adopt rules and regulations establishing minimum days of operation per week, month, or other longer period of time which may vary based upon the type of vendor. 
(Ord. No. 4435-93; Ord. No. 7076-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7216-15, § 1)  
Sec. 38-227. - Additional food truck vendor regulations. 
Vehicles designed to serve patrons within a street vendor district from the curbside of the vehicle may be utilized for that purpose, however the operator of such a vehicle shall: 
(1)  Serve only from the curb side thereof. 
(2)  Vend only from a space designated for food truck vendors and assigned to the vendor. 
(3)  Be subject to all other laws applicable to any such parking space or area, specifically including, but not limited to, motor vehicle and zoning laws, rules and regulations. 
(4)  Not place any table, stand, sign or item or device, apart from a trash receptacle, on any sidewalk or right-of-way. 
(5)  Be subject to all other provisions of this article unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 4435-93; Ord. No. 7076-14, § 1)  
Sec. 38-228. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor and be punished accordingly. Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any vendor operating with a vendor permit found to be in violation of any section of this article, any limitation of his license, or any rules or regulations authorized by or expressed in this article may have his license suspended or revoked. Any vendor aggrieved by such a suspension or revocation shall have the right to appeal to the city manager, in writing, within ten (10) business days of such suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 7076-14, § 1)  
Sec. 38-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - TRAINS CROSSING PUBLIC STREETS 
 
Sec. 38-330. - Locomotives to give signals at railroad crossings. 
(a)  Every locomotive passing upon its road within the city shall sharply sound its whistle at least twice at a distance of not less than three hundred (300) yards nor more than six hundred (600) yards from the place where the railroad crosses upon the same level any public highway or crossing, and it shall ring its bell continuously from the time of giving such signal until the locomotive has reached such highway crossing. 
(b)  Every officer or employee of any railway company whose duty it is to carry out the provisions of subsection a above and shall fail to do so, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding ten dollars ($10.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 4561-94)  
ARTICLE XII. - SPECIAL EVENTS, PARADES, AND RACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2012, shall be in effect on and after March 1, 2012. 
 
Sec. 38-331. - Purpose. 
This article is adopted in order to ensure the free and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way, to ensure free and safe access to public areas, and otherwise to regulate and control the time, place, and manner of activities that would otherwise threaten the public health, safety, and welfare, while also encouraging and protecting the exercise of rights under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1)  
Sec. 38-332. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this article, shall have the meanings indicated below: 
(a)  Director means the director of the department of engineering or his designee. 
(b)  Parade means any march, walk, or procession consisting of people, animals, bicycles, vehicles, or a combination thereof, upon any street or sidewalk within the city and interferes with or is likely to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(c)  Public assembly means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally, or gathering of any kind that occupies any street or sidewalk within the city and interferes with or is likely to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Race means an organized competitive event consisting of people, bicycles, or other vehicular devices, or a combination thereof, upon any street within the city. 
(e)  Sidewalk means any area in the city dedicated to the public use for purposes of pedestrian traffic. 
(f)  Special event means a public assembly or block party. 
(g)  Spontaneous event means an unplanned coming together of persons or vehicles in a parade or public assembly which was not contemplated beforehand by any participant therein, and which is caused by or in response to unforeseen circumstances or events. 
(h)  Street means any public roadway or portions thereof in the city dedicated to the public use for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any shoulder, right-of-way, median strip, or footpath thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1)  
Sec. 38-333. - Permit required. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person, group, or organization to conduct or participate in any special event, parade, or race on any street, sidewalk, or city-owned or leased public parking lot in the city, for which a permit has not been issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Exceptions. No permit shall be required for: 
(1)  Any special event or parade consisting of no more than one hundred (100) persons and which takes place on any sidewalk or other public right-of-way that is not used for the movement of vehicular traffic; 
(2)  Spontaneous events; 
(3)  Any special event, parade, or race conducted entirely in a city park or on the streets and sidewalks therein, or in an area under the control of the department of parks, recreation, and tourism for a particular event or activity. The rules and regulations of the department of parks, recreation, and tourism shall govern such conduct; 
(4)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of school authorities; 
(5)  The United States military forces, and the military forces of the state; 
(6)  The police and fire departments of the state, city, and of any other locality rendering aid; 
(7)  Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions or in the course of a ceremonial function; and 
(8)  Wedding or funeral processions. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above exceptions, picketing before or about the residence or dwelling place of any individual is prohibited pursuant to section 28-32. 
(Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1)  
Sec. 38-334. - Application fee. 
(a)  There shall be paid by the applicant or sponsor at the time of application, a non-refundable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each special event, parade, or race to cover the administrative costs of processing the permit. 
(b)  No application shall be considered complete until the required fee is paid. 
(c)  Applicants are exempt from the application fee for parades and public assemblies the primary purpose of which is the exercise of expressive activity and free speech as guaranteed by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States. The director shall grant or deny the exemption under this subsection with the advice and consent of the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1)  
Sec. 38-335. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Filing period. An application for a permit for any parade, block party, or race shall be made to the director, accompanied by a non-refundable application fee as provided in section 38-334. The application shall be submitted not less than twenty-one (21) days nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the date on which the event will occur. However, the application for any activity the primary purpose of which is the exercise of expressive activity and free speech as guaranteed by the First Amendment shall be submitted not less than two (2) business days nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the date on which the event will occur. 
(b)  Any person, group, or organization desiring to conduct a special event, parade, or race shall make written application to include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the person requesting the permit; 
(2)  The name and address of any person, group, or organization the applicant is representing; 
(3)  The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the person who will act as the special event, parade, or race leader or chairman and who will be responsible for the conduct of the parade or race; 
(4)  A description of the activities planned during the event; 
(5)  The date and time (start and end) of the special event, parade, or race and rain date (if applicable); 
(6)  The specific assembly and dispersal locations, a sketch and description of the specific route, appropriate traffic control, and the plans, if any, for assembly and dispersal; 
(7)  The approximate number of people who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such special event, parade, or race and the type of animals and a description of the vehicles (e.g., marching units, floats, etc.), including but not limited to vehicle size and weight; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the special event, parade, or race intends to occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets or sidewalks proposed to be traversed or used; 
(9)  A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, banners, signs, or other attention-getting devices to be used in connection with the special event, parade, or race; 
(10)  The type and proposed location of any reviewing stands, temporary structures, and restroom facilities; and 
(11)  Such other information as the director may deem reasonably necessary in order to properly provide for traffic control, street and property maintenance, administrative arrangements, police and fire protection, and for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1)  
Sec. 38-336. - Permit processing and approval process. 
(a)  The director shall process applications for special event, parade, and race permits in the order in which they are received, and shall notify the applicant in writing at the address provided by the applicant, of his decision no later than fourteen (14) days (excluding city holidays) following the date the completed application is received. First Amendment activities which require application for a permit not less than two (2) business days before the event shall be processed immediately, and the applicant notified of a decision forthwith. If the application is denied, the applicant shall be apprised in writing of the reason. 
(b)  The director may deny an application, applying any of the following criteria and finding that: 
(1)  Due to the time, duration, route or size of the special event, parade, or race, the proposed activity presents an unreasonable safety or health risk to participants, spectators, or the public; or 
(2)  Due to the condition of the street or sidewalk, including scheduled construction or maintenance, the proposed activity presents an unreasonable safety or health risk to participants, spectators, or the public; or 
(3)  Public safety resources to support the activity are not reasonably available; or 
(4)  The conduct of the activity will unduly interfere with the proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, all or part of the city; or 
(5)  The activity will cause irreconcilable interference with a competing special event, parade, race, or other activities; or 
(6)  Other special event, parade, or race permit requirements have not been met; or 
(7)  The application contains a material falsehood or misrepresentation; or 
(8)  The applicant or the person, group, or organization on whose behalf the application for permit was made has on one (1) or more prior occasions made material falsehoods or misrepresentations regarding the nature or scope of a special event, parade, or race previously permitted or has violated the requirements or conditions of a prior permit issued to or on behalf of the applicant. 
(c)  A denied permit application may be resubmitted for review. An additional application fee will not be required if resubmitted within thirty (30) days. A resubmitted permit application is subject to the same criteria as an original application and any changes submitted by the applicant are not grounds for automatic approval. 
(d)  Permit conditions. The director may condition the issuance of a permit by imposing reasonable requirements or conditions as are necessary to protect the safety and rights of persons and property and control of traffic, provided that the applicant's rights under the First Amendment are not denied thereby. In order to accommodate the rights of abutting owners and the needs of the public to use the streets and sidewalks, and to protect the safety of the event participants, the conditions may include but are not limited to reasonable adjustments in the date, time, route, and location of the proposed event; designation of parking areas, and assembly and dispersal locations; accommodations for pedestrian and vehicular traffic using the streets and sidewalks; limitations on the length and duration of the event; and the use of monitors, security personnel, or off-duty police officers. If emergency medical services and/or security services are desired, or required by the city, the applicant shall be responsible for obtaining and paying for those services. 
(e)  Insurance. The applicant shall provide evidence of general liability insurance for a special event, parade, or race in amounts of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any person or persons, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for damage to property. Such insurance policy shall include an endorsement naming the City of Newport News as an "additional insured." No such insurance shall be required for any special event or parade the primary purpose of which is the exercise of expressive activity and free speech as guaranteed by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States, or for any special event or parade which does not include vehicles, or which does not require a full or partial street closure. 
(f)  Review by city manager or designee. Upon request made in writing to the city manager, a denied applicant shall be entitled to an informal meeting with the city manager, or his designee, to review the decision of the director. The meeting shall occur within five (5) business days of the receipt of the request unless there is mutual agreement to a different date. For denial of a permit involving First Amendment activities, the meeting shall occur no later than the end of the next business day. The city manager, or his designee, may affirm, reverse, or modify the director's decision. 
(g)  Notice to various officials. Immediately upon the issuance of a permit under this section, the director shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The chief of police; 
(2)  The fire chief; 
(3)  The director of public works; and 
(4)  Transportation division of the department of engineering. 
(h)  Compliance with directions and standards. Every person to whom a permit is issued under this section shall comply with all permit terms and conditions and with all applicable regulations and laws. The special event, parade, or race chairman or other person responsible for leading the event shall carry the permit upon his person during the conduct of the event and show the permit when requested to do so. It shall be unlawful to violate any requirement or condition of the permit. 
(i)  Public conduct. 
(1)  Interference. No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any special event, parade, or race or with any person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in such an event. 
(2)  Driving through special events, races, and parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive through or between the vehicles, persons, or animals comprising a special event, race, or parade except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(3)  Parking on the parade or race route or the area of a special event. The director and the police department shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along the public streets or public rights-of-way constituting a part of the route of a parade or race or an area in which a special event will occur. The director may post signs to such effect. No person shall be in violation of this subsection for parking on an unposted street unless the person was personally notified by the director or the police department to move the vehicle. 
(j)  It shall be a violation of this permit for participants in the permitted special event, parade, or race to: 
(1)  Engage in stunt riding of motorized vehicles; and 
(2)  Throw candy or other items into the crowd. 
(k)  The granting of any permit under this article shall not eliminate any requirement for any other license or permit which may be prescribed by any other federal, state, or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations, or compliance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1)  
Sec. 38-337. - Revocation. 
(a)  A special event, parade, or race permit issued under this article shall be temporary, shall vest no permanent rights in the applicant, and may be immediately revoked by the director, or the chief of police or his representative, if: 
(1)  The applicant has made a material falsehood or misrepresentation in the information supplied; 
(2)  The applicant has failed to fulfill a requirement or condition of the permit in a timely manner; 
(3)  The check submitted by the applicant in payment of the fee for a permit has been dishonored; 
(4)  The applicant requests the cancellation of the permit or cancels the event; 
(5)  The activity endangers or threatens persons or property, or otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety or welfare of persons or property; 
(6)  The activity conducted is in violation of any of the requirements or conditions of the permit, or any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation; or 
(7)  An emergency or the consequences thereof, or a supervening occurrence requires the cancellation or termination of the event in order to protect the public health or safety. 
(b)  Written or verbal notice of such revocation may be given before or during a special event, parade, or race to the applicant, chairman, or leader of the activity, after which the special event, parade, or race shall immediately cease. If verbal notice is given, written notice shall also be given within two (2) business days of the verbal notice to the applicant, chairman, or leader of the activity. All written revocation notices shall set forth the reason or reasons for such revocation and shall be hand-delivered to the applicant, chairman, or leader of the activity, or sent by first class mail to the applicant's address as set forth in the application. 
(c)  Upon revocation, the applicant may appeal the determination of the director or the chief of police or representative within ten (10) business days of the date of the written notice to the applicant. Appeal should be made by filing a written notice of appeal to the city manager. The appeal shall be heard in accordance with section 38-336(f) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1)  
Sec. 38-338. - Violations. 
Any persons convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1)  
Sec. 38-339. - Retroactive application of ordinance. 
Any permit issued by the city for a special event, parade, or race prior to the adoption of this ordinance and which has not yet occurred, and any applicant for such permit, or sponsor thereof, shall be subject to the provisions of sections 38-336, 38-337, and 38-338. 
(Ord. No. 6846-12, § 1)  
Chapter 39 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4739-95, adopted June 27, 1995, amended Ch. 39, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 39 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Building regulations, Ch. 13; parks, squares and recreational facilities, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Ordinances requiring fencing of swimming pools, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-921. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 39-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, except as otherwise provided in this chapter: 
Certified operator. The individual responsible for the everyday operation of a public swimming pool and who has successfully passed a course approved by the health department in proper pool operation and maintenance. 
Disinfectant. Any chemical that kills or neutralizes the organisms that cause disease and/or infection and is readily measurable. 
Fence. A close type vertical barrier not less than four (4) feet in height above ground or more than two (2) inches from the ground at the bottom. A woven wire, chain link, picket or solid board type fence or a fence of similar construction which will prevent the smallest of children from getting through and which has a gate capable of being locked shall be construed as being within this definition. 
Free available (residual) chlorine. The portion of the total chlorine remaining in water that is not combined with ammonia or nitrogen compounds and will react chemically with undesirable or pathogenic organisms. 
Hazard. Any condition or situation which exists within a pool or pool area that poses a risk of injury or harm to the patron(s). 
Health officer. The director of public health of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
Hot tub. A hydrotherapy spa constructed of wood with sides and bottoms formed separately; and the whole shaped to join together by pressure from the surrounding hoops, bands or rods; as distinct from spa units formed of plastic, concrete, metal and other materials. 
Hydrotherapy spa. A unit designed for recreational and therapeutic use which is not drained, cleaned or refilled for each user. It may include but not be limited to hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water mineral baths, air induction bubbles, or some combination thereof. Industry terminology for a spa includes but is not limited to "therapeutic pool," "hydrotherapy pool," "whirlpool," "hot spa," "hot tubs," etc. 
Maximum load. Maximum or design load, determined by dividing the total square footage of swimming pool surface area by twenty-seven (27). 
Operator or manager. The individual responsible for the operation and management of a public swimming pool. 
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, governmental agency, club, school or organization of any kind. 
Pool area. That area immediately surrounding and adjacent to the swimming pool to include all areas within the fence, if required, or within the walls of the room in which the pool is located if it is an indoor pool. 
Private residential swimming pool. Any swimming pool located on private residential property under the control of the homeowner or a tenant, the use of which is limited to swimming by members of the homeowner's or tenant's family and their guests. 
Public spa and hot tubs. Any spa and/or hot tub, other than a residential spa or hot tub, which is intended solely for bathing and is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. Public spas and hot tubs may be individual units or may be integrated into a larger swimming pool or bathing pool. 
Public swimming pool. Any swimming pool intended to be used collectively by persons, whether they be owners, lessees, operators or concessionaires, regardless of whether a fee is charged for such use. Such term shall include, but not be limited to, a swimming pool owned and operated by a private club or association, a civic club or any other association. "Public swimming pool" shall include public spas and hot tubs. 
Spa. A hydrotherapy unit (see "hydrotherapy spa") of irregular or geometric shell design. 
Swimming pool. Any swimming, wading or spray pool, including all appurtenant equipment, structures and facilities, constructed for the purpose of providing a swimming or wading place for any person or persons. 
Turnover rate. The amount of time required by a filtration system to filter the equivalent of the entire volume of a pool or spa. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-2. - Applicability and purpose of chapter generally. 
(a)  This chapter, except as otherwise provided herein, is adopted to provide regulations relating to the design, construction, alteration and maintenance of sanitation and safety features applying to the use and operation of all swimming pools, with the exception of single-occupant tanks or showers used exclusively for therapeutic purposes and tourist establishment swimming pools, as defined under Section 35.1-13 of the Code of Virginia, and to provide for requirements for permits for the construction of such pools and for administration and enforcement by the health officer. 
(b)  The primary purposes of this chapter, in its application to swimming pools, are: 
(1)  To assure that the water in a swimming pool is sufficiently clear, free from dirt or other foreign substances and properly treated by approved chemicals to make it free from undue hazard to the health of its patrons and the citizens of the city. 
(2)  To provide the health officer with a means for insuring that these objectives are carried out and made effective both with respect to existing swimming pools and those which may be built in the future. 
(3)  To assure that the appurtenances of swimming pools are so organized and operated that they promote and protect the safety of their patrons and of the citizens of the city. 
(4)  To assure that new construction of swimming pools shall have the benefit of this chapter as a guide for persons interested in planning, organizing and building such swimming pools. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-3. - Application of chapter to existing pools. 
The structural and equipment provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any swimming pool constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, except as follows: 
(1)  Any alteration, placement or replacement of any equipment shall comply with such requirements. 
(2)  The provisions and requirements of this chapter with respect to fences, operational procedures and standards, chemical feeding equipment, flowmeters, pressure gauges and toilet facilities shall be complied with by all public swimming pools, regardless of the date of construction, except where specifically provided otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-4. - Applicability of plumbing, building, electrical and zoning regulations. 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, the requirements of the city building, plumbing and electrical codes and the zoning ordinance shall also apply in the construction, maintenance and operation of all swimming pools. Any appeal from a decision by the director of codes compliance or a building, plumbing, electrical or zoning inspector with respect to such additional requirements or the design and construction requirements contained in this chapter shall be made under the provisions of such codes and ordinances, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-5. - Notice to comply with chapter. 
When any violation of this chapter occurs, the operator or owner of the swimming pool involved shall be notified in writing and shall be given a time limit, not to exceed ninety (90) days, in which to comply. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-6. - Submission of plans. 
For any proposed public swimming pool or spa, it is the responsibility of the owner of the real estate on which the said pool or spa is to be located to provide detailed plans and specifications to the health officer for review and approval. Such plans and the review thereof must be completed prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-7. - Building permit. 
A building permit shall be obtained from the department of codes compliance before the construction, remodeling or major alteration of any swimming pool. Plans and specifications for other than private residential swimming pools shall have been approved by the health officer prior to the issuance of such permit. Such plans and specifications must be submitted in triplicate to the health officer and one (1) set of plans and specifications, when approved, shall be stamped and returned to the applicant. Original tracings shall not be stamped for approval. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-8. - Authority of health officer to close pools. 
When the health officer finds that the provisions of this chapter are not met or that any condition exists that endangers the life, health or safety of the users of any swimming pool, such officer may order the facility closed until the condition is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-9. - Location. 
The location of a swimming pool shall in no way hinder the operations for which it is designed nor adversely affect swimmers' safety or the quality of the water. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-10. - Water supply. 
All water used in swimming pools shall be from an approved source. No piping arrangement shall exist which, under any conditions, will permit sewage or wastewater to enter the swimming pool water system or water from the swimming pool to enter the make-up water supply. In the case of spray pools, spray heads shall be installed so that there will be no possibility for their submergence, as might result in the case of clogged drains. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-11. - Outlet drain. 
An outlet drain shall be provided for completely emptying any swimming pool. Direct connections to a sanitary sewer or a septic tank shall not be permitted. Indirect connection to a storm sewer is subject to approval by the director of public works and the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-12. - Fencing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, use, possess or control any swimming pool located outdoors, unless such swimming pool is completely enclosed by a substantial fence not less than four (4) feet in height nor more than two (2) inches above the ground surface and is located not closer than five (5) feet from any swimming pool edge. A woven steel wire, chain link, picket or solid board type fence or a fence of equal or greater strength shall be construed as meeting this requirement. The fence shall have at least one (1) gate, and all gates shall be kept locked at all times when the swimming pool is not in use. 
(b)  All fences required by this section shall conform to the city's building code and to the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation shall be construed as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Secs. 39-13—39-21. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC POOLS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 39-22. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to public swimming pools and shall be in addition to other provisions of this chapter applicable to such pools. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-23. - Approval of materials, design features, etc., not covered by article. 
For any items not specifically covered by this article, the health officer is hereby authorized to require that all materials, methods of construction and design features for public swimming pools shall prove to function adequately, effectively and without excessive maintenance and operation difficulties, before granting approval thereof. Such approval shall be based upon the need for protecting the health and safety of those using the pool. It shall be the duty of the applicant to provide such data, tests or other adequate proof that the device, material or product will satisfactorily perform the function for which it is intended before such item shall be approved. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-24. - Operating permit; health officer's right to inspect. 
(a)  No person shall operate a public swimming pool, unless an annual permit has been secured from the health officer. Such permit shall be issued to an individual who has been certified as a pool operator by the Tidewater Swimming Pool Conference Committee or equivalent certification approved by the health officer or to an organization naming a specific certified pool operator to be in charge, and shall be valid only until the end of the calendar year in which it is issued, unless sooner revoked by the health officer. Such permit shall only be issued for those public swimming pools meeting the requirements of this chapter; and, as a condition for the issuance of such permit, the operator or person in charge of the swimming pool shall, upon request of the health officer, permit access to all parts of the pool at all reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections. 
(b)  The permit required by this section shall be posted under a transparent waterproof material in view of the users of the swimming pool. 
(c)  Continued failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for revocation, by the health officer, of any operating permit under this section. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-25. - Supervision. 
The operation of a public swimming pool and all of its appurtenances shall be under the direct supervision of the certified operator. The certified operator shall be readily accessible at all times and capable of responding within two (2) hours of notification of a problem when the pool is open. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-26. - Operating records. 
A daily record of the operation of each public swimming pool shall be maintained by the operator. The record shall include date, pH and free chlorine residual at least every three (3) hours, cyanuric acid content, weather conditions, chemicals added and amounts, filter pressure (inlet and outlet gauges), and rate of flow in gallons per minute. Such record shall also contain a report of all accidents in detail. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-27. - Accessibility to rescue, emergency and maintenance vehicles. 
Each public swimming pool and its appurtenances shall be so located and constructed that a rescue or emergency vehicle and maintenance vehicle shall be capable of being admitted to within fifty (50) feet of the swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-28. - Lifeguards. 
The management of any public swimming pool shall designate and have on duty, within the pool area, a lifeguard or lifeguards, each of whom shall, as a minimum, have passed a current lifeguard training certification and also possesses a current approved first aid and CPR certification conducted by the American Red Cross or the Y.M.C.A. or a program shown to be the equivalent thereof to the director of public health. Each pool shall be equipped with and have available the following lifesaving equipment: a rescue tube per lifeguard, ring buoy, shepherd's crook, reaching pole, first aid kit, and any other equipment necessary. The required number of lifeguards shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  For pools greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet in area, there shall be two (2) or more lifeguards. 
(2)  For pools greater than four thousand (4,000) square feet in area, there shall be no fewer than two (2) lifeguards, plus an additional lifeguard for each fifty (50) bathers over one hundred fifty (150). 
(3)  For pools two thousand (2,000) square feet in area or less, there shall be at least one (1) lifeguard; provided, however, that no lifeguard shall be required for such pools (i) if the pool is no more than five (5) feet in depth; and (ii) the pool is owned by a homeowners' association, recreation association, health club or condominium, or the pool is operated within a gated housing complex whose residents are limited primarily to unaccompanied military personnel; and (iii) if the following restrictions are adhered to for use of the pool: 
a.  Only persons eighteen (18) years and older are allowed in the pool and pool area; 
b.  A sign is clearly posted in the pool area, in four-inch or larger letters, that there is no lifeguard on duty; 
c.  All other lifesaving equipment as specified in this chapter shall be available within the pool area. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95; Ord. No. 5902-03; Ord. No. 6666-10)  
Sec. 39-29. - Lifesaving equipment. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 39-28, the management or operator shall furnish lifeguards with the following lifesaving and safety equipment: a rescue tube per lifeguard, one (1) backboard per facility which is OSHA Compliant and meets The American Red Cross Standards, one (1) whistle for each lifeguard on duty, a ring buoy with rope of not less than one-fourth (¼) inch in diameter and twenty-five (25) feet in length, a shepherd's crook or reaching pole equivalent to not less than one-half (½) the width of the pool, and a first aid kit containing one (1) CPR barrier device mask, one (1) pair barrier first aid gloves, adhesive bandages, gauze bandages (square), gauze bandages (roll), medical tape, one (1) scissors, first aid antibiotic ointment, and one (1) blood or body fluid spill clean-up kit. All equipment and supplies must be readily available within the pool area. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95; Ord. No. 5902-03; Ord. No. 6099-05)  
Sec. 39-30. - Telephones. 
A telephone capable of contacting emergency agencies (police, fire, etc.) shall be readily available within one hundred (100) feet of the pool area at all times while the pool is open. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95; Ord. No. 5902-03; Ord. No. 7560-19)  
Sec. 39-31. - Separation of wading pools. 
Public wading pools shall be separated from swimming pools and appropriate protection features, such as a fence, shall be installed. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-32. - Protection of wading pools from contamination during rainfall. 
Every public wading pool shall be located so that drainage from the surrounding area will not wash contamination into the pool during rainfall. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-33. - General requirements for shells; materials for spray pools. 
(a)  Public swimming pool shells shall be of reinforced concrete, or its equivalent in strength and durability, designed and built to withstand anticipated stresses. Such shell shall be of watertight construction and shall have a smooth and easily cleanable surface. A white or light colored waterproof interior finish, which will withstand repeated brushing, scrubbing and cleaning procedures, shall completely line the pool to the coping. 
(b)  Public spray pools shall be constructed of permanently impervious material that shall have and retain a finish as smooth as possible and that is nonslip to bare feet. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-34. - Shape, contour, slope, etc. 
(a)  A public swimming pool shall be designed and constructed of such shape, contour, and the like that efficient and safe control of swimmers can be accomplished. In water depths under five (5) feet, the slope of the bottom shall not exceed one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet. 
(b)  The bottom of public wading pools and spray pools shall slope not less than three (3) inches in ten (10) feet toward the drains. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-35. - Deck generally. 
(a)  There shall be a deck at least four (4) feet wide extending around the entire perimeter of a public swimming pool. The deck shall be constructed of concrete or other approved material. The material shall have a nonslip but smooth finish. The deck shall have a pitch of not less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of an inch nor more than five-eighths ( 5/8 ) of an inch to the foot and be designed so as to conduct drainage away from the pool area in a manner that will not create or maintain pools of water or become a health nuisance. 
(b)  If the recirculation system is designed for water to enter the bottom and overflow the top or near the top of the pool, then adequate drainage of the scum and floating material from the deck must be provided. This may be a continuous drain or multiple drains. In multiple drains, each drain grating shall have a total orifice area of at least four (4) times the cross-sectional area of the drainpipe, which shall have minimum diameter of two and one-half (2½) inches. In the use of drain channels, continuous around the perimeter of the pool, the channel grating shall be designed so as not to create a hazard to fingers and toes and be resistant to corrosion. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-36. - Persons in street clothes and furniture on deck. 
No person in street clothes shall be allowed on the deck of a public swimming pool, within six (6) feet of the pool rim, except the operating personnel, health officer or personnel engaged in repair work. No tables, chairs, lounges, umbrellas or other furniture shall be placed on the deck, within six (6) feet of the pool rim. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-37. - Ladders and steps. 
(a)  Two (2) or more ladders shall be provided for all public swimming pools having a perimeter greater than one hundred (100) feet and one (1) means of egress shall be provided for such pools having a perimeter of one hundred (100) feet or less. Steps below the water level projecting out into the pool are prohibited. Treads of all steps, ladders or other means of egress shall be of nonslip construction. Each recessed step area shall be provided with one (1) or more handrails. 
(b)  Steps and ladders, when provided at a public wading pool, shall be of a nonslip construction. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-38. - Overflow facilities. 
(a)  Provisions shall be made for removal of floating material and scum from the surface of the water in public swimming pools. If a recessed type of gutter located near the top of the walls is to be used, the gutter shall have a minimum depth of three (3) inches and shall be of a design which will permit satisfactory cleaning of the overflow channel. The lip of the scum gutter shall be level and be designed to serve as a handrail for swimmers. The gutter drain outlets shall be spaced around the pool not more than fifteen (15) feet on centers and shall not exceed three (3) feet in either direction from any corner or irregularity in the gutter. The gutter bottom shall slope toward these outlets with a minimum slope of one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch to the foot. The drains shall not be less than two and one-half (2½) inches in diameter and the total orifice area of the grating shall be at least twice the cross-sectional area of the outlet pipe. 
(b)  In lieu of the gutter referred to in subsection (a) above the pool may be equipped with an arrangement of overflow devices, henceforth known as "skimmers," in the walls which will provide the proper removal of scum and floating material. There shall be one (1) such device for each four hundred (400) square feet of pool area, with a minimum of four (4) per pool, each of which shall be individually controlled. "Skimmers" shall be maintained so that they are functioning properly and in good repair at all times. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-39. - Outlet drain cover. 
The outlet drain for any public swimming pool, as required by section 39-11 shall be covered with a grate of such design that it cannot be readily removed by or produce a hazard to the swimmers. All pools installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be equipped with anti-vortex type main drain covers. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-40. - Drains for spray pools. 
Each public spray pool shall be equipped, at its low point, with an unvalved drain to waste. The drain shall be of such size and design that water sprayed into the pool will not pond in the pool bottom. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-41. - Depth markings. 
The depth of the water in a public swimming pool shall be marked at every foot increment of depth in water depths five (5) feet and under, on both the horizontal and vertical surfaces on both sides of the pool and on the top of the coping. In water deeper than five (5) feet, the markings need not be closer than three (3) feet apart. Numerals and letters shall be at least five (5) inches in size and of good contrast with the pool wall and deck. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-42. - Diving boards and areas. 
(a)  At least twelve (12) feet of free and unobstructed headroom shall be provided above the diving boards at public swimming pools. The minimum depth of water in diving areas shall be determined as follows: 
 Elevation ofDiving PointAbove Water   Surface 	Depth of Water 	End Wall To Maximum Depth 	Maximum Depth To 5 Feet 
0? to 24? inclusive 	8 ft. 	12 ft. 	12 ft. 
24? to 30? inclusive 	8 ft. 	13 ft. 	17 ft. 
30? plus to 1 meter incl. 	8 ft. 10 in. 	15 ft. 	20 ft. 
1 meter plus to 3 meters incl. 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 	20 ft. 
3 meters plus to 5 meters 	14 ft. 6 in. 	17 ft. 	23 ft. 
 
(b)  The minimum length of any diving area terminating at a vertical wall shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(c)  Where multiple diving boards are used, the space between centerlines shall not be less than ten (10) feet, and no board over twenty-four (24) inches above the water shall be closer than twelve (12) feet to a side wall. Boards twenty-four (24) inches and under shall be no closer than ten (10) feet to a side wall and space between centerlines shall not be less than ten (10) feet. These dimensions shall apply both at the end wall and the point of maximum depth. 
(d)  The space between centerlines of three (3) meter and five (5) meter diving boards shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet, and between five (5) meter and ten (10) meter boards, shall be not less than eighteen (18) feet. The minimum distances from centerlines of five (5) meter and ten (10) meter boards shall be the same to side walls. 
(e)  A life line shall be provided at the five-foot break point to separate the diving area from the swimming area of a public swimming pool. 
(f)  All diving boards shall have a minimum of three (3) feet of their length extended out over the water beyond the pool edge. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-43. - Lighting fixtures. 
Where public swimming pools are used after dark, the swimming pool area shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of such number and design as to light all parts of the pool area and the water therein. Fixtures should be installed in such a manner as to create no hazard to swimmers and to prevent light-attracted insects from falling into the water. The design and installation of fixtures shall be such that lifeguards can see clearly every part of the pool, including the decks, diving boards and other appurtenances, without being blinded by glare. If installed, submarine lights shall provide at least one (1) watt per square foot of pool area. Each submarine light must be properly connected to a ground. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-44. - Water fountains. 
Each public swimming pool area shall be equipped with at least one (1) approved type water fountain that is readily accessible to swimmers. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-45. - Food and drink regulations. 
(a)  Food and drink preparation, serving or consumption facilities shall not be permitted on the deck of a public swimming pool or closer than twelve (12) feet from the rim of the pool. If food and drink are served at a pool, the operator may be required to obtain a food permit from the health officer. 
(b)  Any person in the process of eating or drinking shall be confined to an area no closer than six (6) feet of the pool rim. Food or drink in glass containers shall not be permitted or consumed within the fenced confinement of any public swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-46. - Dressing room; showers, toilet facilities and lavatories. 
(a)  A dressing room for each sex shall be provided at all public swimming pools. Metal lockers, wire baskets, hooks or other sanitary means of storage of clothing and personal accessories shall be provided. Wooden lockers or cloth bags will not be permitted. All liquid waste shall be discharged to an approved public sewer. The floors shall have a minimum pitch of three (3) inches in ten (10) feet to the drains, with no low spots which will allow water to stand. The floors shall be of smooth but nonslip finish and the rooms shall be ventilated so that floors do not remain damp or wet between periods when the swimming pool is in use. 
(b)  Showers, toilet facilities and lavatories shall be provided at public swimming pools in accord with the provisions of the city's plumbing code. Soap shall be provided at each shower and lavatory and toilet paper shall be provided at each water closet. 
(c)  The floor of the dressing room required by this section shall be maintained in a clean and dry condition, when the swimming pool is not in use, to aid in the prevention of the spread of "athletes foot" disease. All of the dressing room facilities shall be maintained in a healthful and safe manner. 
(d)  Apartment and condominium swimming pools shall be exempt from the provisions of this section requiring dressing rooms. 
(e)  Separate dressing rooms shall not be required for wading pools or spray pools operated in conjunction with a public swimming pool. 
(f)  A minimum of one (1) shower for patron use shall be provided at each public swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-47. - Common use of combs, cups, etc.; laundering and handling of swimming suits and towels furnished by management. 
(a)  The common use of brushes, combs, towels and drinking cups at public swimming pools is prohibited. 
(b)  Swimming suits and towels furnished by the management of a public swimming pool shall be laundered and handled in a healthful and safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Secs. 39-48—39-51. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES 
 
Sec. 39-52. - General requirements. 
(a)  All public swimming pools shall be equipped with a recirculation system consisting of pumps, hair and lint catcher, filters, disinfection equipment and necessary pipe connections to the inlets and outlets. Adequate provision shall be made for backwashing filters. The recirculation system shall be designed for at least a six-hour turnover of the swimming pool water. 
(b)  A complete recirculation system shall be installed at public wading pools which cannot be served adequately by an adjacent swimming pool recirculation system. The recirculation system shall provide a pool volume turnover rate of once in three (3) hours or less. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-53. - Inlets. 
The inlets for recirculation shall be submerged and be located to produce uniform circulation of water throughout any public swimming pool, without the existence of dead spots. Wall inlets shall be located on not more than twenty-foot centers entirely around the perimeter of the pool. Bottom inlets shall be spaced, depending on the pool dimensions, so as to produce uniform water circulation. Each inlet shall be designed as an adjustable orifice or provided with a valve. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-54. - Filtration system generally. 
(a)  The recirculation system shall be equipped with a filtration system that will filter the entire content of a I [inlet] within six (6) hours or less at the rate of three (3) gallons or less per square foot of filter area for rapid sand filter and twenty (20) gallons or less per square foot of filter area for high-rate sand filters. Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves and with an access hole large enough to permit inspections, maintenance and repair work. Each pressure filter system shall be equipped with a pressure gauge, at least four (4) inches in diameter, on the inlet and outlet (unless the system is designed for one (1) gauge and is approved by the National Sanitarian Foundation or equivalent), to indicate the pressure in pounds per square inch; and a sight glass that can be easily removed for cleaning shall be provided on the waste discharge line. Gravity type filters shall be equipped with loss-of-head gauges. 
(b)  The filtration rate for diatomaceous earth filters and similar equipment may not exceed one and one-half (1½) gallons per square foot of filter area with six (6) hours' turnover of pool volume, unless continuous slurry feed is provided, in which case the rate shall not exceed three (3) gallons per square foot of filter area. 
(c)  Arrangements of equipment shall be provided for application of filter aid and proper precoating and cleaning of filter elements. All filters shall be so designed and capable of being cleaned or backwashed by use of the washwater pump and the manipulation of valves. In view of the constant change of design of such equipment, it will be necessary to evaluate each system individually and approval or rejection will be at the discretion of the health officer, based upon the need for protecting the health and safety of those using the pool. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-55. - Filter room. 
(a)  Any room containing the filtration equipment, pumps and other recirculation system appurtenances for a public swimming pool shall be finished in a light color and be provided with a minimum twenty (20) foot candles of illumination and ventilation. The floor of the filter room shall be designed to provide for adequate drainage. Any facility for discharging filter backwashing water onto the filter room floor is strictly prohibited. Adequate provision shall be made for disposal of backwash water and collection and disposal of filter media. All the recirculation equipment in this room shall be installed so that it is easily convenient to operate and repair. All entrances below ground surface shall be by stairway. Adequate headroom shall be provided above all pressure filters. The filter room shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion and shall not be used for storage of potentially hazardous or toxic chemicals other than those necessary for the operation of the pool. 
(b)  A placard shall be prominently displayed in the filter room provided for in this section, showing the following data: Size of pool in feet and volume in gallons; capacity of filters in square feet and gallons per minute; capacity of pumps in gallons per minute at the appropriate head in feet; head loss at which filters should be backwashed; and any other operating data the operator or health officer considers pertinent to the swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-56. - Pumping equipment. 
The pumping equipment of a public swimming pool shall have sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water for the required turnover of the pool against the maximum head of the recirculation system. The pump used for backwashings and filters shall have sufficient capacity to backwash the unit at the rate of at least twelve (12) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-57. - Hair and lint catcher. 
The hair and lint catcher of a recirculation system required by this division shall be installed ahead of the filter pump and be designed and located so that it can be easily and simply dismantled for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-58. - Rate of flow indicator. 
The recirculation system required by this division shall be equipped with a rate of flow indicator reading in gallons per minute and so located so as to indicate the rate of flow of filtered water returned to the pool. The rate of flow indicator shall also be capable of indicating the rate of backwash in gallons per minute in sand or anthracite coal filters. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-59. - Suction cleaners. 
(a)  A suction cleaner shall be provided for each public swimming pool. Where the suction cleaner is operated by the recirculating pump, a device shall be provided for throttling the flow from the pool outlet and the suction cleaner line shall be connected through the hair and lint catcher. 
(b)  The suction cleaner required by this section shall be used at such times as are necessary to maintain the floor of the swimming pool free from all visible sediment. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-60. - Chemical feeding and testing equipment generally. 
(a)  Means shall be provided for regulating the feeding of chemicals to the water in the recirculating system required by this division. The installation of mechanically operated, positive, chemical feeders or open type chemical machines is required. The installation of closed type solution pots is prohibited. Hand feeding of chlorine is strictly prohibited. 
(b)  Each public swimming pool shall be provided with satisfactory equipment for determination of hydrogen-ion concentration ranging from 6.8 to 8.0. Satisfactory equipment shall be provided for determination of residual chlorine content ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 ppm. In swimming pools using isocyanurate chlorine compounds or similar types of chlorination, an approved test kit for checking the cyanuric acid content of the pool water must be provided. Such kit shall be capable of reading from 0.1 to 2.0 ppm. All isocyanurate chlorine compounds and equipment must be approved by the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory, Inc. The use of orthotolidine-type test kits is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-61. - Disinfection equipment; chlorinator room. 
(a)  All public swimming pools shall be provided with approved chlorine-feeding equipment. The chlorinating equipment shall be capable of applying a dose up to six (6) ppm of chlorine, at the rate of circulation. Chlorine gas-feeding equipment and chlorine gas cylinders shall be installed in an enclosed space or room separate from the filter room equipment and shall be equipped with a door capable of being locked. This chlorinator room shall be equipped with a forced draft fan exhausting to the outside from floor level and shall have a fresh air inlet vent located near the ceiling. The exhaust fan shall be capable of exhausting the contents of this room in three (3) minutes. 
(b)  Unless topography makes it difficult or impossible, the chlorinator room shall be located above ground level and below deck level of the pool. The chlorine gas tanks shall be protected from direct sunlight and fastened in place during storage and use. A canister type gas mask for chlorine or a gas mask with a supply of oxygen under positive pressure or compressed air, either of which have been approved by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be provided where chlorine gas is being utilized. The canister for the chlorine gas mask shall be replaced after each use or removal of the seal or, if not used, before the manufacturer's expiration date. The gas mask shall be accessible to, but outside of, the chlorinator room. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-62. - Chemical content of water. 
(a)  The chlorine equipment shall be operated so as to maintain a free available chlorine content of not less than one (1.0) ppm nor more than three (3.0) ppm at all points throughout the public swimming pool water. In pools using isocyanurate chlorine compounds, the free available chlorine content of the pool shall be one (1.0) to three (3.0) ppm and the cyanuric acid content shall be forty (40) to sixty (60) ppm. Cyanuric acid content must never exceed one hundred (100) ppm at any time. 
(b)  The hydrogen-ion concentration (pH) in a public swimming pool should be maintained on the alkaline side at a point between a pH of 7.2 and 7.8. 
(c)  Chemicals other than chlorine, isocyanurate chlorine compounds, sodium or calcium hypochlorite, lime, soda, ash, aluminum sulfate and hydrochloric acid shall not be used to treat public swimming pool water, without permission from the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-63. - Operation of filters; clarity of water. 
The filters for a public swimming pool shall be operated twenty-four (24) hours per day during the season the pool is in use. At all times when the pool is in use, the main drain(s) on the bottom of the pool shall be clearly visible from the deck around the pool. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Sec. 39-64. - Public spas and hot tubs. 
There is hereby adopted by reference in the city the publication "Health and Safety Guidelines for Public Spas and Hot Tubs," dated April, 1981, as revised January, 1985, published by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Center for Disease Control, Atlanta, Georgia. Copies of this publication shall be available in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 4739-95)  
Chapter 40 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General powers of city with reference to taxation, § 2.02; collection of taxes generally, §§ 8.15, 8.16. 
Cross reference— Tax levy ordinances not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-5(3); bids for city services or supplies not accepted from persons in default on payment of taxes, § 2-576; licenses, Ch. 23; motor vehicle license tax, § 26-48 et seq.; postponement of payment of sewer assessments by elderly property owners, § 33-68 et seq. 
State Law reference— Taxation, Code of Virginia, Title 58.1; city tax levies, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3005 et seq.; general authority of city relative of taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXEMPTIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1, adopted June 10, 2003, amended Art. I, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 40-1. - Exemption for certified pollution control equipment, facilities and property. 
(a)  Certified pollution control equipment, facilities and property shall be exempt from local taxes, including taxes upon the sale, purchase or use thereof. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "certified pollution control equipment, facilities and property" shall mean any property, including real or personal property, equipment, facilities or devices, used primarily for the purpose of abating or preventing pollution of the atmosphere or waters of the commonwealth and which the state certifying authority having jurisdiction with respect to such property has certified to the state department of taxation as having been constructed, reconstructed, erected or acquired in conformity with the state program or requirements for abatement or control of water or atmospheric pollution or contamination. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "state certifying authority" shall mean the state water control board for water pollution and the state air pollution control board for air pollution and shall include any interstate agency authorized to act in place of a certifying authority of the state. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-2. - Exoneration from payment or refund in cases of erroneous assessment on tangible personal property, machinery, etc. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 58.1-3990 of the Code of Virginia, if the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that an applicant has been erroneously assessed with any local levies, as provided in sections 58.1-3980 and 58.1-3981 of the Code of Virginia, such commissioner shall certify to the city treasurer the amount erroneously assessed. When the commissioner of the revenue who made the erroneous assessment has been succeeded by another person, such other person shall have the same authority as the commissioner making the original erroneous assessment, provided such other person makes diligent investigation to determine that the original assessment was erroneously made and certifies thereto to the city treasurer and to the city council. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city treasurer, upon receipt of the certification provided for in subsection (a) above, if the levies have not been paid, to exonerate from payment so much thereof as is erroneous, and if such levies have been paid, to refund to the applicant the amount erroneously paid, together with any penalties and interest paid thereon. 
(c)  No refunds shall be made under the provisions of this section in any case when application therefor is made more than three (3) years after the last day of the tax year for which such taxes were assessed. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-3. - Fee for collection of delinquent taxes or other charges. 
Where any tax or other charge assessed by the city is delinquent and has been referred to counsel or to a collection agency, a fee to cover administrative costs and reasonable attorney's fees or collection agency's fees of twenty (20) percent of the delinquent tax bill and penalty thereon shall be imposed, in addition to all other penalties, fees and interest owing thereon. In addition to all penalties and interest, administrative costs shall be imposed in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to thirty (30) or more days after notice of delinquent taxes or charges pursuant to Section 58.1-3919 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, but prior to the taking of any judgment with respect to such delinquent taxes or charges, and thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to judgment. If the collection activity is to collect on a nuisance abatement lien, the fee for administrative costs shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of the cost, whichever is less; however, in no event shall the fee be less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
No tax assessment or tax bill shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the collection procedures prescribed herein during the pendency of any administrative appeal under Section 58.1-3980 of the Code of Virginia or section 40-221 of this Code, so long as the appeal is filed within ninety (90) days of the date of the assessment and for thirty (30) days after the date of the final determination of the appeal, provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to preclude the assessment or refund, following the final determination of such appeal, of such interest as otherwise may be provided by general law as to that portion of a tax bill that has remained unpaid or was overpaid during the pendency of such appeal and is determined in such appeal to be properly due and owing. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5943-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-4. - Payment of tax by bad check. 
(a)  If any check tendered for any tax due under this chapter, or under Chapter 23, is not paid by the bank on which it is drawn, the taxpayer for whom such check was tendered shall remain liable for the payment of the tax the same as if such check had not been tendered. 
(b)  If such person fails to pay the amount shown on the face of the check within five (5) days after notice of such nonpayment has been mailed by certified or registered mail to the taxpayer by the tax assessing official, a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be added to the tax due. Such penalty shall be in addition to any and all other penalties provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-5. - Prepayment of local taxes; voluntary program; fee for insufficient funds. 
(a)  Any person desiring to pay any local taxes for any year prior to the time the treasurer receives copies of the commissioner of the revenue's books may pay the same to the treasurer and the treasurer shall give his or her receipt therefor; but if such taxes are of a kind requiring a return to be filed with the commissioner of revenue in order that the correct amount of taxes may be computed, such person shall file such return with the commissioner of the revenue before he or she pays such taxes to the treasurer. 
(b)  The treasurer is authorized to institute a program permitting the voluntary prepayment of designated local taxes at any time before such taxes have been assessed or, if assessed, before such taxes are due and payable. 
(c)  In connection with providing for the prepayment of taxes by automatic debiting of a taxpayer's account, the treasurer is authorized to impose and collect and the taxpayer shall pay to the city a fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) when the debit is refused because of insufficient funds or because the account is closed. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-6. - Willful failure to collect and account for certain taxes; penalty. 
Any corporate, partnership or limited liability company officer as defined in Section 58.1-3906 of the state code, or any other person required to collect, account for and pay over any local admission, transient occupancy, food and beverage, daily rental property or cigarette taxes administered by the commissioner of the revenue or other authorized officer, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for and pay over such tax, and any such officer or person who willfully evades or attempts to evade any such tax or the payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTIONS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40-7. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the word "taxation" shall not be construed to include assessments for local improvements as provided for in Article 2 (Section 15.2-2404 et seq.) of Chapter 24 of Title 15.2, or Article 2 (Section 15.2-2404 et seq.) of Chapter 24 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-7.01. - Property becomes taxable immediately upon sale by tax-exempt owner. 
Any property exempt from taxation pursuant to this chapter which is subsequently sold to a person not having tax-exempt status shall immediately become subject to taxation and be assessed therefor. The tax levied for the current year shall be prorated for the remainder of the tax year. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-7.02. - Exemptions not applicable to associations, etc., paying death, etc., benefits. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt from taxation the property of any person, firm, association or corporation who shall, expressly or impliedly, directly or indirectly, contract or promise to pay a sum of money or other benefit, on account of death, sickness or accident, to any of its members or other person. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-7.03. - Triennial application for exemption; removal by local governing body. 
The real estate assessor, after giving sixty (60) days' written notice, may require any entity which owns real property and personal property exempt pursuant to this chapter to file triennially an application with him as a requirement for retention of the exempt status of the property. Such application shall show the ownership and usage of such property and shall be filed within the next sixty (60) days preceding the tax year for which such exemption, or the retention thereof is sought. This requirement shall not apply to the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth, or the United States of America. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-7.04. - Exemption strictly construed. 
Exemption of property from taxation under this article shall be strictly construed in accordance with Article X, Section 6(f) of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-7.05. - Exemptions prior to January 1, 2003. 
Nothing in this chapter or in any ordinance adopted pursuant to Division 3 or 4 of this article shall affect the validity of a classification exemption claimed by an organization, or a designation exemption granted by the General Assembly, prior to January 1, 2003, that was still effective on December 31, 2002, pursuant to Title 58.1, Chapter 36, Article 3 (Section 58.1-3609 et seq.) or 4 (Section 58.1-3650 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, and the city shall not recognize a classification exemption first claimed by an organization pursuant to Title 58.1, Chapter 36, Article 3 (Section 58.1-3609 et seq.) after January 1, 2003. An exemption granted pursuant to Title 58.1, Chapter 36, Article 4 (Section 58.1-3650 et seq.), of the Code of Virginia, may be revoked in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code Section 58.1-3605. For purposes of this section "a classification exemption claimed by an organization" as of January 1, 2003, means that the organization owns property in the city that is not being taxed by the city on December 31, 2002, by virtue of a classification exemption provided under Title 58.1, Chapter 35, Article 3 (Section 58.1-3609 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-7.06. - Exemption for disabled veterans. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 6-A of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia, there is hereby exempted from taxation the real property, including the joint real property of husband and wife, of any veteran who has been rated by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, or its successor agency, pursuant to federal law, to have a one hundred (100) percent service-connected, permanent, and total disability, and who occupies the real property as his principal place of residence. The land area to be exempted as part of the principal place of residence shall not exceed one (1) acre. 
(b)  The surviving spouse of a veteran eligible for the exemption set forth in this section shall also qualify for the exemption, so long as the death of the veteran occurred on or after January 1, 2011, and the surviving spouse does not remarry. The exemption applies without any restriction on the spouse's moving to a different principal place of residence. 
(c)  The veteran, or surviving spouse, claiming the exemption under this section shall file with the commissioner of the revenue on forms to be supplied by the city, an affidavit or written statement (i) setting forth the name of the disabled veteran, and the name of the spouse, if any, also occupying the real property, (ii) indicating whether the property is jointly owned by a husband and wife, (iii) certifying that the real property is occupied as the veteran's, or surviving spouse's, principal place of residence, and (iv) documentation from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, or its successor agency, indicating that the veteran has a one hundred (100) percent service-connected, permanent, and total disability. The taxable status of real property is determined on the first day of the tax year, i.e. July 1 of each year, and the exemption hereby granted shall be prospective only. However, the veteran, or the surviving spouse, shall be required to re-file the information mandated by this subsection only if the principal place of residence changes. In the event a surviving spouse of a veteran claims the exemption, the surviving spouse shall also provide documentation satisfactory to the commissioner of the revenue that the veteran's death occurred on or after January 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 6787-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7561-19, § 1)  
Sec. 40-7.07. - Exemption for surviving spouses of members of the armed forces killed in action. 
(a)  Pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 6-A of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia, and effective with the tax year of July 1, 2015 and thereafter, there is hereby exempted from taxation the qualified dwelling and the land upon which it is situated, not to exceed one acre, of the surviving spouse (i) of any member of the armed forces of the United States who was killed in action as determined by the United States Department of Defense and (ii) who occupies the real property as his principal place of residence. 
(b)  Only those dwellings within the city with assessed values in the most recently ended tax year that are not in excess of the average assessed value for such year of a dwelling situated on property that is zoned as single family residential shall qualify for the exemption under this article. Single family homes, condominiums, town homes, and other types of dwellings of surviving spouses that (i) meet this requirement and (ii) are occupied by such persons as their principal place of residence shall qualify for the real property tax exemption. 
For purposes of determining whether a dwelling is exempt from property taxes, the average assessed value shall be such average for all dwellings located within the city that are situated on property zoned as single family residential. 
(c)  The surviving spouse of a member of the armed forces killed in action shall qualify for the exemption so long as the surviving spouse does not remarry. The exemption applies without any restriction on the spouse's moving to a different principal place of residence. 
(d)  For the purposes of this exemption, real property of any surviving spouse of a member of the armed forces killed in action includes real property (i) held by a surviving spouse as a tenant for life, (ii) held in a revocable inter vivos trust over which the surviving spouse holds the power of revocation, or (iii) held in a irrevocable trust under which the surviving spouse possesses a life estate or enjoys a continuing right of use or support. The term does not include any interest held under a leasehold or term of years. 
(e)  In the event that (i) a surviving spouse is entitled to an exemption under this section by virtue of holding the property in any of the three ways set forth in subsection (d), and (ii) one or more other persons have an ownership interest in the property that permits them to occupy the property, then the tax exemption for the property that otherwise would have been provided shall be prorated by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction that has a numerator the number of surviving spouses who are qualified for the exemption pursuant to this section and has a denominator the total number of people having an ownership interest that permits them to occupy the property. 
In the event that the principal residence is jointly owned by two or more individuals, not all of whom qualify for the exemption, and no person is entitled to the exemption under this section by virtue of holding the property in any of the three ways set forth in subsection (d) then the exemption shall be prorated by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction that has a numerator the percentage of ownership interest in the dwelling held by all such joint owners who qualify for the exemption, and as a denominator, one hundred (100) percent. 
(f)  The surviving spouse claiming the exemption under this section shall file with the commissioner of the revenue, or such other designated officer, on forms to be supplied by the city, an affidavit or written statement (i) setting forth the surviving spouse's name, (ii) indicating any other joint owners of the real property, and (iii) certifying that the real property is occupied as the surviving spouse's principal place of residence. The surviving spouse shall also provide documentation from the United States Department of Defense or its successor agency indicating the date that the member of the armed forces of the United States was killed in action. 
The surviving spouse shall be required to refile the information required by this section only if the surviving spouse's principal place of residence changes, and shall promptly notify the commissioner of the revenue of any remarriage. 
(Ord. No. 7077-14; Ord. No. 7561-19, § 1)  
DIVISION 3. - PROPERTY EXEMPTED BY DESIGNATION 
 
Sec. 40-8. - Exemption by designation. 
(a)  Pursuant to subsection 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia, the city council may by designation exempt from real or personal property taxes, or both, by ordinance duly adopted, the real or personal property, or both, owned by a nonprofit organization that uses such property for religious, charitable, patriotic, historical, benevolent, cultural, or public park and playground purposes. The ordinance shall state the specific use on which the exemption is based, and continuance of the exemption shall be contingent on the continued use of the property in accordance with the purpose of which the organization is classified or designated. No exemption shall be provided to any organization that has any rule, regulation, policy, or practice that unlawfully discriminates on the basis of religious conviction, race, color, sex, or national origin. 
(b)  Exemptions of property from taxation under this division shall be strictly construed in accordance with Article X, Section 6(f) of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-8.01. - Procedure for exemption by designation. 
The ordinance exempting property pursuant to section 40-8 shall be adopted only after holding a public hearing with respect thereto, at which citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. The city shall publish notice of the hearing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall include the assessed value of the real and tangible personal property for which an exemption is requested as well as the property taxes assessed against such property. The public hearing shall not be held until at least five (5) days after the notice is published in the newspaper. The city shall collect the cost of publication from the organization requesting the property tax exemption. Before adopting any such ordinance the governing body shall consider the following questions: 
(1)  Whether the organization is exempt from taxation pursuant to § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; 
(2)  Whether a current annual alcoholic beverage license for serving alcoholic beverages has been issued by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board to such organization, for use on such property; 
(3)  Whether any director, officer, or employee of the organization is paid compensation in excess of a reasonable allowance for salaries or other compensation for personal services which such director, officer, or employee actually renders; 
(4)  Whether any part of the net earnings of such organization inures to the benefit of any individual, and whether any significant portion of the service provided by such organization is generated by funds received from donations, contributions, or local, state or federal grants. As used in this subsection, donations shall include the providing of personal services or the contribution of in-kind or other material services; 
(5)  Whether the organization provides services for the common good of the public; 
(6)  Whether a substantial part of the activities of the organization involves carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation and whether the organization participates in, or intervenes in, any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office; 
(7)  The revenue impact to the locality and its taxpayers of exempting the property; and 
(8)  Any other criteria, facts and circumstances that the governing body deems pertinent to the adoption of such resolution. 
(Ord. No. 5940-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-8.02. - Property of Menchville House Ministries, Inc. 
(a)  That Menchville House Ministries, Inc., a non-profit corporation, is designated as a religious, charitable and benevolent organization within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located at 13658 Warwick Boulevard in the City of Newport News, owned by Menchville House Ministries, Inc., and used by it exclusively for religious, charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 5947-03, § 1)  
Sec. 40-8.03. - Property of Hampton-Newport News Community Services Board Property Company Inc. 
(a)  That the Hampton-Newport News Community Services Board Property Company Inc., a non-profit corporation, is designated as a charitable and benevolent organization within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News at 13365 Warwick Boulevard, 638 J. Clyde Morris Boulevard and 2712 Washington Avenue, owned by the Hampton-Newport News Community Services Board Property Company Inc., and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 6459-08, § 1, eff. 7-1-08)  
Sec. 40-8.04. - Property of Share A Homes of the Virginia Peninsula. 
(a)  That Share A Homes of the Virginia Peninsula., a non-profit corporation, is designated as a charitable and benevolent organization within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News at 11 Conway Road and 708 Terrace Drive, owned by Share A Homes of the Virginia Peninsula, and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 6459-08, § 1, eff. 7-1-08)  
Sec. 40-8.05. - Property of Newport News Green Foundation, Inc. 
(a)  That the Newport News Green Foundation, Inc., a non-profit corporation, is designated as an organization that uses its real property for purposes authorized within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News at 12740 Patrick Henry Drive, 618 South Avenue, 457 Eastwood Drive, 2903 Marshall Avenue, 3809 Chestnut Avenue, 3715 Chestnut Avenue, 3717 Chestnut Avenue, 10295 Jefferson Avenue, 1 Woodhaven Road, 491 Lee's Mill Drive, 496 Lee's Mill Drive, 437 Harpersville Road, 9941 Jefferson Avenue, 551 Aberthaw Avenue, 12559 Warwick Boulevard, 1351 39 th Street, 5101 Huntington Avenue and 315 Center Avenue, owned by the Newport News Green Foundation, Inc., and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 6507-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6737-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6945-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7424-17, § 1, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 7467-18, § 1; Ord. No. 7555-19, § 1)  
Sec. 40-8.06. - Property of Peninsula Pastoral Counseling Center, Inc. 
(a)  That the Peninsula Pastoral Counseling Center, Inc., a non-profit corporation, is designated as an organization that uses its real property for purposes authorized within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News at 707 Gum Rock Court, owned by the Peninsula Pastoral Counseling Center, Inc., and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 6624-09)  
Sec. 40-8.07. - Property of Housing Development Corporation of Hampton Roads. 
(a)  That the Housing Development Corporation of Hampton Roads, a non-profit corporation, is designated as an organization that uses its real property for purposes authorized within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News at 6 Azalea Drive, owned by the Housing Development Corporation of Hampton Roads, and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 6623-09)  
Sec. 40-8.08. - Property of Denbigh Properties LLC. 
(a)  That Denbigh Properties LLC, an entity wholly owned by the Community Futures Foundation, a non-profit corporation, is designated as an organization that uses its real property for purposes authorized within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News at 12727 McManus Boulevard, Units D and E, owned by Denbigh Properties LLC, and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 6656-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6656-10, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2010, shall be in effect on and after Feb. 1, 2010.  
Sec. 40-8.09. - Property of Orcutt Senior Housing, L.P. 
(a)  That Orcutt Senior Housing, L.P., a non-profit limited partnership, is designated as an organization that uses its real property for purposes authorized within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News at 900 36th Street, owned by Orcutt Senior Housing, L.P., and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 6663-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6663-10, § 1, shall be in effect on and after Feb. 23, 2010.  
Sec. 40-8.10. - Property of Orcutt Townhomes I, L.P. 
(a)  That Orcutt Townhomes I, L.P., a non-profit limited partnership, is designated as an organization that uses its real property for purposes authorized within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News at 1003 33rd Street, 1007 33rd Street, 1011 33rd Street, 1015 33rd Street, 1019 33rd Street, 1023 33rd Street, 1000 34th Street, 1001 34th Street, 1002 34th Street, 1003 34th Street, 1006 34th Street, 1007 34th Street, 1010 34th Street, 1011 34th Street, 1014 34th Street, 1015 34th Street, 1018 34th Street, 1019 34th Street, 1022 34th Street, 1002 35th Street, 1006 35th Street, 1010 35th Street, 1014 35th Street, and 1015 35th Street, owned by Orcutt Townhomes I, L.P., and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 6664-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6664-10, § 1, shall be in effect on and after Feb. 23, 2010.  
Sec. 40-8.11. - Property of Orcutt Townhomes III Limited Partnership. 
(a)  That Orcutt Townhomes III Limited Partnership, a non-profit limited partnership, is designated as an organization that uses its real property for purposes authorized within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News and recorded in the Newport News Circuit Court Clerk's Office in Deed Book 1808, Page 198; Deed Book 1808, Page 1978; Deed Book 1808, Page 1975; Deed Book 1808, Page 1972; Deed Book 1808, Page 1969; Deed Book 1808, Page 1966; Deed Book 1808, Page 1963; Deed Book 1808, Page 1960; Deed Book 1808, Page 1913; Deed Book 1808, Page 1957; Deed Book 1808, Page 1954; Deed Book 1808, Page 1951; Deed Book 261, Page 104A; Deed Book 1026, Page 1962; and Deed Book 1024, Page 1072, owned by Orcutt Townhomes III Limited Partnership and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 6665-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6665-10, § 1, shall be in effect on and after Feb. 23, 2010.  
Sec. 40-8.12. - Property of Youth Challenge Of Hampton Roads, Inc. 
(a)  That Youth Challenge of Hampton Roads, Inc., a non-profit, non-stock corporation, is designated as an organization that uses its real property for purposes authorized within the context of Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(b)  Property located in the City of Newport News at 332 34th Street and 3305 Warwick Boulevard and used by it exclusively for charitable and benevolent purposes on a non-profit basis as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, is hereby determined to be exempt from property taxation. 
(Ord. No. 7336-16)  
Secs. 40-9—40-11. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REAL ESTATE TAXES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Power of city to levy and collect ad valorem taxes on real estate, § 2.02A. 
State Law reference— Real property tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3200 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40-12. - Levied; amount. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2002, and for the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2003, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the taxes on taxable real property of public service corporations in the City of Newport News, Virginia, shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the period beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on June 30, 2002, the tax on lands, lots and improvements thereon, and for all other taxable real estate of public service corporations shall be, and hereby is, levied at the rate of one dollar and twenty-four cents ($1.24) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(2)  For the period beginning on July 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2002, unless changed, the tax on lands, lots and improvements thereon, and for all other taxable real estate of public service corporations shall be, and hereby is, levied at the rate of one dollar and twenty-seven cents ($1.27) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(3)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2003, and ending December 31, 2003, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty-seven cents ($1.27) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(4)  For the period beginning on January 1, 2005, and ending on June 30, 2005, the tax on lands, lots and improvements thereon, and for all other taxable real estate of public service corporations shall be, and hereby is, levied at the rate of one dollar and twenty-seven cents ($1.27) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(5)  For the period beginning on July 1, 2005, and ending on December 31, 2005, unless changed, the tax on lands, lots and improvements thereon, and for all other taxable real estate of public service corporations shall be, and hereby is, levied at the rate of one dollar and twenty-four cents ($1.24) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(6)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2006, and ending December 31, 2006, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty-four cents ($1.24) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(7)  For the period beginning on January 1, 2006, and ending on June 30, 2006, the tax on lands, lots and improvements thereon, and for all other taxable real estate of public service corporations shall be, and hereby is, levied at the rate of one dollar and twenty-four cents ($1.24) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(8)  For the period beginning on July 1, 2006, and ending on December 31, 2006, unless changed, the tax on lands, lots and improvements thereon, and for all other taxable real estate of public service corporations shall be, and hereby is, levied at the rate of one dollar and twenty cents ($1.20) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(9)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2007, and ending December 31, 2007, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty cents ($1.20) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(10)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2008, and ending December 31, 2008, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(11)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2009, and ending December 31, 2009, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(12)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2010, and ending December 31, 2010, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(13)  For the period beginning July 1, 2013, and ending on December 31, 2013, unless changed, the tax on lands, lots and improvements thereon, and for all other taxable real estate of public service corporations shall be, and hereby is, levied at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, prorated for the six-month period. 
(14)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2014, and ending December 31, 2014, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(15)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2015, and ending December 31, 2015, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(16)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2016, and ending December 31, 2016, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(17)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2017, and ending December 31, 2017, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(18)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2018, and ending December 31, 2018, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(19)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2019, and ending December 31, 2019, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(20)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2020, and ending December 31, 2020, and for each calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and all other taxable real estate of public service corporations at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(b)  For the fiscal year beginning on July 1, 2020, and ending on June 30, 2021, and for each and every fiscal year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all lands, lots and improvements thereon, and on all other taxable real estate, except that of public service corporations, and except such lands, lots and improvements thereon and all real estate as is exempt from taxation by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or by ordinance of the City of Newport News, at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) of every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3884-89; Ord. No. 4460-93, § 1; Ord. No. 5284-99; Ord. No. 5446-00; Ord. No. 5614-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5783-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5921-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6025-04, § 1; Ord. No. 6119-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6240-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6359-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6481-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6581-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6957-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7166-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7265-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7369-17; Ord. No. 7457-18, § 1; Ord. No. 7546-19, § 1; Ord. No. 7617-20, § 1)  
Sec. 40-13. - Annual assessment required; general powers and duties of assessor. 
(a)  All real estate in the city not exempt from taxation by the state constitution and not assessable for taxation by the state corporation commission, as provided by law, shall be assessed annually for taxation by the assessor, beginning July 1, 1968. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the assessor and the assessor's agents to examine and assess annually, for taxation, at the fair market value thereof, all real estate in the city not exempted from taxation by the state constitution and not assessable for taxation by the state corporation commission, which shall include all lands, buildings, structures and improvements thereon and all rights thereto and interests therein, other than chattel interests, and they shall have the power to do any and all things necessary to assess such property. 
(Ord. No. 13, §§ 1, 9; Ord. No. 1106, § 1; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 16-33, 16-35) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to provide for annual assessments, § 12.01. 
Cross reference— Department of real state assessment, § 2-611 et seq. 
State Law reference— Real estate assessments, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3200 et seq.  
Sec. 40-14. - Manager and council not involved in assessments. 
The city manager and the city council shall have no supervision or control or any authority as to the assessments made or to be made by the assessor. The assessments to be made shall be exclusively by the assessor. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 4; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-34)  
Sec. 40-15. - Assessment of real estate owned by city. 
The assessor shall assess, at its fair market value, all real estate owned by the city, as if such real estate were subject to taxation. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 10; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-36)  
Sec. 40-16. - Valuation of nontaxable real estate, etc. 
In addition to the property required to be assessed by the assessor under the provisions of this article, the assessor shall value any nontaxable real estate in the city as may be required by the city council and any other real estate in the city as may be required by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 17; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-42)  
Sec. 40-17. - Land book generally. 
The form of the land book shall be prescribed by the assessor, who shall prepare the same, and shall consist of an original and three (3) copies thereof and additional copies as deemed necessary. The original land book shall be filed in the office of the division of real estate assessment and no change or alteration in or addition to any entry appearing thereon shall be made without legal authority. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 12; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-38)  
Sec. 40-18. - When assessments to be completed; how entries made in land book; buildings under construction. 
The assessor shall annually complete the assessment of all real estate and the improvements thereon, as of July first, not later than the following November first. Every parcel of real estate shall be entered separately upon the land book in the name of the owner thereof. Buildings and structures under construction on July first shall be assessed at the fair market value of the completed portion as of that date. 
(Ord. No. 13, §§ 11, 13; Ord. No. 984, § 1; Ord. No. 1106, § 1; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-37)  
Sec. 40-19. - Assessment of new buildings substantially completed or fit for use, occupancy and enjoyment; abatement of levies on buildings razed, destroyed or damaged. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, all new buildings substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy prior to May 1 of the year of completion shall be assessed when so completed or fit for use and occupancy, and the assessor shall enter in the books the fair market value of such building. No partial assessment as provided herein shall become effective until information as to the date and amount of such assessment is recorded in the office of the treasurer and made available for public inspection. The total tax on any such new building for that year shall be the sum of (i) the tax upon the assessment of the completed building, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the tax year such building is substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire tax year, and (ii) the tax upon the assessment of such new building as it existed on July 1 of that assessment year computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building was not substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire tax year. With respect to any assessment made under this subsection after April 1 of any year, the penalty for nonpayment by June 5 shall be extended to September 5 of the succeeding tax year. 
(b)  All levies on buildings which are (i) razed, or (ii) destroyed or damaged by a fortuitous happening beyond the control of the owner shall be abated. No such abatement, however, shall be allowed if the destruction or damage to such building shall decrease the value thereof by less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Also, no such abatement shall be allowed unless the destruction or damage renders the building unfit for use and occupancy for thirty (30) days or more during the calendar year. The tax on such razed, destroyed or damaged building is computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year the building was fit for use, occupancy and enjoyment bears to the entire year. Application for such abatement shall be made by or on behalf of the owner of the building within six (6) months of the date on which the building was razed, destroyed or damaged. 
(Ord. No. 1029, § 1; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-21; Ord. No. 4047-90; Ord. No. 5492-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-20. - Assessment of real estate owned by public service corporation. 
(a)  The assessment by the state corporation commission of the real properties of public service corporations for the preceding year shall be taken as the assessment of such property for levying taxes and collecting the first installment thereon pursuant to this article, until the regular annual assessment of such properties by the commission for the current year is completed as provided by state law. Upon the payment of the final installment of such taxes to the city by any such public service corporation, the total of such taxes for the current year shall be adjusted on the basis of the assessment by the state corporation commission for the current year. 
(b)  The state corporation commission may, upon the application of any such public service corporation or the city, filed with the commission on or before the fifteenth day of January in any year, amend its assessment for the preceding year by increasing or decreasing the same, by reason of any improvements or additions thereto, or proper deductions therefrom, or other changes affecting the assessment of the properties of such corporation within the preceding year, such increases, decreases and changes to be subject to adjustment by the commission until the regular annual assessment of the properties of the corporation is completed by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 982, § 1; Ord. No. 999, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 16-99, 16-100)  
Sec. 40-21. - Effective date of assessments; tax and assessment year. 
Every assessment made under the provisions of this article shall be effective for tax purposes on the first day of July in the year in which the same is made and taxes and other charges for such year shall be extended on the basis of the last assessment made prior to July first of the fiscal year of July first through June thirtieth which immediately follows such assessment. The beginning of the tax and assessment year for the assessment of taxes on all real estate assessable by the city for taxation and other charges shall be July first, and the owner of such real estate on that day shall be assessed with taxes and other charges for the fiscal year beginning on that day and ending on June thirtieth. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 20; Ord. No. 1106, § 1; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-20) 
Cross reference— Fiscal year, § 2-2.  
Sec. 40-22. - Extension of taxes; disposition of copies of land book. 
Upon final completion of assessments made by the assessor under this article, the division of real estate assessment shall extend the taxes levied thereon and such other charges as are authorized by the council. A copy of the land book containing such assessments and levies, together with tax bills or data processing media for the processing of such tax bills shall be delivered to the city treasurer not later than October first. Copies of such land book shall also be delivered to the clerk of court in whose office deeds are admitted to record and the state department of taxation. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 14; Ord. No. 984, § 1; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-39)  
Sec. 40-23. - Exonerations for relieving assessments. 
The assessor may issue exonerations to relieve an assessment on which the taxes have not been paid. Every such exoneration shall comply with the law of the state and be justified by the facts in the case. The reason for such exoneration shall be made and become a part of such exoneration and shown in an appropriate place thereon. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 16; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-41)  
Sec. 40-24. - Assessor's reports to city council. 
The assessor shall make from time to time such reports to the city council as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 18; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-43)  
Sec. 40-25. - Summons authority of assessor; refusal to answer summons or furnish information. 
(a)  The assessor, in performing the duties prescribed in this article, shall have authority: 
(1)  To summons taxpayers or their agents or any person to furnish information relating to real estate of any and all taxpayers. 
(2)  To summons taxpayers or their agents or any person to answer under oath all questions touching the ownership and value of real estate of any and all taxpayers. 
(3)  To summons taxpayers or their agents or any person to bring before the board of review of real estate assessments their books of account or other papers and records containing information with respect to the valuation of real estate of any taxpayer or any other real state subject to taxation within the city. 
Such summons may be served by any officer charged by law with the duty of serving process or by registered mail. 
(b)  Any person refusing to answer the summons of the assessor or to furnish information or to produce books of accounts, papers or other records required by the assessor under the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Each day's failure to answer such summons or to furnish such information or to produce such books of account or other papers or records shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 13, § 19; Ord. No. 1577, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-44)  
Sec. 40-26. - When tax due and payable. 
All taxes levied by the city on real estate shall be due and payable in two (2) equal installments. For taxable real property of public service corporations, the first such installment shall be due and payable on or before the fifth day of June and the second such installment shall be due and payable on or before the fifth day of December of the year for which the tax is imposed. For all other taxable real estate, the first such installment shall be due and payable on or before the fifth day of December and the second such installment shall be due and payable on or before the fifth day of June of the year for which the tax is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 982, § 1; Ord. No. 999, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-97; Ord. No. 4386-92)  
Sec. 40-27. - Tax bills. 
The city treasurer shall, as soon as may be, in each year, send, by United States mail to each taxpayer assessed with real estate taxes for that year, a bill or bills in the form prescribed by the state department of taxation. The bill or bills for real estate taxes due on February fifth shall be sent by United States mail to the taxpayer not later than January first, the bill or bills for real estate taxes due on June fifth shall be sent by United States mail to the taxpayer not later than May first, the bill or bills for real estate taxes due on August fifth shall be sent by United States mail to the taxpayer not later than July first, and the bill or bills for real estate taxes due on December fifth shall be sent by United States mail to the taxpayer not later than November first. 
(Ord. No. 982, § 1; Ord. No. 999, § 1; Ord. No. 1098, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-98)  
Sec. 40-28. - When taxes received; penalty and interest for late payment. 
(a)  Treasurer to receive taxes. The treasurer shall commence to receive real estate taxes as soon as copies of the land books are received from the assessor, and the treasurer shall continue to receive the amount due and payable for the semi-annual installment payments, up to and including the due dates as set out in section 40-26, without penalty thereon. 
(b)  Penalty for failure to pay installments when due. Any person failing to remit the installment payments of real estate levies on or before the due dates, as set out in section 40-26, shall incur a penalty thereon of ten (10) percent, which shall be added to the amount of taxes or levies due from such taxpayer except in cases of assessment under section 40-19, pursuant to the authority of Section 58.1-3292 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, with respect to any assessment made after September first of any year the ten (10) percent penalty for nonpayment by December fifth shall be extended to February fifth of the succeeding year and any assessment made after April first but before June sixth of any year, the ten (10) percent penalty for nonpayment by June fifth shall be extended to August fifth of the same year. 
(c)  Interest on taxes not paid when due. Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the first day of the month following the month in which such taxes are due shall be collected upon the principal and penalties of all such taxes and levies not paid when due, which penalty and interest shall be collected and accounted for by the officers charged with the duty of collecting such taxes or levies, along with the principal sum thereof. 
(Ord. No. 982, § 1; Ord. No. 999, § 1; Ord. No. 1098, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 16-101—16-103; Ord. No. 2441-78, § 1; Ord. No. 3966-89) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to impose penalties for nonpayment of taxes, § 8.16.  
Secs. 40-29—40-33. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ASSESSMENT OF LAND DEVOTED TO AGRICULTURAL USES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the amendments of Ord. No. 5591-01, § 1, are applicable to the following program through June 30, 2001. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3231. 
 
Sec. 40-34. - Finding of fact. 
The council in 1976 found that the preservation of real estate devoted to agricultural use within the boundaries of the city was in the public interest, and, having heretofore adopted a land-use plan, ordained that such real estate shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 of Chapter 32 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia and of this division. 
Despite this plan to promote agricultural use, after a study of this matter the council hereby finds that the number of parcels of land in the city devoted to agricultural use has so diminished that it is no longer in the public interest to continue the taxation of real estate in accordance with the provisions of Article 4 of chapter 32 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia and this division, and as a result of same, such assessment and taxation will cease as of June 30, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 2282, § 16-136; Ord. No. 5591-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-35. - Application for classification, assessment, etc., generally. 
(a)  For the purpose of assessment and taxation prior to July 1, 2001, the owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 58.1-3230 and 58.1-3233 of the Code of Virginia may, at least sixty (60) days preceding the tax year for which such taxation is sought, apply to the assessor for the classification, assessment and taxation of such property for the next succeeding tax year on the basis of its use, under the procedures set forth in Section 58.1-3236 of the Code of Virginia. In any year in which a general reassessment is being made, such application may be submitted until thirty (30) days have elapsed after the notice of increase in assessment is mailed. 
(b)  The application provided for in this section shall be on forms provided by the state department of taxation and supplied by the assessor and shall include such additional schedules, photographs and drawings as may be required by the assessor. An individual who is the owner of an undivided interest in a parcel may apply on behalf of himself and the other owners of such parcel upon submitting an affidavit that such other owners are minors or cannot be located. An application shall be submitted whenever the use or acreage of such land previously approved changes; provided, however, that such property owner must re-validate annually with the assessor any applications previously approved. 
(c)  An application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall accompany each application submitted under this section. A separate application shall be filed for each parcel on the land book. 
(Ord. No. 2282, § 16-137; Ord. No. 5591-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-36. - Determination of assessor. 
(a)  Promptly upon receipt of any application under this division, the assessor shall determine whether the subject property meets the criteria for taxation hereunder. If the assessor determines that the subject property does meet such criteria, the assessor shall determine the value of such property for its qualifying use, as well as its fair market value. 
(b)  In determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for "agricultural use," the assessor may request an opinion from the state commissioner of agriculture and commerce. Upon the refusal of such commissioner to issue an opinion, or in the event of an unfavorable opinion which does not comport with standards set forth by the commissioner, the party aggrieved may seek relief from any court of record wherein the real estate in question is located. If the court finds in such party's favor, it may issue an order which shall serve in lieu of an opinion for the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2282, § 16-138; Ord. No. 5591-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-37. - Land book entries; tax to be extended from use value. 
The use value and fair market value of any property qualifying under this division shall be placed on the land book before delivery to the treasurer and the tax for the next succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value. 
(Ord. No. 2282, § 16-139; Ord. No. 5591-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-38. - Change in use or zoning of real estate assessed; roll-back taxes. 
(a)  When real estate qualifies for assessment and taxation prior to July 1, 2001, on the basis of use under this division, and the use by which it qualified changes to a non-qualifying use, or the zoning of the real estate is changed to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent, it shall be subject to additional taxes, hereinafter referred to as roll-back taxes. Such additional taxes shall only be assessed against that portion of such real estate which no longer qualifies for assessment and taxation on the basis of use or zoning. Liability for roll-back taxes shall attach and be paid to the treasurer only if the amount of tax due exceeds ten dollars ($10.00). 
(b)  The roll-back tax shall be equal to the sum of the deferred tax for each of the five (5) most recent complete tax years including simple inter est on such roll-back taxes at the rate prescribed in section 40-28(c) for each of the tax years. The deferred tax for each year shall be equal to the difference between the tax levied and the tax that would have been levied based on the fair market value assessment of the real estate for that year. In addition, the taxes for the current year shall be extended on the basis of fair market value which may be accomplished by means of a supplemental assessment based upon the difference between the use value and the fair market value. 
(c)  Liability to the roll-back taxes shall attach when a change in use occurs, or a change in zoning of the real estate to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent occurs. Liability to the roll-back taxes shall not attach when a change in ownership of the title takes place if the new owner does not re-zone the real estate to a more intensive use and continues the real estate in the use for which it is classified under the conditions prescribed in this division. The owner of any real estate which has been zoned to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent as provided in subsection (d), or otherwise subject to or liable for roll-back taxes, shall, within sixty (60) days following such change in use or zoning, report such change to the real estate assessor on such forms as may be prescribed. The real estate assessor shall forthwith determine and assess the roll-back tax, which shall be assessed against and paid by the owner of the property at the time the change in use which no long qualifies occurs, or at the time of the zoning of the real estate to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent occurs, and shall be paid to the treasurer within thirty (30) days of the assessment. If the amount due is not paid by the due date, the treasurer shall impose a penalty and interest on the amount of the roll-back tax, including interest for prior years. Such penalty and interest shall be imposed in accordance with sections 40-28 (b) and (c). 
(d)  Real property zoned to a more intensive use, at the request of the owner or his agent, shall be subject to and liable for the roll-back tax at the time such zoning is changed. The roll-back tax shall be levied and collected from the owner of the real estate in accordance with subsection (c). Real property zoned to a more intensive use before July 1, 1988, at the request of the owner or his agent, shall be subject to and liable for the roll-back tax at the time of such zoning. Said roll-back tax, plus interest calculated in accordance with subsection (b), shall be levied and collected at the time such property was rezoned. For property rezoned after July 1, 1988, but before July 1, 1992, no penalties or interest, except as provided in subsection (b), shall be assessed, provided the said roll-back tax is paid on or before October 1, 1992. No real property rezoned to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent shall be eligible for taxation and assessment under this article, provided that these provisions shall not be applicable to any rezoning which is required for the establishment, continuation, or expansion of a qualifying use. If the property is subsequently rezoned to agricultural, horticultural, or open space, it shall be eligible for consideration for assessment and taxation under this article only after three (3) years have passed since the rezoning was effective. 
However, the owner of any real property that qualified for assessment and taxation on the basis of use, and whose real property was rezoned to a more intensive use at the owner's request prior to 1980, may be eligible for taxation and assessment under this article provided the owner applies for rezoning to agricultural, horticultural, open-space or forest use. The real property shall be eligible for assessment and taxation on the basis of the qualifying use for the tax year following the effective date of the rezoning. If any such real property is subsequently rezoned to a more intensive use at the owner's request, within five (5) years from the date the property was initially rezoned to a qualifying use under this section, the owner shall be liable for roll-back taxes when the property is rezoned to a more intensive use. Additionally, the owner shall be subject to a penalty equal to fifty (50) percent of the roll-back taxes due as determined under subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2282, §§ 16-140, 16-141; Ord. No. 4560-94; Ord. No. 5150-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5591-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-39. - Misstatements in application filed under division. 
Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any application filed pursuant to this division shall be liable for all taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if such property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate in the taxing jurisdiction, together with interest and penalties thereon, and such person shall be further assessed with an additional penalty of one hundred (100) percentum of such unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2282, § 141; Ord. No. 5591-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-40. - Application of general tax law. 
The provisions of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia applicable to local levies and real estate assessment and taxation shall be applicable to assessments and taxation under this article mutatis mutandis including, without limitation, provisions relating to tax liens and the correction of erroneous assessments, and for such purposes the roll-back taxes shall be considered to be deferred real estate taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2282, § 16-142; Ord. No. 5591-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-41. - Transition after discontinuance of agricultural land use assessment program. 
(a)  That on and after July 1, 2001, the benefits derived from the program for the assessment of land devoted to agricultural uses will no longer be available to the owner(s) of that real estate previously afforded such designation through the process found in sections 40-34 through 40-40 of this division. The council adopts the provisions of this section to specify the transition provisions made necessary by its decision to discontinue the agricultural land use assessment program as of June 30, 2001. 
(b)  The "roll-back" tax calculation provisions set forth in Division 2 of this chapter, as adopted and made effective through June 30, 2001, shall remain in force from July 1, 2001, through June 30, 2006. 
(Ord. No. 5591-01, § 1)  
Secs. 40-42—40-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DEFERRAL FOR ELDERLY AND DISABLED PERSONS; EXEMPTION FOR QUALIFYING ELDERLY PERSONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6786-11, § 1, adopted May 10, 2011, which amended Div. 3, §§ 40-46—40-53, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012. 
Cross reference— Postponement of payment of sewer assessments for elderly persons, § 33-68 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide for exemption or deferral as provided for in this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210 et seq. 
 
Sec. 40-46. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Affidavit. The real estate tax deferral or exemption affidavit provided for in this division. 
Deferral. Deferral from the real estate tax of the city according to the provisions of this division. 
Dwelling. The full-time residence of the person or persons claiming deferral or exemption under this division. Dwelling shall include an improvement to real estate which is exempt from taxation or for which taxes are deferred pursuant to this division, and the land upon which such improvement is situated, so long as the improvement is used principally for other than a business purpose and is used to house or cover any motor vehicle classified pursuant to subdivision A 3 through 10 of § 58.1-3503, of the Code of Virginia, 1950 as amended; household goods classified pursuant to subdivision A 14 of § 58.1-3503, of the Code of Virginia, 1950 as amended; or household goods exempted from personal property tax pursuant to § 58.1-3504, of the Code of Virginia, 1950 as amended. 
Exemption. Release from real estate tax liability according to the provisions of this division. 
Permanently and totally disabled. A person is permanently and totally disabled if such person is so certified as required in subsection 40-50(c) and is found by the city manager to be unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
Property. Real property and, in addition, mobile homes assessed pursuant to subsection 40-220.3. 
Taxable year. The fiscal year, from July 1 until June 30, for which a deferral or exemption is claimed under this division. In the case of mobile homes assessed pursuant to subsection 40-220.3, the taxable year shall be January 1 until December 31, for which a deferral or exemption is claimed under this division. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § 1; Ord. No. 1911, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-119; Ord. No. 2335; Ord. No. 6408-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6786-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7562-19, § 1)  
Sec. 40-47. - Tax deferral; authorized. 
Real estate tax deferral is provided for qualified property owners who are eligible according to the terms of this division who are age sixty-five (65) or older or who are permanently and totally disabled. Property owners who are both permanently and totally disabled and over sixty-five (65) years of age may claim deferral under both age and disability. Persons qualifying for deferral are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-120; Ord. No. 2335; Ord. No. 6786-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40-48. - Administration of tax deferral; rules and regulations of city manager. 
The deferral provided for in this division shall be administered by the city manager according to the provisions of this division, provided that the city manager may designate another officer, employee or constitutional officer to perform these duties. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations, in conformance with the provisions of this division, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for deferral as specified in this division. The city manager may require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income or financial worth. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-121; Ord. No. 6223-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6461-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6786-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40-49. - General prerequisites to grant of tax deferral; effect of residency in hospital, nursing home, etc.; proration. 
(a)  Deferral shall be granted to persons subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The title to the property is held or partially held on July 1 of the taxable year, by the person or persons claiming deferral for the said property. 
(2)  Such real estate shall be owned and occupied as the sole dwelling of a person who is either permanently and totally disabled or sixty-five (65) years of age or older on December 31 of the calendar year immediately preceding the taxable year. 
(3)  Real property owned and occupied as the sole dwelling of an eligible person includes real property: 
(i)  Held by the eligible person alone or in conjunction with his spouse as tenant or tenants for life or joint lives; 
(ii)  Held in a revocable inter vivos trust over which the eligible person or the eligible person and his spouse hold the power of revocation; or 
(iii)  Held in an irrevocable trust under which an eligible person alone or in conjunction with his spouse possesses a life estate or an estate for joint lives or enjoys a continuing right of use or support. 
The term "eligible person" does not include any interest held under a leasehold or term of years. 
(4)  Subject to subparagraph (6), of this section, the total combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by: 
(i)  Owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence; 
(ii)  Owners' relatives who live in the dwelling, except for those relatives living in the dwelling and providing bona fide caregiving services to the owner whether such relatives are compensated or not; and 
(iii)  Non-relatives of the owner who live in the dwelling, except for bona fide tenants or bona fide caregivers of the owner, whether compensated or not, 
shall not exceed the greater of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), or the income limits based upon family size for the respective metropolitan statistical area, annually published by the Department of Housing and Urban Development for qualifying for federal housing assistance pursuant to § 235 of the National Housing Act (12 U.S.C. § 1715z). Any amount up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income of each relative who is not the spouse of an owner living in the dwelling and each non-relative who is not the bona fide tenant or bona fide caregiver of an owner living in the dwelling and who does not qualify for the deferral provided by subparagraph (6) hereof is hereby excluded from the total combined income calculation. In addition, ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income, from whatever source, shall be excluded from the income of any owner who is permanently disabled. 
(5)  The net combined financial worth, as determined by the city manager, including the present value of all equitable interests, as of December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year, of the owners, and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land, not exceeding one (1) acre, upon which it is situated shall not exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). The value of the owner's furnishings that are located in the dwelling are also excluded from the determination of the net combined financial worth. Such furnishings shall include furniture, household appliances and other items typically used in a home. 
(6)  Notwithstanding subparagraph (4) of this section, if a person qualifies for a deferral under this article, and if the person can prove by clear and convincing evidence that the person's physical or mental health has deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care is to have a relative move in and provide care for the person, and if a relative does then move in for that purpose, then none of the income of the relative or of the relative's spouse shall be counted towards the income limit, provided the owner of the residence has not transferred assets in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) without adequate consideration within a three-year period prior to or after the relative moves into such residence. 
(b)  The fact that persons who are otherwise qualified for tax deferral pursuant to this division reside in hospitals, nursing homes or other facilities for physical or mental care for extended periods of time shall not be construed to mean that the real estate for which tax deferral is sought does not continue to be the sole dwelling of such person during such extended periods of other residence so long as such real estate is not used by or leased to others for consideration. 
(c)  A change in ownership of the subject property to a spouse which results solely from the death of the qualifying individual or a sale of such property shall result in a prorated or deferred tax for the then current taxable year if such application for deferral was properly and timely filed and approved. Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the deferral by a fraction wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such deferral is the numerator and the number twelve (12) is the denominator. 
(d)  For the purposes of this division, income shall mean total gross income from all sources, without regard to whether a tax return is actu-ally filed. Income shall not include life insurance benefits or receipts from borrowing or other debt. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § 1; Ord. No. 1638, § 1; Ord. No. 1803, § 1; Ord. No. 1911, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-122; Ord. No. 2335; Ord. No. 2475-78; Ord. No. 2579-79; Ord. No. 2722-81; Ord. No. 2883-82; Ord. No. 3015-83; Ord. No. 3046-83; Ord. No. 3162-84; Ord. No. 3304-85, § 1; Ord. No. 3447-86, § 1; Ord. No. 3576A-87, § 1; Ord. No. 3946-89; Ord. No. 4039-90; Ord. No. 5098-98; Ord. No. 5832-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6130-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6786-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7078-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40-50. - Applicant's affidavit and certificate of disability for tax deferral; manager's certification to treasurer. 
(a)  Effective with the tax year beginning July 1, 2009 and thereafter, with the exception of certain situations set forth in subsection (b) below, the person or persons claiming a deferral for the forthcoming taxable year shall annually file a real estate tax deferral affidavit with the city manager or his designee between January 1 and August 31. With the exception of certain situations set forth in subsection (b) below, failure to file a properly completed real estate tax deferral affidavit by August 31 shall disqualify any otherwise qualified applicant, for the receipt of real estate tax deferral. If the deferral is sought for a mobile home, the affidavit must be filed between April 1 and June 30, and with the exception of certain situations as set forth in subsection (b) below, failure to file a properly completed real estate tax deferral affidavit by June 30 shall disqualify any otherwise qualified applicant, for the receipt of real estate tax deferral. 
(b)  Affidavits for real estate tax deferral may be submitted outside the January 1 to August 31 filing period, until October 31 of the tax year for which deferral is sought, in cases of: 
(1)  First time applicants, or 
(2)  Where the city manager determines that the failure to grant the deferral would serve to create an extreme hardship for the applicant. 
(c)  The affidavit required by this section shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the city manager, the names of the related persons occupying the dwelling for which deferral is claimed, their gross combined income and their total combined net worth. 
(d)  If the applicant is under sixty-five (65) years of age, the affidavit shall have attached thereto a certification by the Social Security Administration, veteran's administration or the railroad retirement board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two (2) medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth of Virginia, to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled as defined in section 40-46. The affidavit of at least one (1) of such doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of such person by such doctor. The affidavit of one (1) of such doctors may be based upon medial information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability as defined in section 40-46. 
(e)  If, after audit and investigation, the city manager determines that the applicant is qualified for deferral, the manager shall so certify to the treasurer of the city who shall deduct the amount of the deferral from the claimant's real estate tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § 1; Ord. No. 1911, § 1, Code 1961, § 16-123; Ord. No. 2335; Ord. No. 2497-78, § 1; Ord. No. 3046-83; Ord. No. 3446-86; Ord. No. 3576A-87, § 1; Ord. No. 6223-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6461-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6786-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40-51. - Amount of deferral; payment of deferred taxes. 
(a)  The person or persons qualifying for and claiming deferral shall be relieved of real estate tax liability levied on the qualifying dwelling and land up to an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the liability, the amount to be deferred to be elected by the claimant. 
(b)  The accumulated amount of taxes deferred shall be paid, without penalty or interest, to the treasurer of the city by the vendor, transferor, executor, or administrator: (i) upon the sale of the real estate; (ii) upon a nonqualified transfer of real estate; or (iii) from the estate of descendant within one (1) year after the death of the last qualified owner thereof. For the purposes of this section a "nonqualified transfer" means a transfer in ownership of the real estate by gift or otherwise not for bona fide consideration, other than (i) a transfer by the qualified owner to a spouse, including without limitation a transfer creating a tenancy for life or joint lives; (ii) a transfer by the qualified owner or the qualified owner and his spouse to a revocable inter vivos trust over which the qualified owner, or the qualified owner and his spouse, hold the power of revocation; or (iii) a transfer to an irrevocable trust under which a qualified owner alone or in conjunction with his spouse possesses a life estate or an estate for joint lives, or enjoys a continuing right of use or support. A "qualified owner" means the owner of the real property who qualifies for a tax deferral by ordinance. 
(c)  Such deferred real estate taxes shall constitute a lien upon the real estate as if they had been assessed without regard to the deferral permitted by this division; provided, that such liens shall, to the extent that they exceed in the aggregate ten (10) percent of the price for which such real estate may be sold, be inferior to all other liens of record. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-125; Ord. No. 6786-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7482-18, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7294-16, adopted July 12, 2016, renumbered § 40-52 as § 40-51 to allow for additional provisions to be added.  
Sec. 40-52. - Tax exemption authorized. 
Real estate tax exemption is provided for qualified property owners who are eligible according to the terms of this division who are age sixty-five (65) or older. Persons qualifying for exemption are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth. 
(Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40-52.1. - Administration of tax exemption; rules and regulations of city manager. 
The exemption provided for in this division shall be administered by the city manager according to the provisions of this division, provided that the city manager may designate another officer, employee or constitutional officer to perform these duties. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations, in conformance with the provisions of this division, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption as specified in this division. The city manager may require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income or financial worth. 
(Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40-52.2. - General prerequisites to grant of tax exemption; effect of residency in hospital, nursing home, etc.; proration. 
(a)  Exemption shall be granted to persons subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The title to the property is held or partially held on July 1 of the taxable year, by the person or persons claiming exemption for the said property. 
(2)  Such real estate shall be owned and occupied as the sole dwelling of a person who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older on December 31 of the calendar year immediately preceding the taxable year. 
(3)  Real property owned and occupied as the sole dwelling of an eligible person includes real property: 
(i)  Held by the eligible person alone or in conjunction with his spouse as tenant or tenants for life or joint lives; 
(ii)  Held in a revocable inter vivos trust over which the eligible person or the eligible person and his spouse hold the power of revocation; or 
(iii)  Held in an irrevocable trust under which an eligible person alone or in conjunction with his spouse possesses a life estate or an estate for joint lives or enjoys a continuing right of use or support. 
The term "eligible person" does not include any interest held under a leasehold or term of years. 
(4)  Subject to subparagraph (7), of this section, the total combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by: 
(i)  Owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence; 
(ii)  Owners' relatives who live in the dwelling, except for those relatives living in the dwelling and providing bona fide caregiving services to the owner whether such relatives are compensated or not; and 
(iii)  Non-relatives of the owner who live in the dwelling, except for bona fide tenants or bona fide caregivers of the owner, whether compensated or not, 
shall not exceed the greater of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Any amount up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income of each relative who is not the spouse of an owner living in the dwelling and each non-relative who is not the bona fide tenant or bona fide caregiver of an owner living in the dwelling and who does not qualify for the exemption provided by subparagraph (7) hereof is hereby excluded from the total combined income calculation. 
(5)  The net combined financial worth, as determined by the city manager, including the present value of all equitable interests, as of December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year, of the owners, and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land, not exceeding one acre, upon which it is situated shall not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The value of the owner's furnishings that are located in the dwelling are also excluded from the determination of the net combined financial worth. Such furnishings shall include furniture, household appliances and other items typically used in a home. 
(6)  An eligible person must show that forty (40) percent of the total combined income detailed in subsection 40-52.2(4) is expended on housing costs for the qualifying dwelling and real property. Housing costs include, but are not limited to, utility bills and mortgages associated with the dwelling. 
(7)  Notwithstanding subparagraph (4) of this section, if a person qualifies for an exemption under this article, and if the person can prove by clear and convincing evidence that the person's physical or mental health has deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care is to have a relative move in and provide care for the person, and if a relative does then move in for that purpose, then none of the income of the relative or of the relative's spouse shall be counted towards the income limit, provided the owner of the residence has not transferred assets in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) without adequate consideration within a three-year period prior to or after the relative moves into such residence. 
(b)  The fact that persons who are otherwise qualified for tax exemption pursuant to this division reside in hospitals, nursing homes or other facilities for physical or mental care for extended periods of time shall not be construed to mean that the real estate for which tax exemption is sought does not continue to be the sole dwelling of such person during such extended periods of other residence so long as such real estate is not used by or leased to others for consideration. 
(c)  A change in ownership of the subject property to a spouse which results solely from the death of the qualifying individual or a sale of such property shall result in a prorated tax or exemption for the then current taxable year if such application for exemption was properly and timely filed and approved. 
(d)  For the purposes of this division, income shall mean total gross income from all sources, without regard to whether a tax return is actually filed. Income shall not include life insurance benefits or receipts from borrowing or other debt. 
(Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40-52.3. - Applicant's affidavit and certificate of disability for tax exemption; manager's certification to treasurer. 
(a)  Effective with the tax year beginning July 1, 2016 and thereafter, with the exception of certain situations set forth in subsection (b) below, the person or persons claiming an exemption for the forthcoming taxable year shall annually file a real estate tax exemption affidavit with the city manager or his designee between January 1 and August 31. With the exception of certain situations set forth in subsection (b) below, failure to file a properly completed real estate tax exemption affidavit by August 31 shall disqualify any otherwise qualified applicant, for the receipt of real estate tax exemption. If the exemption is sought for a mobile home, the affidavit must be filed between April 1 and June 30, and with the exception of certain situations as set forth in subsection (b) below, failure to file a properly completed real estate tax exemption affidavit by June 30 shall disqualify any otherwise qualified applicant, for the receipt of real estate tax exemption. 
(b)  Affidavits for real estate tax exemption may be submitted outside the January 1 to August 31 filing period, until October 31 of the tax year for which exemption is sought, in cases of: 
(1)  First time applicants; or 
(2)  Where the city manager determines that the failure to grant the exemption would serve to create an extreme hardship for the applicant. 
(c)  The affidavit required by this section shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the city manager, the names of the related persons occupying the dwelling for which exemption is claimed, their gross combined income, their total combined net worth, and housing costs. 
(d)  If, after audit and investigation, the city manager determines that the applicant is qualified for exemption, the manager shall so certify to the treasurer of the city who shall deduct the amount of the exemption from the claimant's real estate tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40-53. - Nullification upon change in status. 
(a)  Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which an affidavit in support of tax deferral or exemption is filed and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided for in this division shall nullify any relief of real estate tax liability for the full tax year for which the tax was relieved. 
(b)  A change in ownership of the subject property to a spouse which results solely from the death of a qualifying individual, or a sale of such property, shall result in a prorated deferral or exemption for the then current taxable year, if such application for deferral or exemption was properly and timely filed and approved. Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the deferral or exemption by a fraction wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such deferral or exemption is the numerator and the number twelve (12) is the denominator. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-126; Ord. No. 3946-89; Ord. No. 4770-95; Ord. No. 6786-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7294-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40-54. - False requests; violation. 
Any person falsely requesting relief under this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-127; Ord. No. 5440-00, § 1)  
DIVISION 4. - EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN REHABILITATED RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5503-00, § 1, adopted July 11, 2000, amended Div. 4, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 4, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 40-55. - Exemption for rehabilitated or replacement residential real estate—Authorized. 
(a)  Generally. An exemption from taxation of improved real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated for residential use is hereby authorized in accord with the criteria contained in this division. The general criteria for exemption pursuant to this subsection are the following: the rehabilitated residential structure shall be at least fifteen (15) years of age; the cost of eligible improvements to that structure shall be no less than ten (10) percent of the city's most recently recorded assessed value of the structure prior to commencement of the rehabilitation; all building permits required by the building code shall have been issued prior to commencement of the work, with the subsequent work for which a building permit is required approved by the department of codes compliance and the assessing officer's verification that the rehabilitation or replacement indicated on the application has been completed. 
(b)  Demolished structures. The exemption provided in this section may apply to a residential structure which is demolished and rebuilt. In such a case, the demolished residential structure shall be at least fifteen (15) years of age, the new residential structure shall be at least eighty (80) percent of the square footage of the demolished structure or at least one thousand (1,000) square feet, and the new residential structure shall be a single-family or a two-family residence and the post reconstruction real estate tax shall not be less than the pre-demolition tax for that property. The exemption provided in this section shall not apply when the residential structure demolished is a registered Virginia landmark or is determined by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Historic Resources to contribute to the significance of a registered historic district. 
(c)  Eligible improvements. For the purposes of this section, eligible improvements shall include expenditures associated with any exterior, structural, mechanical, plumbing or electrical improvements necessary to expand or rehabilitate a building for residential purposes; expenditures associated with excavations, grading, paving, driveways, roads, sidewalks, landscaping or other land improvements; and expenditures including, but not limited to, demolition, carpentry, sheetrock, plaster, painting, ceilings, fixtures, doors, windows, fire suppression systems, roofing and flashing, exterior repair, cleaning and cleanup. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, "rehabilitation" shall not include renovation, repair work or replacement done to a structure damaged by (i) explosion; or (ii) fire, earthquake, tornado, hurricane, flood or other acts of God. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Dwelling unit shall mean a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
(2)  Attached single-family dwelling shall mean a building containing two (2) or more dwelling units sharing at least sixteen (16) horizontal feet of a wall, ceiling or floor area between such units with each unit having its own front and rear or side access to the outside. 
(3)  Detached single-family dwelling shall mean a building containing one (1) dwelling unit, entirely surrounded by a yard. Manufactured homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents or other forms of temporary or portable housing are not included within this definition. 
(4)  Two-family dwelling shall mean a building containing two (2) dwelling units, entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is not on a separate lot. 
(5)  Multiple-family dwelling shall mean a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is served by a common outside entrance. 
(6)  Residential structure shall include attached single-family dwellings, detached single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings; residential structure shall not include multiple-family dwellings. 
(f)  The city manager or his designee shall administer the tax exemption program described herein. At the time that a property owner or his agent applies for a building permit, he shall be provided information about this tax exemption program by the department of codes compliance. 
(Ord. No. 5503-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5776-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6556-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6729-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6729-10 shall be in effect on December 1, 2010.  
Sec. 40-56. - Same—Amount; duration. 
(a)  The exemption authorized in section 40-55(a) shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  For the first five (5) years the exemption shall be in an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the eligible cost of the rehabilitation. 
(2)  After the fifth year through the tenth year, the exemption in subparagraph (a)(1) shall be reduced by twenty (20) percent of the original amount of the exemption for each succeeding year. 
(3)  The amount of the exemption and the commencement date of the exemption shall be certified by the city manager or his designee to the real estate assessor and made applicable as provided herein. 
(b)  The exemption authorized in section 40-55(b) shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  For the first five (5) years, the exemption shall be in an amount equal to twenty (20) percent of the eligible cost of demolition and rebuilding. 
(2)  After the fifth year through the tenth year, the exemption in subparagraph (b)(1) shall be reduced by ten (10) percent of the original amount of the exemption for each succeeding year. 
(3)  The amount of the exemption and the commencement date of the exemption shall be certified by the city manager or his designee to the real estate assessor and made applicable as provided therein. 
(c)  The exemption shall commence upon the completion of the rehabilitation or replacement with such completion being established by the verification by the assessing officer that the rehabilitation or replacement indicated on the application has been completed. The exemption shall run with the real estate for a period of ten (10) years. For the purposes of this ordinance, final inspection and approval of work for which a building permit is required shall serve as a certificate of occupancy for any addition or alteration to a structure for which a certificate of occupancy has already been issued. If application is made for the exemption after the date of its commencement as defined herein, the real estate assessor shall exempt the amount as determined above for the remainder of the exemption period with the period of the exemption beginning on the date of the application. 
(d)  No property shall be eligible for the exemption provided in section 40-55 unless application therefor has been made within eighteen (18) months after completion of the rehabilitation. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the real estate assessor to list upon the land book any reduced value due to the exemption authorized pursuant to section 40-55. 
(Ord. No. 5503-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6556-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6729-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6729-10 shall be in effect on December 1, 2010.  
Sec. 40-57. - Exemption for rehabilitated commercial real estate—Authorized. 
(a)  Generally. An exemption from taxation of improved real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated for commercial use is hereby authorized. The criteria for exemption pursuant to this subsection are the following: the rehabilitated commercial structure must be no less than twenty (20) years of age, or no less than fifteen (15) years of age if located within an Enterprise Zone; the cost of eligible improvements to that structure must be no less than twenty (20) percent of the city's most recently recorded assessed value of the structure prior to the commencement of the rehabilitation; the rehabilitation may not increase the total square footage of the structure by more than fifty (50) percent; all building permits required by the building code shall have been issued prior to commencement of the work, with the subsequent work for which a building permit is required approved by the department of codes compliance and the assessing officer's verification that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed. 
(b)  Facade improvement. There is hereby authorized an exemption from taxation of improved real estate located within the Newport News Enterprise Zone #2 (to include its subzone #2-A) on which a facade improvement has been made to a structure used for commercial purposes. The criteria for exemption of improved commercial real estate in the Mid-City Enterprise Zone pursuant to this subsection are the following: the facade improvement must be made to a structure no less than fifteen (15) years of age; the modification must be plainly visible from a public street and all building permits required by the building code shall have been issued to do the work. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "eligible improvements" shall mean the amount properly chargeable to a capital account for improvements to rehabilitate or expand depreciable real property placed in service during the taxable year. Eligible improvements include expenditures associated with any exterior, structural, mechanical, or electrical improvements necessary to expand or rehabilitate a building for commercial or industrial use and excavations, grading, paving, driveways, roads, sidewalks, landscaping, or other land improvements. Eligible improvements shall include, but not be limited to, costs associated with demolition, carpentry, sheetrock, plaster, painting, ceilings, fixtures, doors, windows, fire suppression systems, roofing and flashing, exterior repair, cleaning, and cleanup. 
Eligible improvements shall not include: 
(1)  The cost of acquiring any real property or building; 
(2)  The cost of (i) furnishings; (ii) any expenditure associated with appraisal, architectural, engineering and interior design fees; (iii) loan fees, points, or capitalized interest; (iv) legal, accounting, realtor, sales and marketing, or other professional fees; (v) bids, insurance, signage, utilities, bonding, copying, rent loss, or temporary facilities incurred during construction; (vi) utility hook-up or access fees; (vii) outbuildings; or (viii) the cost of any well or septic or sewer system. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, "amount properly chargeable to a capital account" means an amount properly includable in computing the basis of real property under U.S. Department of Treasury, Internal Revenue Code, Reg. § 1.46-3(c). 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, "depreciable real property" means income-producing property or property used in a trade or business. 
(f)  For the purposes of this section, "rehabilitation" shall not include renovation or repair work done on a structure damaged by (i) explosion; or (ii) fire, earthquake, tornado, hurricane, flood or other acts of God. 
(g)  The city manager or his designee shall administer the tax exemption program described herein. At the time that a property owner or his agent applies for a building permit, he shall be provided information about this tax exemption program by the department of codes compliance. 
(Ord. No. 5503-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6556-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6729-10, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6729-10 shall be in effect on December 1, 2010.  
Sec. 40-58. - Same—Amount; duration. 
(a)  The exemption authorized in section 40-57 shall be an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the cost of the rehabilitation or facade improvement. This amount and commencement date of the exemption shall be certified by the city manager or his designee to the real estate assessor and made applicable as provided herein. 
(b)  The exemption shall commence upon the completion of the rehabilitation or facade improvement, and the assessing officer's verification that the rehabilitation or facade improvement has been completed, or on January 1 of the year following the completion of the rehabilitation or facade improvement. The exemption shall run with the real estate for a period of five (5) years. Final inspection and approval of work for which a building permit is required shall serve as a certificate of occupancy for any addition or alteration to a structure for which a certificate of occupancy has already been issued. If application is made for the exemption after the date of its commencement as defined herein, the real estate assessor shall exempt the amount as determined above for the remainder of the exemption period, with the period of exemption beginning on the date of the application. 
(c)  No property shall be eligible for the exemption provided in this division unless application therefor has been made within eighteen (18) months after completion of the rehabilitation or facade improvement. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the real estate assessor to list upon the land book any reduced value due to the exemption authorized pursuant to section 40-57. 
(Ord. No. 5503-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6556-08, § 1)  
Sec. 40-59. - Application required; certification to treasurer. 
(a)  The person claiming an exemption pursuant to the provisions of this division shall file an application with the city manager or his designee on such forms as the city manager or his designee shall prescribe. 
(b)  If after investigation the city manager or his designee determines that the real estate for which the exemption is claimed qualifies, he shall notify the real estate assessor who shall so certify to the treasurer of the city, who shall deduct the amount of the exemption from the applicant's real estate tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 5503-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6556-08, § 1)  
DIVISION 5. - DEFERRAL FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS ELIGIBLE FOR FEDERAL LOW-INCOME HOUSING CREDITS 
 
Sec. 40-59.1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Affidavit. The real estate tax deferral affidavit provided for in this division. 
Deferral. Deferral from the real estate tax of the city according to the provisions of this division. 
Tax year. The fiscal year, from July 1 until June 30, for which a deferral is claimed under this division. 
(Ord. No. 7536-19, § 1)  
Sec. 40-59.2. - Deferral of portion of real estate tax increases authorized. 
Effective with the tax year beginning July 1, 2019, real estate tax deferral is provided for owners of housing developments identified in the Marshall-Ridley Choice Neighborhood Transformation Plan, as adopted by the city council, which are eligible for low-income housing credits under the United States Internal Revenue Code, for which the real estate tax for the tax year is greater than one hundred five (105) percent of the real estate tax on the property in the previous tax year. The deferral authorized in this division is adopted pursuant to authority granted in § 58.1-3219 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 7536-19, § 1)  
Sec. 40-59.3. - Applicant's affidavit; manager's certification to treasurer. 
(a)  The person or persons seeking a deferral for the upcoming tax year shall annually file a real estate tax deferral affidavit with the city manager or his designee between May 1 and June 30. Failure to submit a real estate tax deferral affidavit by June 30 shall disqualify any otherwise qualified applicant from the receipt of real estate tax deferral for the upcoming tax year. 
(b)  The affidavit required by this section shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the city manager, the name of the applicant for deferral, the amount of the deferral sought, and shall certify that the real estate for which deferral is sought is eligible for low-income housing credits under the United States Internal Revenue Code and is identified in the Marshall-Ridley Choice Neighborhood Transformation Plan, as adopted by the city council. The city manager may require such additional documentation as is necessary to verify such eligibility. 
(Ord. No. 7536-19, § 1)  
Sec. 40-59.4. - Conditions and amount of deferral; payment of deferred amounts. 
(a)  The deferred amount may include all or any portion of the real estate tax which is greater than one hundred five (105) percent of the real estate tax on the property in the previous tax year, the amount to be deferred to be elected by the applicant. 
(b)  The deferred amount shall be subject to interest computed at the rate established pursuant to Section 6621 of the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
(c)  The accumulated amount of taxes deferred and interest shall be paid to the treasurer of the city by the owner upon the sale or transfer of the property, or from the estate of the decedent within one (1) year after the death of the owner. 
(d)  If the real estate is jointly owned and all such owners applied and qualified for deferral, the death of one of the joint owners shall not disqualify the surviving owner or owners from participating in the deferral program. All accumulated deferred taxes and interest shall be paid within one (1) year of the date of death of the last qualifying owner. 
(e)  The accumulated amount of tax deferred and interest shall constitute a lien upon the real estate. 
(Ord. No. 7536-19, § 1)  
Sec. 40-59.5. - Administration of tax deferral; rules and regulations of city manager. 
The deferral provided for in this division shall be administered by the city manager according to the provisions of this division, provided that the city manager may designate another officer, employee or constitutional officer to perform these duties. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations, in conformance with the provisions of this division, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for deferral as specified in this division. 
(Ord. No. 7536-19, § 1)  
Sec. 40-59.6. - Limitations. 
The deferral program provided under this division shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Real estate which participates in a real estate tax relief or deferral program for the elderly or permanently or totally disabled pursuant to Article 2 (§ 58.1-3210 et seq.) of Chapter 32 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(b)  Persons who are delinquent on any portion of real estate taxes for which deferral is sought. 
(c)  Real estate assessed on the basis of use value pursuant to Article 4 (§ 58.1-3230 et seq.) of Chapter 32 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 7536-19, § 1)  
ARTICLE III. - RETAIL SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 40-60. - Levied; amount; etc. 
There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, a general retail sales tax at the rate of one (1) percent to provide revenue for the general fund of the city. The rate of tax shall be added to the rate of the state retail sales tax imposed by Chapter 6 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act) and shall be subject to all of the provisions of such chapter, and all amendments thereto, and the rules and regulations published with respect thereto, except that the applicable brackets of prices shall be prescribed in Section 58.1-628 of the Code of Virginia for the combined tax, and except that no discount under Section 58.1-622 of the Code of Virginia shall be allowed on the tax levied by this section. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-104)  
Sec. 40-61. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of the council in adopting this article to levy the general retail sales tax authorized to be levied by Section 58.1-3716 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 2; Code 1961, § 16-105)  
Sec. 40-62. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
The general retail sales tax levied pursuant to section 40-60 shall not include the following: 
Artificial or propane gas, firewood, coal or home heating oil used for domestic consumption. "Domestic consumption" means the use of artificial or propane gas, firewood, coal or home heating oil by an individual purchaser for other than business, commercial or industrial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3253-84, § 1)  
Secs. 40-63—40-71. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2646-80 amended and reordained Ch. 40, Art. IV, to read as set out in §§ 40-72—40-77. Formerly, Art. IV, §§ 40-72—40-75, dealt with a tax on bank stock and was derived from Ord. No. 564, §§ 1, 2, 4; Ord. No. 771, §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 927, §§ 1—4; Code 1961, §§ 16-54, 16-56—16-59; and Ord. No. 2506-79, § 1. 
Annotation—For a case upholding the validity of city's tax on bank stock under a former ordinance, see West v. City of Newport News, 51 S.E. 2d 206 (Va. SCA, 1905). 
 
Sec. 40-72. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Bank shall be as defined in Section 58.1-1201 of the Code of Virginia. 
(2)  Net capital shall mean a bank's net capital computed pursuant to Section 58.1-1205 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 2646-80)  
Sec. 40-73. - Imposition of city bank franchise tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of this city a tax on net capital equaling eighty (80) percent of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in Section 58.1-1204 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  In the event that any bank located within the boundaries of this city is not the principal office but is a branch extension or affiliate of the principal office, the tax upon such branch shall be apportioned as provided by Section 58.1-1211 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 2646-80)  
Sec. 40-74. - Filing of return and payment of tax. 
(a)  On or after the first day of January of each year, but not later than March first of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within this city shall prepare and file with the commissioner of the revenue a return as provided by Section 58.1-1207 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, in duplicate, which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Chapter 10.01 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. The commissioner of the revenue shall certify a copy of such filing of the bank's return and schedule and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the boundaries of this city and such bank has branch offices located within this city, in addition to the filing requirements set forth in subsection (a) hereof, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of the revenue of this city a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Sections 58.1-1207, 58.1-1211 and 58.1-1212 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(c)  Each bank, on or before the first day of June of each year, shall pay into the treasurer's office (or other appropriate official) of this city all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2646-80; Ord. No. 5309-99)  
Sec. 40-75. - Effective date of article. 
The provisions of this article shall be effective for the tax year beginning January 1, 1980, and for tax years 1981 and 1982. 
(Ord. No. 2646-80)  
Sec. 40-76. - Penalty upon bank for failure to comply with article. 
Any bank which shall fail or neglect to comply with any provision of this article shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), which fine shall be recovered upon motion, after five (5) days' notice in the court of this city. 
(Ord. No. 2646-80)  
Sec. 40-77. - Effective provisions if sections 40-72 to 40-76 declared unconstitutional; definition of bank; assessment, levy and extension; payment and receipt therefor; tax as lien and duty of bank as to dividends. 
In the event that the provisions of sections 40-72 to 40-76 are declared unconstitutional for tax year 1980, the bank state tax provisions below will be effective for said tax year. 
(1)  Definition of "bank." The word "bank," as used in this article, shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in section 58.1-1201 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(2)  Assessment, levy and extension of tax. 
(a)  The stockholders of banks located in the city shall be assessed and taxed on their shares of stock therein, and each bank shall deliver each year to the commissioner of the revenue an original and one (1) copy of the report such bank is required by state law to file for the purpose of state taxation. It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue, upon receipt of such report annually, to assess each stockholder, upon the taxable value of the shares of stock owned by such stockholder, a tax at the rate of eighty cents ($0.80) on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) of such value of such stock and to extend such tax against the stockholders of such bank. The taxable value of the shares of stock shall be the same as that fixed for the purpose of state taxation thereof. 
(b)  The tax imposed by the city on the stock of any bank located in the city, which bank has a branch or branches located outside the corporate limits of the city, and the tax imposed by the city on the stock when any branch of a bank is located in the city, whose principal office is located outside of the city, shall be assessed and collected in the manner provided by the laws of the state. 
(3)  Payment and receipt therefor. Every bank, on or before the first day of June in each year, shall pay into the city treasury the tax assessed against its stockholders; and the city treasurer shall give such bank duplicate receipts therefor, as provided by Section 58-480 of the Code of Virginia. 
(4)  Tax as lien; duty of bank as to dividends. The tax assessed under this article upon each stockholder shall be a lien upon the stock standing in such stockholder's name and upon dividends thereon due and to become due, having priority over any and all liens by deeds of trust, mortgages, bills of sale or other assignments made by the owner or holder, except tax liens of the state, and take priority over all liens by execution, garnishment or attachment process sued out by creditors of the stockholder. The bank shall hold the dividends or other funds belonging to the stockholder and in its custody at the time the state's assessment list is received by it or that thereafter shall come under its control and apply the same to the payment of the tax assessed under this article, and when thus applied, shall be acquitted and discharged from liability to the stockholder for the money so disbursed. 
(Ord. No. 2646-80; Ord. No. 5310-99)  
Secs. 40-78—40-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5489-00, § 2, adopted June 27, 2000, repealed Art. V, §§ 40-86—40-88, which pertained to levied; amount; collection; exemption or deferral for elderly and disabled persons. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 40-86—40-97. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TAX ON PURCHASERS OF LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE 
 
Sec. 40-98—40-105. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7198-15, adopted July 14, 2015, repealed §§ 40-98—40-105, which pertained to levied; amount, emergency telephone system tax levied; amount, applicability generally, exemptions, duty of seller to collect and remit; seller's reports, seller's records, violation of article by seller, general duty of treasurer to collect, and assessment and collection of delinquencies and derived from Ord. No. 566; Ord. No. 770, §§ 1—5, 7—9; Ord. No. 926, §§ 1—5, 7—9; Ord. No. 1257, §§ 1—8; Ord. No. 1366, §§ 1—8; Code 1961, §§ 16-62—16-65, 16-67—16-69; Ord. No. 3173-84, § 1; Ord. No. 3457-86; Ord. No. 4476-93, § 1; Ord. No. 4726-95, § 1; Ord. No. 4727-95, § 1; Ord. No. 4774-95, § 1; Ord. No. 4916-96, § 1; Ord. No. 5021-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5136-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5488-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5922-03, § 1 Ord. No. 5923-03, § 1; and Ord. No. 6127-05, § 1. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 40-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6599-09, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed § 40-106, which pertained to rebate of local exchange telephone service tax and derived from Ord. Nos. 3140-84 and 4756-95. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 40-107—40-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASERS OF ELECTRIC AND NATURAL GAS UTILITY SERVICES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1, adopted Oct. 10, 2000, amended Art. VII, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. VII pertained to tax on purchasers of gas and electric service. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 40-116. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
All other classes of consumers means a consumer of natural gas or electric utility service provided to property used primarily for purposes other than commercial, industrial or residential as classified by the utility service provider. 
Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services. 
CCF means a volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
Commercial consumer means a consumer of natural gas or electric utility service provided to property used primarily for commercial purposes as classified by the utility service provider. 
Electric utility means a public utility authorized to furnish electric service to consumers in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service to consumers in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Industrial consumer means a consumer of natural gas or electric utility service provided to property used primarily for industrial purposes as classified by the utility service provider. 
kWh (kilowatt hours) means one thousand (1,000) watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric service provider to a consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Section 56-594 of the state code, it means the kilowatt hours supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kilowatt hours generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
Person means an individual, partnership or limited liability partnership, company or limited liability company, corporation, or any other entity. 
Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a consumer for purposes of furnishing heat, light or power. 
Residential consumer means a consumer of natural gas or electric utility service provided to property used primarily for residential purposes as classified by the utility service provider. 
Service provider means every person who delivers utility service to a consumer. 
Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
Utility service means the provision of electricity or natural gas for consumption by consumers. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-117. - Electric consumer utility tax levied; amount. 
In accordance with § 58.1-3814 of the State Code, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax, on a "per meter" basis, on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider in the following classes, as defined by the service provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. Such tax shall be one dollar and fifty-four cents ($1.54), plus the rate of $0.016398 per kWh on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider, however the total tax shall not exceed three dollars and eight cents ($3.08) per month. 
(2)  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be two dollars and twenty-nine cents ($2.29), plus the rate of $0.013859 per kWh on the first two thousand seven hundred twenty-one (2,721) kWhs, plus the rate of $0.003265 per kWh on all remaining kWhs delivered monthly to commercial consumers, however the total tax shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per month. 
(3)  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be two dollars and twenty-nine cents ($2.29), plus the rate of $0.015455 per kWh on the first two thousand four hundred forty (2,440) kWhs, plus the rate of $0.003482 per kWh on all remaining kWhs delivered monthly to industrial consumers, however the total tax shall not exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per month. 
(4)  All other classes of non-residential consumers. Such tax shall be two dollars and twenty-nine cents ($2.29), plus the rate of $0.015455 per kWh on the first two thousand four hundred forty (2,440) kWhs, plus the rate of $0.003482 per kWh on all remaining kWhs delivered monthly to all other classes of non-residential consumers, however the total tax shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per month. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6870-12, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6870-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Sec. 40-118. - Natural gas consumer utility tax levied; amount. 
In accordance with Section 58.1-3814 of the state code, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax, on a "per meter" basis, on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities, classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in § 58.1-3814(J) of the state code, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. Such tax shall be one dollar and fifty-one cents ($1.51) per month for gas utility service. 
(2)  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be one dollar twenty-nine cents ($1.29), plus the rate of $0.067602 per CCF on the first 128.91 CCFs, plus the rate of $0.032576 per CCF on all remaining CCFs delivered monthly to commercial consumers, however the total tax shall not exceed fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per month. 
(3)  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be one dollar and twenty-nine cents ($1.29), plus the rate of $0.067602 per CCF on the first 128.91 CCFs, plus the rate of $0.032576 per CCF on all remaining CCFs delivered monthly to industrial consumers, however the total tax shall not exceed fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per month. 
(4)  All other classes of non-residential consumers. Such tax shall be one dollar and twenty-nine cents ($1.29), plus the rate of $0.067602 per CCF on the first 128.91 CCFs, plus the rate of $0.032576 per CCF on all remaining CCFs delivered monthly to all other classes of non-residential consumers, however the total tax shall not exceed fifty-five dollars ($55.00) per month. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-119. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The United States of America, the Commonwealth of Virginia and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and regional authorities thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of utility services used by such governmental agencies, except that this section shall not apply to local authorities which shall be subject to the tax imposed by this article for utility service to occupants and lessees of premises owned or managed by the authorities. 
(b)  There shall be no tax computed on bills submitted for electric service for heating water where a separate meter is used solely for water heating service. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-120. - Duty of service provider to bill, collect and remit tax. 
(a)  The service provider shall (i) bill the consumer utility tax to all consumers who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers utility services, and (ii) report and remit the same to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the last day of the succeeding month of collection. Until the consumer pays the tax to such service provider, the tax shall constitute a debt of the consumer to the locality. Upon payment by the consumer to the service provider, the tax shall constitute a debt of the service provider to the locality, and the service provider shall hold such receipts in trust as a fiduciary for and on behalf of the city. 
(b)  If any consumer receives and pays for utility services but refuses to pay the consumer utility tax stated on the bill, the service provider shall notify the commissioner of the revenue in writing of the name and address of each such consumer and the amount of delinquent taxes owed by that consumer within forty-five (45) days after the failure of the consumer to pay the tax. It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to assess taxes reported by the service provider as unpaid under this article against the consumer, together with a penalty of five (5) percent of the delinquent tax owed, with a minimum penalty of one dollar ($1.00). If not paid as assessed, the taxes and penalties shall be turned over to the city treasurer, who shall collect the delinquent taxes and penalties in the same manner as other delinquent taxes and penalties are collected, and shall cause the same to be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(c)  If any consumer fails to pay the entire bill issued by a service provider, including the consumer utility tax, the service provider shall follow its normal collection procedures with respect to the charge for utility service and the tax, and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof shall (i) apportion the net amount collected between the charge for the utility service and the tax and (ii) report and remit the tax portion to the commissioner of the revenue. After the consumer pays the tax to the service provider, the taxes shall be deemed to be held in trust by such service provider until reported and remitted to the commissioner of the revenue. Delinquent taxes determined uncollectible by the service provider shall be reported, assessed and collection attempted as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to remit to the city the tax required to be collected under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent, with a minimum penalty of two dollars ($2.00). In addition, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall be computed and collected upon the taxes and penalty beginning thirty (30) days from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-121. - Service provider records. 
Each and every service provider shall keep complete and accurate, service and accounting records using generally accepted accounting principles and practices, which records shall indicate the consumption utilized by each consumer, the dates of such consumption, the date of billing and payment for utility services provided, and the amount of all billings and payments of the con sumer utility taxes imposed pursuant to this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection and access provided to duly authorized agents of the city during the city's normal business hours for a period of three (3) years from the date such record was created; and such agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as the records are inspected. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-122. - Computation tax for bills not on monthly basis. 
Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this article if submitted twelve (12) times per year of approximately one (1) month each. The tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kWh or CCF reflected on the bill shall be divided by two (2); (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in this article; (iii) the tax determined by step (ii) shall be multiplied by two (2) which shall equal the applicable tax; however, (iv) the tax calculated in step (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "not to exceed" amount. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-123. - Rebate of consumer utility taxes in enterprise zones. 
(a)  Any qualified business firm located in a designated enterprise zone within the city may be eligible for a rebate of its consumer utility tax it has paid in accordance with the provisions of this article. Rebate to a business entity of consumer utility taxes shall begin as of the date of certification by the department of development of that business as a qualified business firm within a designated enterprise zone in the city. The tax shall be rebated according to the following schedule: 
Time Period 	Percent Reduction 
Year 1 	100% 
Year 2 	80% 
Years 3—10 	60% per year 
 
(b)  Any business entity located in a designated enterprise zone may be certified as a qualified business entity for purposes of this section if it meets specific guidelines for eligibility in accordance with the application submitted to and approved by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia for designation of the specific Virginia Enterprise Zone within which the business firm is located. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6598-09)  
Sec. 40-124. - General duty of treasurer to collect. 
The city treasurer shall be charged with the authority and duty of collecting consumer utility taxes and penalties levied and imposed by this article, and upon collection shall cause the same to be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-125. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who willfully fails to bill, collect, remit or truthfully account for and pay over the city treasurer the consumer utility tax as provided in this article, or who willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax, or the billing, collection or remittance thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who willfully fails to bill, collect, remit or truthfully account for and pay over the city treasurer the consumer utility tax as provided in this article, or who willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such tax, or the billing, collection or remittance thereof, shall, in addition to all other penalty provided by law, be liable to the city for a penalty in an amount equal to such tax. 
(c)  The term "person" as used in this section specifically includes any officer, agent and employee of any person as defined in this article who is under a duty to perform on behalf of that person the act in respect of which the violation occurs and who (i) had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt as set forth herein and (ii) had authority to prevent such failure or attempt. 
(d)  A criminal conviction pursuant to this section shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 5532-00, § 1)  
Secs. 40-126—40-134. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - TAX ON TRANSIENTS OBTAINING BOARD AND LODGING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Excise tax on transient room rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 
 
Sec. 40-135. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following respective meanings: 
Board and lodging. The services, meals, food, board, lodging or space furnished any transient. 
Hotel. Any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, rooming house or other lodging place within the city offering board and lodging, either or both, as defined in this section, for compensation, to any transient as defined in this section. 
Transient. Any person who, for any period of not more than sixty (60) consecutive days, either at such person's own expense or at the expense of another, obtains board and lodging in any hotel. 
(Ord. No. 1508, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-106)  
Sec. 40-136. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied on each transient a tax equivalent to eight (8) percent of the total amount paid for board or lodging by or for any such transient to any hotel. In addition thereto, there is hereby imposed and levied a flat tax of one dollar ($1.00) for each night of lodging at any place other than a campground. 
(Ord. No. 1508, § 2; Code 1961, § 16-107; Ord. No. 4731-95, § 1; Ord. No. 5788-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6959-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7054-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7054-14, § 1, adopted May 13, 2014, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 40-137. - Exceptions. 
(a)  No tax shall be payable under this article on charges for board and lodging paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the tax imposed on transient room rentals pursuant to this article shall be imposed only for the occupancy of any room or space that is suitable or intended for occupancy of transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1508, § 9; Code 1961, § 16-114; Ord. No. 6315-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-138. - Collection. 
Every person receiving any payment for board and lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the transient on whom such tax is levied or from the person paying for such board and lodging at the time payment for such board and lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under this section shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1508, § 3; Code 1961, § 16-108)  
Sec. 40-139. - Reports and remittances generally. 
The person collecting any tax as provided in section 40-138 shall make out a report thereof, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of board and lodging charges collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver such report to the city treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the commissioner of revenue and the city treasurer shall allow reports and remittances to be made quarterly by any person collecting the tax when the person has established for a period of one (1) year that his monthly remittances are less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month following the close of the period. 
(Ord. No. 1508, § 4; Code 1961, § 16-109; Ord. No. 4872-96)  
Sec. 40-140. - Collector's records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and to preserve, for a period of two (2) years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as such person may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city. The commissioner of the revenue may inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 1508, § 7; Code 1961, § 16-112)  
Sec. 40-141. - Duty of collector going out or disposing of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of such person's business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Ord. No. 1508, § 8; Code 1961, § 16-113)  
Sec. 40-142. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the city treasurer a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent, if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00), but in no event shall the penalty exceed the amount of tax assessable. In addition, interest of the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall be computed and collected on the tax and penalty beginning from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 1508, § 5; Code 1961, § 16-110; Ord. No. 6161-05; Ord. No. 6315-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-143. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances required in this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as the commissioner may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, the commissioner shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such person, by registered mail, sent to such person's last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a hotel in the city, liable for the collection of tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the reports or remittances required in this article. The commissioner of the revenue may have legal process issued and served for such person in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1508, §§ 6, 10; Code 1961, §§ 16-111, 16-115)  
Sec. 40-144. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Each violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense, but conviction thereof shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1508, § 11; Code 1961, § 16-116)  
Secs. 40-145—40-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CIGARETTE TAX[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to levy cigarette tax and permitted provisions of ordinance providing for administration and enforcement of such tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3830, 58.1-3832. 
 
Sec. 40-155. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer. The word "dealer" shall mean every manufacturer, jobber, wholesale dealer or other person who supplies a seller with cigarettes. 
Package. The word "package" shall mean and include every package, box, can or other container of any cigarettes, irrespective of the material from which such container is made, to which the internal revenue cigarette tax of the United States is applicable by and under federal statutes and regulations, and in which retail sales of such cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
Person. The word "person" shall mean and include any individual, partnership, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate, receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of individuals. 
Purchaser. The word "purchaser" shall mean and include every person to whom title to any cigarettes is transferred by a seller within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sale. The word "sale" shall mean and include every act or transaction, irrespective of the method or means employed, including the use of vending machines and other mechanical devices, whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller to any other person within the corporate limits of the city. 
Seller. The word "seller" shall mean any person who transfers title to any cigarettes, or in whose place of business title to any cigarettes is transferred, within the corporate limits of the city, for any purpose other than resale. 
Stamp. The word "stamp" shall mean a small gummed piece of paper or decalcomania to be sold by the city treasurer and to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold at retail in the city, and also any insignia or symbols printed by a meter machine upon any such package under the authorization of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 1; Ord. No. 1259, § 1; Ord. No. 1364, § 1; Code 1961, § 16-80)  
Sec. 40-156. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby levied and imposed by the city, upon each and every sale of cigarettes, a tax equivalent to eighty-five cents ($0.85) for each twenty (20) cigarettes, or fractional number of twenty (20) cigarettes, sold within the city, the amount of the tax to be paid by the seller, if not previously paid, in the manner and at the time provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 2; Ord. No. 1259, § 2; Ord. No. 1364, § 2; Code 1961, § 16-81; Ord. No. 3586-87, § 1; Ord. No. 3889-89; Ord. No. 4196-91, § 1; Ord. No. 5145-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5787-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5924-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5996-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6783-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6868-12, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6868-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Sec. 40-157. - Method of payment. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall be paid by affixing or causing to be affixed a stamp or stamps of the proper denominational or face value to each and every package of cigarettes sold within the city in the manner and at the time or times provided for in this article. Every dealer and every seller in the city shall have the right to buy such stamps from the city treasurer and to affix the same to packages of cigarettes as provided in this article. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue is authorized to permit the payment in advance of the tax levied and imposed by this article by the method of placing imprints of the stamps upon original packages by the use of meter machines, in lieu of the method of paying such tax by the purchase and affixing of gummed stamps, and to prescribe and enforce the necessary regulations, setting forth the method to be employed and the conditions to be observed in the use of such meter machines. 
(Ord. No. 658, §§ 3, 8; Ord. No. 1259, §§ 3, 8; Ord. No. 1364, §§ 3, 8; Code 1961, §§ 16-82, 16-86)  
Sec. 40-158. - Preparation and sale of stamps generally. 
For the purpose of making stamps available for use, the commissioner of the revenue shall prescribe, prepare and furnish to the city treasurer, and the city treasurer shall sell, stamps of such denominations and in such quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the taxes imposed by this article. In the sale of such stamps, the city treasurer shall allow a discount of four (4) percent of the denominational or face value thereof to cover the costs which will be incurred in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. In the event the printing by an authorized meter machine is used in lieu of gummed stamps, there shall be allowed a discount of six (6) percent of the denominational or face value of the imprints of the stamps so printed by the meter machine to cover the costs incurred in printing such imprints. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 6; Ord. No. 1259, § 6; Ord. No. 1262, § 1; Ord. No. 1364, § 6; Code 1961, § 16-83)  
Sec. 40-159. - Duties of dealers and sellers with respect to stamps. 
(a)  Every local dealer in cigarettes is hereby required, and it shall be such dealer's duty, to purchase such stamps at the office of the city treasurer as shall be necessary to pay the tax levied and imposed by this article, and to affix or cause to be affixed a stamp or stamps of the monetary value prescribed by this article to each package of cigarettes prior to delivery or furnishing of such cigarettes to any seller. Nothing herein contained shall preclude any dealer from using a stamp meter machine in lieu of gummed stamps to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every seller is hereby required to examine each package of cigarettes prior to exposing the same for sale, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such package has the proper stamps affixed thereto or imprinted thereon, as provided by this article. If upon such examination, unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes are discovered, the seller, where such cigarettes were obtained from a local dealer, shall immediately notify such dealer, and upon such notification, such dealer shall forthwith either affix to or imprint upon such unstamped or improperly stamped packages the proper amount of stamps, or shall replace such packages with others to which stamps have been properly affixed or imprinted thereon. 
(c)  Should a seller obtain or acquire possession, from any person other than a local dealer, of any unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes, such seller shall, forthwith, before selling, offering or exposing such cigarettes for sale in the city, purchase and affix or cause to be affixed to such packages of cigarettes the proper stamps, or the marking of a meter machine covering the tax imposed by this article. 
(d)  In the event any seller shall elect to purchase and affix such stamps or imprints of a meter machine before offering such cigarettes for sale, any local dealer delivering and furnishing cigarettes to any such seller shall not be required to purchase and affix the stamps or imprints to such cigarettes so sold or furnished; provided, that any such local dealer shall, on the day following the day of such delivery and furnishing, file with the commissioner of the revenue a copy of the delivery memorandum showing the name and address of such seller and the quantity and type of cigarettes so delivered and furnished. 
(Ord. No. 658, §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 1259, §§ 4, 5; Ord. No. 1364, §§ 4, 5; Code 1961, § 16-85)  
Sec. 40-160. - Visibility of stamps or meter markings. 
Stamps or the printed marking of a meter machine shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such manner as to be readily visible to the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 4; Ord. No. 1259, § 4; Ord. No. 1364, § 4; Code 1961, § 16-87)  
Sec. 40-161. - Altering design of stamps. 
The commissioner of the revenue may, from time to time, and as often as the commissioner may deem advisable, provide for the issuance and exclusive use of cigarette tax stamps of a new design and forbid the use of stamps of any other design. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 7; Ord. No. 1259, § 7; Ord. No. 1364, § 7; Code 1961, § 16-88)  
Sec. 40-162. - Refund for unused stamps or meter imprints. 
(a)  The purchase price of any tax stamps purchased under this section shall be refunded, without penalties or additional fees, upon verification by the commissioner of the revenue that the stamps have been returned to the city. In the case of any authorized meter machine, should any imprints of such machine theretofore paid for not be used, such person shall, upon furnishing the commissioner of the revenue with verification of such non-use, be entitled to a refund of the purchase price thereof, without penalties or additional fees, upon verification by the commissioner of the revenue that the imprints of the machine were not used. 
(b)  Any and all refunds issued under this section shall be subject to the time limitations set forth in article XIII section 40-225. 
(c)  Any and all refunds for unused stamps and for nonuse of meter machine imprints provided for under this section are hereby authorized to be made on vouchers approved by the commissioner of the revenue, and when made, the same shall be charged against the sums collected for the sale of the stamps and for the use of such imprints. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 9; Ord. No. 1259, § 9; Ord. No. 1262, § 1; Ord. No. 1364, § 9; Code 1961, § 16-89; Ord. No. 7413-17)  
Sec. 40-163. - Seizure and sale of unstamped cigarettes. 
Whenever the commissioner of the revenue shall discover any cigarettes which are subject to the tax imposed by this article and upon which the tax has not been paid or upon which stamps have not been affixed or evidence of such tax shown thereon by the printed markings of an authorized meter machine, as in this article required, the commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to forthwith seize and take possession of such cigarettes, which shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the city, which may, within a reasonable time thereafter, after written notice posted at the front door of the courthouse of the city at least five (5) days before the date of sale, or published in some newspaper having general circulation in the city at least five (5) days before the date of sale, sell such forfeited cigarettes at the time and place designated in such notice. From the proceeds of such sale, the city shall collect the tax due thereon, together with a penalty of fifty (50) percentum thereof and the costs incurred in such proceedings, and pay the balance, if any, of such proceeds to the person in whose possession such forfeited cigarettes were found. Such seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from any fine provided herein for the violation of the provisions of this article. All money collected under the provisions of this section shall be paid to the city treasurer and treated as other taxes collected under this article. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 10; Ord. No. 1259, § 10; Ord. No. 1364, § 10; Code 1961, § 16-90)  
Sec. 40-164. - Dealers' and sellers' records generally. 
It shall be the duty of every local dealer and seller to maintain and keep, for a period of two (2) years, such record of cigarettes sold and delivered by the dealer or seller as may be required by the commissioner of the revenue and to make all such records available for examination by the commissioner of the revenue, upon demand, at any and all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 13; Ord. No. 1259, § 13; Ord. No. 1364, § 13; Code 1961, § 16-91)  
Sec. 40-165. - Rules and regulations for enforcement and administration of article; examination of books, records, etc. 
The commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the method and means to be used in the cancellation of the stamps provided for in this article and to any and all other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. Such commissioner is hereby further authorized and empowered to examine books, records, invoices, papers and any and all cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed, stored, sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale by a seller. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 14; Ord. No. 1259, § 14; Ord. No. 1364, § 14; Code 1961, § 16-92)  
Sec. 40-166. - Tax in addition to other taxes. 
The tax levied and imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other taxes of every kind levied and imposed by any other ordinance or law. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 15; Ord. No. 1259, § 15; Ord. No. 1364, § 15; Code 1961, § 16-93)  
Sec. 40-167. - Violations of article—Prohibited acts enumerated. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person: 
(1)  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof; or for any dealer or seller, with intent to violate any provision of this article, to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon such dealer or seller under the provisions of this article, or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which the commissioner of the revenue may issue under this article. 
(2)  To falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp or the printed marking of any meter machine or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp or printed markings of a meter machine or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps or printed markings of a meter machine. 
(3)  To sell any cigarettes upon which the tax imposed by this article has not been paid and upon which evidence of payment thereof is not shown on each package of cigarettes. 
(4)  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid have been removed. 
(5)  To remove from any package any stamp or the printed marking of a meter machine with intent to use or cause the same to be used after the same has already been used or to buy, sell or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamp or printed marking of a meter machine to any person or to reuse any stamp or printed marking of a meter machine which has theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article, or, except as to the city treasurer, to sell or offer to sell any stamps or printed markings of a meter machine provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 11; Ord. No. 1259, § 11; Ord. No. 1364, § 11; Code 1961, § 16-94)  
Sec. 40-168. - Same—Possession by seller of unstamped cigarettes deemed evidence of violation. 
In the event any package of cigarettes is found in the possession of a seller without the proper stamps being affixed thereto or without authorized printed markings of a meter machine thereon, and the seller shall be unable to submit evidence establishing that the seller received such package within the immediately preceding forty-eight (48) hours and that the seller has not offered the same for sale, the presumption shall be that such package is being kept by such seller in violation of the provisions of this article, and shall subject the seller to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 658, § 12; Ord. No. 1259, § 12; Ord. No. 1364, § 12; Code 1961, § 16-95)  
Sec. 40-169. - Same—Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and such conviction and payment of fine shall not relieve any such person from the payment of any tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Each violation of or noncompliance with any of the provisions of this article shall be and constitute a separate offense and shall subject every person convicted thereof to the penalties prescribed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 658, §§ 16, 17; Ord. No. 1259, §§ 16, 17; Ord. No. 1364, §§ 16, 17; Code 1961, § 16-96)  
Secs. 40-170—40-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - RECORDATION TAX 
 
Sec. 40-180. - Imposed. 
Pursuant to the authority of Sections 58.1-814 and 58.1-3800 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, and in addition to all other taxes, there is hereby imposed a recordation tax on each taxable instrument recorded in the city, in the amount of one-third ( 1/3 ) of the amount of the state recordation tax collectible for the state imposed by Section 58.1-801, paragraph (a), of the Code of Virginia, excepting such instruments as are exempted by Sections 58.1-814 and 58.1-3800 et seq. of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 1; Ord. No. 258; Ord. No. 1077; Code 1961, § 16-61)  
Sec. 40-181. - Collection. 
The tax imposed by section 40-180 shall be collected by the clerk of the circuit court for the city, and paid monthly to the treasurer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 40, § 1; Ord. No. 258; Ord. No. 1077; Code 1961, § 16-61)  
Secs. 40-182—40-189. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - TAX ON FOOD AND BEVERAGES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4097-90, adopted Aug. 28, 1990, amended Art. XI to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. XI pertained to tax on meals sold by restaurants and derived from Ord. No. 2547-79; Ord. No. 2556-79; Ord. No. 2584-79; Ord. No. 2804-81; Ord. No. 3059-83; Ord. No. 3725-88, § 1; Ord. No. 3931-89, § 1; Ord. No. 3933-89 and Ord. No. 4056-90, § 1. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
Sec. 40-190. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Caterer. A person who furnishes food, beverages or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
(2)  City treasurer. The treasurer of the City of Newport News and any of his duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees or agents. 
(3)  Commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner of the revenue of the City of Newport News, and any of his duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees or agents. 
(4)  Food and beverages. All food, food products, any beverage(s), including alcoholic beverage(s), or any combination thereof, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(5)  Person. Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership or any group of individuals acting as a unit. 
(6)  Purchaser. Any person who purchases food and beverages in or from a food establishment or from a caterer. 
(7)  Food establishment. Any place in or from which food and beverages, are packaged, prepared, sold or distributed in the city, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or beverages are sold for immediate consumption. 
(8)  Seller. Any person who sells food and beverages in or from a food establishment or as a caterer. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90; Ord. No. 5134-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5324-99; Ord. No. 5491-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-191. - Amount and levy. 
There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, in addition to all other taxes, fees and charges of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, a tax upon all food and beverages, purchased in the city in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, such tax to be at a rate of seven and one-half (7.5) percent on the total amount charged by the seller for the food or beverage. In the computation of this tax any fraction of one-half (0.5) cent or more shall be treated as one cent ($0.01). 
(Ord. No. 4097-90; Ord. No. 5324-99; Ord. No. 5460-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5491-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5786-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6867-12, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6867-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Sec. 40-191.1. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed by section 40-191 shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Factory-prepackaged donuts, nabs, chips, cookies, ice cream, crackers and items of essentially the same nature; 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g. a whole cake, a whole pie, a gallon of ice cream, etc.); a bulk sale shall not include any food and beverages that is catered or delivered or prepared for carry out by a food establishment for off-premises consumption; 
(3)  Beverages sold in factory sealed containers. 
(4)  Any food and beverages purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the food stamp program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Program for Women, Infants and Children. 
(5)  Any food and beverages purchased for home consumption as defined in the Federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C., § 2012, as amended, except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items, whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the Federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and non-factory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect the provisions set forth in subparagraph (c)(3), (4) and (5) below. 
(b)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(c)  The tax imposed by section 40-191 on food and beverages shall not be levied on food and beverages sold or provided by: 
(1)  Food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or colleges or universities to their students or employees. 
(3)  For use or consumption by and which is paid for directly by the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Hospitals, medical clinics, convalescent homes, nursing homes, homes for the aged, infirm or handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facilities to patients or residents thereof. 
(5)  Public or private non-profit charitable organizations or establishments to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Private establishments that contract with the appropriate agency of the Commonwealth to offer food, food products, or beverages for immediate consumption at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped, or needy persons in their homes or at central locations 
(7)  Volunteer fire and rescue departments, non-profit educational, charitable or benevolent organizations, churches, or religious bodies as fund raising activities sold on an occasional basis, not exceeding three (3) times per calendar year, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organizations exclusively for non-profit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(8)  Vending machines. 
(9)  Churches that serve meals for their members as a regular part of their religious observances. 
(10)  Age-restricted apartment complexes or residences with restaurants, not open to the public, where meals are served and fees are charged for such food and beverages and are included in rental fees. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90; Ord. No. 5134-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5491-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6610-09, § 1) 
Note— Ord. No. 6610-09, § 2, provides for an effective date of July 1, 2009.  
Sec. 40-192. - Same—Collection. 
The tax levied by section 40-191, in each and every case, shall be collected by the seller from the purchaser at the time that the charge for the food and beverages shall be due and payable, whether such payment shall be made in cash or on credit by means of a credit card or otherwise. The seller shall separately state the amount of the tax and add such tax to the amount charged for the food and beverages, and the tax shall be paid to the city by the seller as hereinafter provided. No blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the visually handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90; Ord. No. 5491-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-193. - Collections held in trust. 
All money collected as taxes under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the seller collecting the same until remitted to the city as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90)  
Sec. 40-193.1. - Deduction allowed for seller. 
For the purpose of compensating a seller for accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this chapter, such seller shall be allowed three (3) percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction in submitting his return and paying the amount due by him, provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90)  
Sec. 40-194. - Reports and remittances. 
Every seller shall make a report for each calendar month, showing the amount of food and beverage charges collected and the tax required to be collected, upon such forms setting forth such other information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require and shall deliver such report to the commissioner of revenue with remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the twentieth day of the calendar month following the month being reported. The tax required to be collected shall be computed by the seller at the rate set forth in section 40-191 on the total amount of food and beverage charges collected for the calendar month and remitted to the commissioner of the revenue in that amount. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the commissioner of revenue shall allow reports and remittances to be made quarterly by any person collecting the tax when the person has established for a period of one (1) year that his monthly remittances are less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month following the close of the period. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90; Ord. No. 4873-96; Ord. No. 6252-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-195. - Gratuities and service charges. 
Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided, in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, which does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the selling price of the food and beverages, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, is not subject to the tax imposed by this article; however, any portion of such mandatory gratuity, tip or service charge that exceeds twenty (20) percent that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90; Ord. No. 6308-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-196. - Advertising payment or absorption of tax prohibited. 
No person shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that all or any part of a tax imposed under this article will be paid or absorbed by him or by anyone else, or that he or anyone else will relieve any purchaser of the payment of all or any part of such tax. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90)  
Sec. 40-197. - Penalty and interest for failure to remit taxes when due. 
If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the commissioner of revenue a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent for the first month the taxes are past due, and five (5) percent for each month thereafter, up to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00), but in no event shall the penalty exceed the amount of the tax assessable. In addition, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall be computed and collected upon the taxes and penalty beginning from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90; Ord. No. 5134-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6162-05; Ord. No. 6309-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-198. - Procedure upon failure or refusal to collect, etc., taxes. 
If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article or to make within the time provided in this article the reports and remittances required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax or to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax, penalty and interest provided for in this article and shall notify such person by registered mail at his last-known place of address of the amount of such tax, penalty and interest and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90)  
Sec. 40-199. - Preservation of records. 
It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the city the taxes imposed by the article to keep and to preserve for a period of five (5) years records showing all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The commissioner of the revenue or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90)  
Sec. 40-200. - Duty of person going out of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate and shall otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable; and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90)  
Sec. 40-201. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90; Ord. No. 5134-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5323-99)  
Sec. 40-202. - Duty of city treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall have the power and the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied hereunder and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury for the city. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90)  
Sec. 40-202.1. - Duties of commissioner of the revenue. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a food establishment in the city, liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the reports or remittances required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90; Ord. No. 5324-99)  
Sec. 40-203. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are hereby declared severable. If any part, section, subsection, provision, sentence, clause or phrase, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason judged unconstitutional or invalid, the remainder of the article shall remain in full force and effect and its validity shall not be impaired, it being the legislative intent now hereby declared that this article would have been adopted even if such invalid matter has not been included in it, or if such invalid application had not been made. 
(Ord. No. 4097-90)  
Secs. 40-204—40-209. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3885-89, adopted June 14, 1989, amended Art XII to read as herein set out in §§ 40-210—40-216, 40-220—40-220.7. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. XII, §§ 40-210—40-215, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 3335-85, § 1. 
State Law reference— Tangible personal property taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3500 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 40-210. - Definition. 
For the purpose of and as used in this article, the words "personal property" shall be defined as and include all tangible personal property, machinery and tools, merchants capital, equalized and unequalized personal property of public service corporations, including automobiles and trucks of public service corporations, mobile homes and boats which are subject to local taxation by the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89)  
Sec. 40-211. - Assessment date. 
For the calendar year beginning January 1, 1986, and ending December 31, 1986, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, all personal property shall be assessed as of January first of each calendar year, which date shall be known as the "effective date of assessment" or the "tax day." 
(Ord. No. 3885-89)  
Sec. 40-212. - When personal property tax due and payable. 
For the calendar year beginning January 1, 1986, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, all personal property taxes levied by the city shall be due and payable to the treasurer of the City of Newport News in two (2) installments. The first such installment shall be due and payable on or before the fifth day of June, and the second such installment shall be due and payable on or before the fifth day of December of the calendar year for which the tax is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89)  
Sec. 40-213. - Taxpayers to file returns. 
(a)  Every person owning any of the property mentioned in this article on January first of any year shall file a return thereof with, and on forms prescribed by, the commissioner of the revenue of the City of Newport News on or before February fifteenth of each such year. In the case of machinery and tools or any personal property used in a business, the return required hereby shall be filed on or before March first of each such year. 
(b)  Every person who acquired personal property subsequent to January first of any year shall file a return thereof with the commissioner of the revenue of the City of Newport News and tender the prorated amount of taxes due to the treasurer of the City of Newport News on or before the next personal property tax payment date, except that the tax on personal property purchased within thirty (30) days of personal property tax payment date shall not be due until the next subsequent personal property tax payment date. 
(c)  Every person who sells or otherwise transfers ownership or title to any personal property subsequent to January first of any year shall, within thirty (30) days thereof, report the sale or transfer to the treasurer of the City of Newport News in the event the said personal property was included on the taxpayer's personal property tax return. In the event that personal property was not included on the taxpayer's personal property tax return, the sale or transfer shall be reported to the commissioner of the revenue of the City of Newport News within thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89; Ord. No. 5381-00, § 1)  
Sec. 40-213.1. - Personal property returns—Motor vehicles and trailers. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 40-213(a), any person who has filed a personal property return for a motor vehicle or trailer, for which there has been no change in situs or status as hereinafter described, shall not be required to file another personal property return on such vehicle or trailer. The annual assessment and taxation of such motor vehicles and trailers shall be based on the most recent personal property return filed by the owner. 
(b)  The owner shall file a new or amended personal property return with the commissioner of the revenue, as provided under section 40-213, when any of the following events occur: 
(1)  A change in ownership due to purchase, acquisition, sale, trade or disposal. 
(2)  A change in the name or address of the person or persons owning or leasing the motor vehicle or trailer. 
(3)  A change in the use of the motor vehicle or trailer from personal to business use or vice versa. 
(4)  Any event or occurrence which causes a motor vehicle or trailer to acquire or lose situs for taxation. 
(5)  Any other change affecting the assessment or levy of personal property tax on the motor vehicle or trailer for which a return was previously filed. 
The new or amended personal property return shall be filed with the commissioner of the revenue within thirty (30) days of a change in situs or other triggering event identified herein. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the commissioner of the revenue from assessing taxable personal property in accordance with this chapter and Title 58.1, Chapter 35, of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 6436-07)  
Sec. 40-214. - Tax bills. 
The treasurer of the City of Newport News shall send to each taxpayer assessed with personal property taxes a bill or bills indicating the amount of personal property taxes owed by each taxpayer. The bill or bills for personal property taxes due on June fifth shall be sent by United States mail to each taxpayer not later than May twenty-second of each year, and the bill or bills for personal property taxes due on December fifth shall be sent by United States mail to each taxpayer not later than November twenty-first of each year. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89; Ord. No. 5606-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-215. - When taxes received; penalty and interest for late payment. 
(a)  Treasurer to receive taxes. The treasurer of the City of Newport News shall collect personal property taxes and continue to collect the amount due and payable for the semiannual installment payments, up to and including the due date as set out in this article, without penalty or interest thereon. 
(b)  Penalty for failure to pay installments when due. Any person failing to remit the installment payments of personal property taxes on or before the due dates as set out in this article shall incur a penalty thereon of ten (10) percent, which said penalty shall be added to the amount of taxes due from such taxpayer and shall be collected and accounted for by the treasurer of the City of Newport News. 
(c)  Interest on taxes and penalties not paid when due. There shall be interest charged at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the first day of the month following the month in which such taxes are due, and such interest shall be collected and accounted for by the treasurer of the City of Newport News upon the taxes due and any penalties thereon. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89; Ord. No. 3966-89)  
Sec. 40-216. - Proration of certain personal property taxes. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 1986 and ending on December 31, 1986, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, each and every motor vehicle, trailer, boat, and mobile home which acquires a situs within the City of Newport News after the tax day or situs day of January first of each year, shall be taxed for the balance of the tax year. Such tax shall be prorated on a monthly basis, and for the purposes of proration, a period of more than one-half (½) of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half (½) of a month shall not be counted; except that such tax on mobile homes shall be prorated on a quarterly basis, and for the purposes of proration, a period of forty-five (45) days or more shall be counted as a full quarter and a period of less than forty-five (45) days shall not be counted. 
(b)  When any person, after the tax day or situs day, acquires a motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or mobile home with a situs in Newport News, the tax shall be assessed on the motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or mobile home as provided above for that portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or mobile home, and it has a situs within Newport News. When any person sells or otherwise transfers ownership or title to a motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or mobile home having a situs in Newport News after the tax day or situs day, the tax thereon shall be relieved and prorated on a monthly or quarterly basis as provided above, and the appropriate amount of any tax already paid shall be (i) refunded, or (ii) credited against the tax due on any motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer or boat owned by the taxpayer during the same tax year. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89; Ord. No. 5817-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5833-02, § 1)  
Sec. 40-217. - Personal property tax relief; amount of reimbursement. 
(a)  The amount of personal property tax reimbursements to taxpayers beginning with the calendar tax year 2006 which are required by the provisions of the Virginia Personal Property Tax Relief Act of 1998 (PPTRA), as amended; the provisions of Section 58.1-3523, et seq. of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended; and subject to the limitations stated therein, shall be: 
(1)  One hundred (100) percent of the reimbursable dollar amount for qualifying personal use vehicles used for nonbusiness purposes with a value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less; and 
(2)  The reimbursable dollar amount for qualifying personal use vehicles with a value of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be based on the application of the remaining PPTRA reimbursement from the Commonwealth of Virginia to the projected personal property tax book value for each tax year. 
(b)  Pursuant to authority conferred in Item 503.D of the Commonwealth of Virginia 2005 Appropriations Act, the city treasurer is authorized to issue a supplemental personal property tax bill, in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of tax due without regard to any former entitlement to the state's PPTRA relief, plus applicable penalties and interest, to any taxpayer whose taxes with respect to a qualifying vehicle for tax year 2005, or any prior tax year, remain unpaid on September 1, 2006, or such date as state funds for reimbursement of the state's share of such bill have become unavailable, whichever earlier occurs. 
(c)  Penalty and interest with respect to bills issued pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be computed on the entire amount of tax owed. Interest shall be computed at the rate provided in section 40-215 from the original due date of the tax. 
(d)  Reimbursable dollar amount means the value of a qualifying personal use vehicle up to the first twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) of value multiplied by the effective annual personal property tax rate. 
(e)  To the extent provisions of this section may conflict with any prior ordinance or provision of the city code, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 6171-05, § 1)  
Secs. 40-218—40-219. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TAX LEVY AND RATES 
 
Sec. 40-220. - Generally. 
The tangible personal property tax levy and rates shall be as prescribed in this division. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89)  
Sec. 40-220.1. - General personal property tax; levied; amount. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2006, and ending on December 31, 2006, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on tangible personal property (except household tangible personal property) and other property segregated to and made subject to taxation by the city except as is otherwise specially taxed or exempted from taxation by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or by ordinance of the City of Newport News, Virginia, shall be at the rate of four dollars and twenty-five cents ($4.25) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(b)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2013, and ending on December 31, 2013, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on tangible personal property (except household tangible personal property) and other property segregated to and made subject to taxation by the city except as is otherwise specially taxed or exempted from taxation by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or by ordinance of the City of Newport News, Virginia, shall be at the rate of four dollars and fifty cents ($4.50) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89; Ord. No. 4725-95, § 1; Ord. No. 6120-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6865-12, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6865-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Sec. 40-220.2. - Tax on machinery and tools; levied; amount; idle machinery and tools. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2000, and ending December 31, 2000, and for the calendar year beginning January 1, 2001 and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be levied a tax on machinery and tools used in manufacturing, mining, processing or reprocessing, radio or television broadcasting, dairy, drycleaning or laundry business by any person, firm or corporation in the City of Newport News, Virginia, as follows: 
(1)  For the period beginning January 1, 2000, and ending on June 30, 2000, the tax rate shall be three dollars ($3.00) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, prorated for the six-month period. 
(2)  For the period beginning July 1, 2000, and ending on December 31, 2000, the tax rate shall be three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(3)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2001, and ending on December 31, 2001, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax rate shall be three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(4)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2008, and ending on December 31, 2008, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax rate shall be three dollars and seventy-five cents ($3.75) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  Idle machinery and tools as herein defined are not subject to the tax levied in subsection (a) above, but are taxable by the Commonwealth as capital under Section 58.1-1101 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(1)  "Idle machinery and tools" means machinery and tools that (i)(a) have been discontinued in use continuously for at least one year prior to any tax day or (b) on and after January 1, 2007, and have been specifically identified in writing by the taxpayer to the commissioner of the revenue, on or before April 1 of such year, as machinery and tools that the taxpayer intends to withdraw from service not later than the next succeeding tax day and (ii) are not in use on the tax day and no reasonable prospect exists that such machinery and tools will be returned to use during the tax year. 
(2)  In the event that any machinery and tools taken out of use subsequent to January 1, 2007, are returned to use after having been previously identified or previously classified as idle machinery and tools pursuant to clause (i)(b) of subsection (b)(1), the taxpayer shall identify such machinery and tools to the commissioner of the revenue in writing on or before the next return due date without extension, and such machinery and tools shall be subject to tax in accordance with the procedures provided in Section 58.1-3903 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, in the same manner as if such machinery and tools had been in use on the tax day of the year in which such return to use occurs. Any interest otherwise payable pursuant to applicable law or ordinance shall apply to taxes imposed pursuant to this subsection and paid after the due date, without regard to the fault of the taxpayer or lack thereof. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 58.1-3903 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, if the taxpayer has provided timely written notice of return to use in accordance with the provisions of this subsection, no penalty shall be levied with respect to any tax liability arising as a result of the return to use of machinery and tools classified as idle and actually idle prior to such return to use. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89; Ord. No. 5459-00; Ord. No. 6369-07, § 1)  
Sec. 40-220.3. - Mobile home tax; levied; amount. 
For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2002, and for the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2003, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, as follows: 
(1)  For the period beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on June 30, 2002, the tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.1-1(38) of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be, at the rate of one dollar and twenty-four cents ($1.24) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(2)  For the period beginning on July 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2002, unless changed, the tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-seven cents ($1.27) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(3)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2003, and ending on December 31, 2003, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-seven cents ($1.27) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(4)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2006, and ending on December 31, 2006, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-four cents ($1.24) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(5)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2007, and ending December 31, 2007, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty cents ($1.20) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(6)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2008, and ending December 31, 2008, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be at the rate of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(7)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2009, and ending December 31, 2009, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be at the rate of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(8)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2010, and ending December 31, 2010, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be at the rate of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(9)  For the period beginning on July 1, 2013, and ending on December 31, 2013, unless changed, the tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(10)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2014, and ending December 31, 2014, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all vehicles without motive power, used or designed to be used as mobile homes as defined in section 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89; Ord. No. 4460-93, § 1; Ord. No. 5282-99; Ord. No. 5489-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5784-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6120-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6241-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6360-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6482-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6582-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6958-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6958-13, § 1, adopted May 14, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2013.  
Sec. 40-220.4. - Tax on aircraft, automobiles and trucks of public service corporations; levied; amount. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2006, and ending on December 31, 2006, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all automobiles and trucks of public service corporations in the City of Newport News, and other property segregated to and made subject to taxation by the city except as is otherwise specially taxed or exempted from taxation by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or by ordinance of the City of Newport News, Virginia, shall be at the rate of four dollars and twenty-five cents ($4.25) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value thereof. 
(b)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2013, and ending on December 31, 2013, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all automobiles and trucks of public service corporations in the City of Newport News, and other property segregated to and made subject to taxation by the city except as is otherwise specially taxed or exempted from taxation by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or by ordinance of the City of Newport News, Virginia, shall be at the rate of four dollars and fifty cents ($4.50) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value thereof. 
(c)  For the period beginning on July 1, 1999 and ending on December 31, 1999, and for the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2000 and ending on December 31, 2000, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all aircraft of public service corporations in the City of Newport News, Virginia at the rate of two dollars and ten cents ($2.10) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value thereof. 
(d)  For the period beginning on January 1, 2016 and ending on December 31, 2016, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on all aircraft of public service corporations in the City of Newport News, Virginia at the rate of fifty cents ($0.50) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89; Ord. No. 4725-95, § 1; Ord. No. 5325-99, § 1; Ord. No. 6120-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6866-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7226-15, § 1)  
Sec. 40-220.5. - Tax on personal property of public service corporations (except aircraft, automobiles and trucks); levied; amount. 
For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2002, and for the calendar year beginning on January 1,2003, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be and hereby is levied a tax on all taxable tangible personal property of public service corporations, except automobiles and trucks, in the City of Newport News, Virginia, as follows: 
(1)  For the period beginning on January 1, 2002, and ending on June 30, 2002, the tax on all taxable tangible personal property of public service corporations, except automobiles and trucks, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-four cents ($1.24) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(2)  For the period beginning on July 1, 2002, and ending on December 31, 2002, unless changed, the tax on all tangible personal property of public service corporations, except aircraft, automobiles and trucks, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-seven cents ($1.27) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(3)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2003, and ending on December 31, 2003, and each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, by the tax on all taxable tangible personal property of public service corporations, except aircraft, automobiles and trucks, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-seven cents ($1.27) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(4)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2006, and ending on December 31, 2006, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all tangible personal property of public service corporations, except aircraft, automobiles and trucks, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-four cents ($1.24) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(5)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2007, and ending December 31, 2007, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all tangible personal property of public service corporations, except aircraft, automobiles and trucks shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty cents ($1.20) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(6)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2008, and ending December 31, 2008, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all tangible personal property of public service corporations, except aircraft, automobiles and trucks shall be at the rate of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(7)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2009, and ending December 31, 2009, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all tangible personal property of public service corporations, except aircraft, automobiles and trucks shall be at the rate of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(8)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2010, and ending December 31, 2010, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all tangible personal property of public service corporations, except aircraft, automobiles and trucks shall be at the rate of one dollar and ten cents ($1.10) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(9)  For the period beginning on July 1, 2013, and ending on December 31, 2013, unless changed, the tax on all tangible personal property of public service corporations, except aircraft, automobiles and trucks, shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof, pro-rated for the six-month period. 
(10)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2014, and ending December 31, 2014, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all tangible personal property of public service corporations, except aircraft, automobiles and trucks shall be at the rate of one dollar and twenty-two cents ($1.22) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3885-85; Ord. No. 4460-93, § 1; Ord. No. 5283-99; Ord. No. 5325-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5785-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6120-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6241-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6360-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6482-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6582-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6958-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6958-13, § 1, adopted May 14, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2013.  
Sec. 40-220.6. - Tax on boats and watercraft; levied; amount. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2018, and ending on December 31, 2018, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on all boats and/or watercraft in the City of Newport News, Virginia, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Boats or watercraft weighing five (5) tons or more, not used solely for business purposes, shall be taxed at the rate of ninety cents ($0.90) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(2)  Boats or watercraft weighing less [than] five (5) tons, not used solely for business purposes, shall be taxed at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(3)  Privately owned pleasure boats and watercraft eighteen (18) feet and over used for recreational purposes only shall be taxed at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(4)  Privately owned pleasure boats and watercraft, motorized and under eighteen (18) feet used for recreational purposes only shall be taxed at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) on every hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(5)  Privately owned pleasure boats and watercraft, non-motorized and under eighteen (18) feet, used for recreational purposes only shall be taxed at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) on every hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(6)  Boats or watercraft weighing less than five (5) tons, used for business purposes only shall be taxed at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(7)  Boats or watercraft weighing five (5) tons or more used for business purposes only shall be taxed [at] the rate of ninety cents ($0.90) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(8)  Commercial fishing vessels and property permanently attached to such vessels shall be taxed at the rate of ninety cents ($0.90) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3885-89; Ord. No. 7423-17, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 40-220.7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7423-17, § 2 adopted October 24, 2017, repealed § 40-220.7, which pertained to tax on boats or watercraft five tons or over; levied; amount; and for the calendar year beginning January 1, 1990, and derived from Ord. No. 3885-89.  
Sec. 40-220.8. - Tax on motor vehicles specially equipped to provide transportation for physically handicapped individuals. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 1994, and ending on December 31, 1994, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be and hereby is levied a tax on all motor vehicles that are specially equipped to provide transportation for physically handicapped individuals, at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(b)  When used in this section, the phrase "motor vehicles specially equipped to provide transportation for physically handicapped individuals," shall refer to any motor vehicle adapted with one (1) or more of the following devices: 
(1)  Power door operators. 
(2)  Hand controls. 
(3)  Lifts or ramps for wheelchairs or scooters. 
(4)  Special restraints systems for wheelchairs. 
(5)  Raised door and roof to allow wheelchair entry. 
(6)  Special steering devices, such as, but not limited, to, "tri-pins" or "V grips." 
(7)  Driving aids such as, but not limited to, touchpads, low effort power steering, power steering backup, power parking brake or electronic directional signals 
(8)  Roll cages. 
In addition to the above listed criteria, to qualify as a motor vehicle specially equipped to provide transportation for physically handicapped vehicles, said motor vehicle must be licensed pursuant to § 46.2-731 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 4297-91; Ord. No. 4553-93, § 1)  
Sec. 40-220.9. - Tax on motor vehicles owned and regularly used by disabled veterans; levied; amount. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 1994, and ending December 31, 1994, and for the calendar beginning January 1, 1995, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on not more than one (1) motor vehicle owned and regularly used by any disabled veteran, at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(b)  When used in this section, the phrase "disabled veteran" shall mean any veteran who has either lost, or lost the use of, one (1) or both legs, or an arm or a hand, or who is blind, or who is permanently and totally disabled as certified by the department of veterans' affairs. In order to qualify under this section, the disabled veteran must provide a written statement to the commissioner of revenue from the department of veterans' affairs that the disabled veteran has been so designated or classified by the department of veterans' affairs as to meet the requirements of the section, and that his disability is service connected. For the purpose of this section, a person is blind if he meets the provisions of § 46.2-739 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  A qualifying disabled veteran may have no more than one (1) motor vehicle assessed pursuant to this section. All other motor vehicles owned by said disabled veteran shall be assessed pursuant to section 40-220.1. 
(Ord. No. 4337-92; Ord. No. 4563-94)  
Sec. 40-220.10. - Tax on privately owned motor homes, camping trailers used for recreational purposes only and privately owned horse trailers; levied; amount. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2006, and ending on December 31, 2006, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be, and hereby is, levied a tax on privately owned motor homes and camping trailers, used for recreational purposes only, as defined herein and privately owned trailers that are designed and used for the transportation of horses, as follows: 
For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2006, and ending on December 31, 2006, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, the tax on privately owned motor homes and camping trailers, as defined herein, and privately owned trailers that are designed and used for the transportation of horses, shall be at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per year on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Camping trailer means every vehicle, which has collapsible sides and contains sleeping quarters but may or may not contain bathing and cooking facilities and is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Motor home means every private motor vehicle with normal seating capacity of not more than ten (10) persons, including the driver, designed primarily for use as living quarters for human beings. 
(Ord. No. 4471-93, § 1; Ord. No. 5489-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6170-05, § 1)  
Sec. 40-220.11. - Tax on aircraft; levied; amount. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 1998, and ending on December 31, 1998, and for the calendar year beginning January 1, 1999, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be and hereby is, levied a tax on all aircraft in the City of Newport News, Virginia, at the rate of two dollars and ten cents ($2.10) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value thereof. 
(b)  For the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2016, and ending on December 31, 2016, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, there shall be and hereby is, levied a tax on all aircraft in the City of Newport News, Virginia, at the rate of fifty cents ($0.50) on every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 5025-97; Ord. No. 7223-15)  
ARTICLE XIII. - CORRECTION OF ASSESSMENTS AND REFUNDS 
 
Sec. 40-221. - Application for correction. 
Any person assessed by the commissioner of the revenue, or other official performing duties imposed on the commissioner of the revenue by Title 58.1 of the State Code, as amended, with respect to local taxes on tangible personal property, machinery and tools, local business, professional and occupational licenses, transient occupancies, daily rentals, food and beverages and admissions, or by the assessor with respect to local taxes on real property, who is aggrieved by any such assessment, may within three (3) years from the last day of the tax year for which such assessment is made, or within one (1) year from the date of assessment, whichever is later, apply in writing to the official who made the assessment for a correction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3349-85, § 1; Ord. No. 3930-89, § 1; Ord. No. 3948-89, § 1; Ord. No. 4277-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4394-92; Ord. No. 5326-99)  
Sec. 40-222. - Correction of assessment. 
If such assessing official is satisfied that he has erroneously assessed such applicant with any such tax, he shall correct such assessment and certify a copy of the correction to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 3349-85, § 1)  
Sec. 40-223. - Exoneration or refund of taxes. 
If the assessment exceeds the proper amount, the assessing official shall exonerate the applicant from the payment of so much as is erroneously charged if not already paid into the treasury of the city. If the taxes have been paid, the city treasurer shall refund to the applicant the amount erroneously paid. 
(Ord. No. 3349-85, § 1)  
Sec. 40-224. - Interest on the refunds of assessed and paid taxes and fees. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, erroneously assessed taxes and fees on real property, tangible personal property; machinery and tools; business, professional, and occupational licenses; food and beverages; transient occupancies; admissions and daily rentals, which have been paid by the taxpayer, shall be refunded to the taxpayer with interest at the same rate as would have been charged if such taxes were delinquent. 
(b)  No interest shall be paid on such refunds of erroneously assessed taxes and fees on real property; tangible personal property; machinery and tools; food and beverages; transient occupancies; admissions and daily rentals if (i) the amount of the refund is ten dollars ($10.00) or less, or (ii) the refund is the result of proration pursuant to section 40-216 of this Code, as amended, or § 58.1-3516 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, "erroneously assessed taxes and fees" shall not include erroneous assessments caused solely by a person failing to file a return or filing an inaccurate return, regardless of the reason; nor shall it include refunds due to corrections of assessments due to sale, transfer or other disposition of property. 
(Ord. No. 3349-85, § 1; Ord. No. 3992-90; Ord. No. 4912-96; Ord. No. 5326-99; Ord. No. 5515-00)  
Sec. 40-225. - Limitation on refunds. 
No refund shall be made in any case when application therefor was made more than three (3) years after the last day of the tax year for which such taxes were assessed within one (1) year from the date of assessment, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 3349-85, § 1; Ord. No. 3930-89, § 1; Ord. No. 3948-89, § 1; Ord. No. 4277-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4394-92)  
Sec. 40-226. - Appeals and rulings of certain local business taxes; definitions. 
Definitions. For purposes of sections 40-226.1 through 40-226.10: 
Amount in dispute when used with respect to taxes due or assessed, means the amount specifically identified in the administrative appeal or application for judicial review as disputed by the party filing such appeal or application. 
Frivolous means a finding, based upon specific facts, that the party asserting the appeal is unlikely to prevail upon the merits because the appeal is (i) not well grounded in fact; (ii) not warranted by existing law or a good faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law; (iii) interposed for an improper purpose, such as to harass, to cause unnecessary delay in the payment of tax or a refund, or to create needless cost from the litigation; or (iv) otherwise frivolous. 
Jeopardized by delay means a finding, based upon specific facts, that a taxpayer desires to (i) depart quickly from the city, (ii) remove his property therefrom, (iii) conceal himself or his property, or (iv) do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
Local business tax means machinery and tools tax, business tangible personal property tax (including, without limitation, computer equipment), and a consumer utility tax where the amount in dispute exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) other than the tax collected on mobile telecommunication service as defined in State Code § 58.1-3812. 
Local mobile property tax means the tangible personal property tax on airplanes, boats, campers, recreational vehicles, and trailers. 
Tax commissioner means the Chief Executive Officer of the Virginia Department of Taxation or his delegate. 
Taxpayer includes a business required to collect a local consumer utility tax to the extent that the business is charged or assessed with such tax. 
(Ord. No. 5382-00; Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.1. - Administrative appeal to commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. 
(a)  Any person assessed with any local mobile property tax or local business tax as defined in section 40-226 may appeal such assessment within 
one (1) year from the last day of the tax year for which such assessment is made, or within one (1) year from the date of such assessment, whichever is later, to the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. 
(b)  The appeal shall be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, the tax period covered by the challenged assessment, the amount in dispute, the remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, an audit or further audits, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the application. 
(d)  The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. 
(e)  The commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a written determination to the taxpayer setting forth the facts and arguments in support of his decision within ninety (90) days after such appeal is filed. Such determination shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to file an administrative appeal of the determination to the tax commissioner pursuant to section 40-226.3. 
(f)  Any taxpayer whose administrative appeal to the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official pursuant to this subsection has been pending for more than one (1) year without the issuance of a final determination may, upon not less than thirty (30) days' written notice to the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official, elect to treat the application as denied and appeal the assessment to the tax commissioner in accordance with the provisions of section 40-226.3. The tax commissioner shall not consider an appeal filed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection if he finds that the absence of a final determination on the part of the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official was caused by the willful failure or refusal of the taxpayer to provide information requested and reasonably needed by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official to make his determination. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.2. - Suspension of collection activity pending administrative appeal to commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. 
Provided a timely and complete appeal is filed pursuant to section 40-226.1, collection activity shall be suspended by the treasurer or other official responsible for the collection of such tax until a final determination is issued by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official, unless the treasurer or other collection official (i) determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay as defined in section 40-226; or (ii) is advised by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. Whenever an assessment of a local business tax by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalties charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest on any refund shall be paid as provided in section 40-224. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.3. - Administrative appeal to tax commissioner. 
(a)  Any person whose administrative appeal to the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official pursuant to section 40-226.1 has been denied in whole or in part may appeal the determination of the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official by filing an appeal with the tax commissioner and serving a copy of the appeal upon the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official within ninety (90) days of the date of the determination of the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. The appeal shall include a copy of the written determination of the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official that is challenged, together with a statement of the facts and grounds upon which the taxpayer relies. 
(b)  The tax commissioner shall determine whether he has jurisdiction to hear the appeal within thirty (30) days of receipt of the taxpayer's appeal. 
(c)  If the tax commissioner determines that he has jurisdiction, he shall provide the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official with an opportunity to respond to the appeal and permit the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official to participate in the proceedings. The tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within ninety (90) days of receipt of the taxpayer's appeal, unless the taxpayer and the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. Such longer period of time shall not exceed sixty (60) days, and the tax commissioner shall notify the affected parties of the reason necessitating the longer period of time. If the tax commissioner is unable to issue a determination within the sixty-day extension period due to the failure of an affected party to supply the tax commissioner with necessary information, the tax commissioner shall certify this fact in writing prior to the expiration of the extension period. The tax commissioner shall then issue his determination within sixty (60) days of receipt of such necessary information. 
(d)  The appeal shall be treated as an application pursuant to State Code § 58.1-1821, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment of such property pursuant to State Code § 58.1-1822, if the taxpayer has met the burden of proof provided in State Code § 58.1-3987. 
(e)  The tax commissioner shall not make a determination regarding the valuation or the method of valuation of property subject to any local tax other than a local business tax. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.4. - Suspension of collection activity during administrative appeal to tax commissioner. 
On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under section 40-226.3, the treasurer or other official responsible for the collection of such tax shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the treasurer or other collection official (i) determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay as defined in section 40-226; or (ii) is advised by the commissioner or other assessing official that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. The requirement that collection activity be suspended shall cease unless an appeal pursuant to section 40-226.3 is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of the notice of intent to file such appeal. Interest shall accrue on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. Whenever an assessment of a local business tax by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalties charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest on any refund shall be paid as provided in section 40-224. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.5. - Implementation of determination of tax commissioner. 
Promptly upon receipt of a final determination of the tax commissioner, the commissioner of the revenue or other local assessing official shall take those steps necessary to calculate the amount of tax owed by or refund due to the taxpayer consistent with the tax commissioner's determination and shall provide that information to the taxpayer and to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
(a)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of tax due, the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall certify this amount to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a bill to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued, within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(b)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of refund due, the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall certify this amount to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a payment to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued, within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(c)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of tax due, or otherwise requires the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in the determination of a tax due that has not previously been paid in full, the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within sixty (60) days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall certify the new assessment to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a bill to the taxpayer for the amount due, together with interest accrued, within thirty (30) days of the date of the new assessment. 
(d)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of refund due, or otherwise requires the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in the determination of a refund of taxes previously paid, the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within sixty (60) days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall certify the new assessment to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a refund to the taxpayer for the amount of tax due, together with interest accrued, within thirty (30) days of the date of the new assessment. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.6. - Judicial review of determination of tax commissioner. 
Following the issuance of a final determination of the tax commissioner pursuant to section 40-226.3, the taxpayer or commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court for judicial review of the determination, or any part thereof, pursuant to section 40-227. In any such proceeding for judicial review of a determination of the tax commissioner, the burden shall be on the party challenging the determination of the tax commissioner, or any part thereof, to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous with respect to the part challenged. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.7. - Suspension of payment of disputed amount of tax due upon taxpayer's notice of intent to initiate judicial review. 
(a)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an application for judicial review, pursuant to section 40-227, of a determination of the tax commissioner pursuant to section 40-226.3, and upon payment of the amount of the tax that is not in dispute together with any penalty and interest then due with respect to such undisputed portion of the tax, the treasurer or other collection official shall further suspend collection activity while the court retains jurisdiction unless the court, upon appropriate motion after notice and an opportunity to be heard, determines that (i) the taxpayer's application for judicial review is frivolous, as defined in this section; (ii) collection would be jeopardized by delay, as defined in this section; or (iii) suspension of collection would cause substantial economic hardship to the locality. For purposes of determining whether substantial economic hardship to the locality would arise from a suspension of collection activity, the court shall consider the cumulative effect of then-pending appeals filed within the locality by different taxpayers that allege common claims or theories of relief. 
(b)  Upon a determination that the appeal is frivolous, that collection may be jeopardized by delay, or that suspension of collection would result in substantial economic hardship to the locality, the court may require the taxpayer to pay the amount in dispute or a portion thereof, or to provide surety for payment of the amount in dispute in a form acceptable to the court. 
(c)  No suspension of collection activity shall be required if the application for judicial review fails to identify with particularity the amount in dispute. 
(d)  The requirement that collection activity be suspended shall cease unless an application for judicial review pursuant to section 40-227 is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of the notice of intent to file such application. 
(e)  The suspension of collection activity authorized by this subdivision shall not be applicable to any appeal of a local business tax or local mobile property tax that is initiated by the direct filing of an action pursuant to section 40-227 without prior exhaustion of the appeals provided by sections 40-226.1 and 40-226.3. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.8. - Suspension of payment of disputed amount of refund due upon locality's notice of intent to initiate judicial review. 
(a)  Payment of any refund determined to be due pursuant to the determination of the tax commissioner shall be suspended if the locality assessing the tax serves upon the taxpayer, within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, a notice of intent to file an application for judicial review of the tax commissioner's determination pursuant to section 40-227 and pays the amount of the refund not in dispute, including tax and accrued interest. Payment of such refund shall remain suspended while the court retains jurisdiction unless the court, upon appropriate motion after notice and an opportunity to be heard, determines that the locality's application for judicial review is frivolous, as defined in this section. 
(b)  No suspension of refund activity shall be permitted if the locality's application for judicial review fails to identify with particularity the amount in dispute. 
(c)  The requirement that the obligation to make a refund be suspended shall cease unless an application for judicial review pursuant to section 40-227 is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of the notice of intent to file such application. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.9. - Rulings and advisory opinions. 
(a)  Written rulings from commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. Any taxpayer or authorized representative of a taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of a local mobile property tax or a local business tax to a specific situation from the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official. Any taxpayer requesting such a ruling shall provide all facts relevant to the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or the guidelines issued by the Virginia Department of Taxation upon which the ruling was based or (ii) the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any taxpayer who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(b)  Advisory opinions of the tax commissioner. The tax commissioner shall have the authority to issue advisory written opinions in specific cases as requested to interpret a local business tax and matters related to the administration thereof when an assessment of that tax is subject to appeal to the tax commissioner under this chapter. Opinions issued pursuant to this section shall not be applicable as an interpretation of any other tax law. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-226.10. - Record-keeping and audits. 
Every person who is assessable with a local mobile property tax or a local business tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the taxable years assessable and to enable the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official to ascertain the correct amount of tax assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official in order to allow him to establish whether the tax is due within this jurisdiction. The commissioner of the revenue or other assessing official shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the commissioner's or assessor's office upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 6254-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-227. - Application to court to correct erroneous assessments of local levies generally. 
(a)  Any person assessed with local taxes, aggrieved by any such assessment, may, unless otherwise specially provided by law, (i) within three (3) years from the last day of the tax year for which any such assessment is made, (ii) within one (1) year from the date of the assessment, or (iii) within one (1) year from the date of the tax commissioner's final determination under section 23-8.2 or section 40-226.3, or (iv) within one (1) year from the date of the final determination under section 40-221, whichever is later, apply for relief to the Circuit Court of the City of Newport News. The application shall be before the court when it is filed in the clerk's office. In such proceeding, except as may be provided by section 23-8.3 and section 40-226.6, the burden of proof shall be upon the taxpayer to show that the property in question is valued at more than its fair market value or that the assessment is not uniform in its application, or that the assessment is otherwise invalid or illegal, but it shall not be necessary for the taxpayer to show that intentional, systematic and willful discrimination has been made. The proceedings shall be conducted as an action at law before the court, sitting without a jury. The city attorney shall defend the application. 
(b)  In the event it comes or is brought to the attention of the commissioner of the revenue that the assessment of any tax is improper or is based on obvious error and should be corrected in order that the ends of justice may be served, and he is not able to correct it under this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall apply to the Newport News Circuit Court, in the manner herein provided for relief of the taxpayer. Such application may include a petition for relief for any of several taxpayers. 
(Ord. No. 5382-00; Ord. No. 6255-06, § 1)  
Secs. 40-228, 40-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMISSIONS TAX[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Article XIV, §§ 40-230—40-241, was created by § 1 of Ord. No. 3726-88, adopted May 12, 1988. Section 2 of the ordinance declared the provisions effected from and after July 1, 1988. 
Cross reference— Amusements, Ch. 5; use of armory auditorium, § 7-14 et seq.; bingo, § 18-20; parks, squares and recreational facilities, Ch. 29. 
 
Sec. 40-230. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Admission charge. The charge made for admission to any amusement or entertainment, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, including a charge made for season tickets, whether obtained by contributions or subscription, a cover charge or a charge made for the use of seats or tables, reserved or otherwise, and similar accommodations in the city. When a person is admitted free and a service charge is made, the service charge shall be considered a charge of admission. 
Place of amusement or entertainment. Any place in the city wherein or whereat any of the following are located, conducted, performed, exhibited and operated and for which an admission charge is made: circuses, carnivals, menageries, moving picture shows, fairs, shows and exhibitions of all kinds; dances, baseball, basketball, football, wrestling, boxing and sports of all kinds; swimming pools, concerts, and theatrical, vaudeville, dramatic, operatic and musical performances and performances similar thereto; lectures, talks, library readings and performances similar thereto; such attractions as merry-go-rounds, ferris wheels, roller coasters, leap-the-dips and the like; and all other public amusements, performances and exhibitions not specifically named herein. 
Sporting event. Organized league and tournament play of a game involving athletic activity pursuant to a set form and body of rules. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1; Ord. No. 4317-92; Ord. No. 5147-98, § 1)  
Sec. 40-231. - Establishment of classes for taxation purposes. 
In accordance with the Virginia Constitution and § 58.1-3817 of the Code of Virginia (1950, as amended), events to which admission is charged shall be divided into the following classes for the purpose of taxation. 
(1)  Admissions charged for attendance at any event, the gross receipts of which go wholly to charitable purpose or purposes. 
(2)  Admissions charged for attendance at public and private elementary, secondary, and college school-sponsored events, including events sponsored by school-recognized student organizations. 
(3)  Admissions charged for entry into museums, botanical or similar gardens, and zoos. 
(4)  Admissions charged to participants in order to participate in sporting events. 
(5)  All other admissions. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1; Ord. No. 3895-89)  
Sec. 40-232. - Levied; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied a tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of any admission charge to any event included within the class established in section 40-231(5). 
(b)  There shall be no tax on admission charges for any event included within the classes established in section 40-231(1), section 40-231(2), section 40-231(3) and section 40-231(4). 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1; Ord. No. 3895-89; Ord. No. 4317-92; Ord. No. 5147-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5447-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6960-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6960-13, § 1, adopted May 14, 2013, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2013.  
Sec. 40-233. - Federal tax excluded from amount paid for admission. 
The amount paid for admission on which the tax imposed by this article is based shall be the amount paid for admission, exclusive of any federal tax thereon. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1)  
Sec. 40-234. - Collection. 
Every person receiving any payment for admission to any place of amusement or entertainment on which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax from the person making an admission payment, at the time of the payment of such admission. If tickets or cards of admission are issued, the tax shall be collected at the time of the issuance of such tickets or cards. The taxes required to be collected hereunder shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until remitted as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1)  
Sec. 40-235. - Reports and remittances generally. 
The person collecting any tax imposed by this article shall make out a report, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of admission charges collected, exclusive of the federal tax thereon, and the tax from the admissions for which he is liable, and shall sign and deliver the same to the commissioner of revenue, with a remittance of such tax. Such report and remittance shall be made to the commissioner of revenue on or before the twentieth day of the calendar month following the month being reported. If the remittance is by check or money order, the same shall be made payable to the treasurer of the city. All remittances received hereunder, together with copies of the reports received hereunder, by the commissioner of revenue shall be turned over to the city treasurer within fifteen (15) days of their receipt. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the commissioner of revenue and the city treasurer shall allow reports and remittances to be made quarterly by any person collecting the tax when the person has established for a period of one (1) year that his monthly remittances are less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the month following the close of the period. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1; Ord. No. 4874-96)  
Sec. 40-236. - Reports, remittances and deposits by temporary or transitory places of amusement or entertainment. 
(a)  Whenever any place of amusement or entertainment of a temporary or transitory nature makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax levied by this article, the commissioner of revenue may require the report and remittance of such tax to be made on the day following its collection, or on the day following the conclusion of a series of performances or exhibitions, or at such other reasonable time or times as he shall determine, and failure to comply with any such requirement of the commissioner of revenue as to the report and remittance of the tax so required shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Before any temporary or transient place of amusement or entertainment mentioned in subsection (a) above shall begin operation, and before any license shall be issued therefor, if a license is required, the person operating the same shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum of money, to be estimated by the commissioner of revenue, sufficient to cover the tax required to be collected by such person under the provisions of this article, as security for the collection of such tax and payment thereof to the city. At the conclusion of such temporary or transient operation in the city, such person shall file with the commissioner of revenue the report required by this article and pay the tax collected to the city. Upon such report being filed and payment being made, the city treasurer shall refund the deposit made under this section. Should any such person fail to file such report and pay such tax collected within five (5) days from the termination of the operation of such amusement or entertainment, the commissioner of revenue may thereupon assess such person and such tax at the amount of such deposit and the city treasurer shall retain such deposit in full payment of the tax collected by and due the city by such person. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1)  
Sec. 40-237. - Collector's records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of two (2) years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city. The commissioner of revenue shall have the right to inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1)  
Sec. 40-238. - Duty of collector going out of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall quit business or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable to the city under this article shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1)  
Sec. 40-239. - Penalty and interest for late remittance. 
If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax for the first month the taxes are past due, and five (5) percent for each month thereafter, up to a maximum penalty of twenty-five (25) percent in the aggregate, with minimum penalty of ten dollars ($10.00), but in no event shall the penalty exceed the amount of the tax assessable. In addition, interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall be computed and collected upon the taxes and penalty beginning from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1; Ord. No. 6163-05; Ord. No. 6310-06, § 1)  
Sec. 40-240. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
(a)  If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed by this article or to make, within the prescribed time, any report and remittance required by this article, the commissioner of revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such person by mail of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties; and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. The commissioner of revenue shall notify the treasurer of the assessment of any tax and penalties under this section within five (5) days of the expiration of the ten-day payment period hereinabove provided. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a place of amusement in the city, liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make, within the time provided by this article, the report or remittances required in this article. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall have the power and the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied hereunder and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury for the city. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1)  
Sec. 40-241. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and each such violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction for such violation shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax, interest and penalties as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3726-88, § 1)  
Secs. 40-242—40-244. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY TAX[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6611-09, § 1, adopted June 23, 2009, effective July 1, 2009, changed the title of Art. XV from "Daily Rental Property Tax" to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 40-245. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Short-term rental property means all tangible personal property held for rental and owned by a person engaged in the short-term rental business except: 
(1)  Trailers as defined in § 46.2-100, Code of Virginia, 1950 as amended; and 
(2)  Other tangible personal property required to be licensed or registered with the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles, the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, or the Virginia Department of Aviation. 
(b)  Engaged in the short-term rental business. A person is engaged in the short-term rental business if: 
(1)  Not less than eighty (80) percent of the gross rental receipts of such business during the preceding year arose from transactions involving the rental of short-term rental property, other than heavy equipment property as defined in subdivision (2), for periods of ninety-two (92) consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessee; or 
(2)  Not less than sixty (60) percent of the gross rental receipts of such business during the preceding year arose from transactions involving the rental of heavy equipment property for periods of two hundred seventy (270) consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessee. For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "heavy equipment property" means rental property of an industry that is described under code 532412 or 532490 of the 2002 North American Industry Classification System as published by the United States Census Bureau, excluding office furniture, office equipment, and programmable computer equipment and peripherals as defined in § 58.1-3503 A 16 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  For purposes of determining whether a person is engaged in the short-term rental business as defined above, (i) a person is "affiliated" with the lessee of rental property if such person is an officer, director, partner, member, shareholder, parent or subsidiary of the lessee, or if such person and the lessee have any common ownership interest in excess of five (5) percent, (ii) any rental to a person affiliated with the lessee shall be treated as rental receipts but shall not qualify for purposes of the eighty (80) percent requirement of subdivision (1) or the sixty (60) percent requirement of subdivision (2), and (iii) any rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental, provided, however, that the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3887-89, § 1; Ord. No. 6611-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40-246. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied a tax upon short-term rental property in an amount of one (1) percent of the gross proceeds of any person engaged in the short-term rental business. Gross proceeds shall mean the total amount charged to each person for the rental of short-term rental property, excluding any state and local sales tax paid under the provisions of Chapter 6 of Title 58.1, Taxation, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. The imposition and collection of a short-term rental property tax shall be in lieu of taxation of such rental property as tangible business personal property in the same tax year. 
(Ord. No. 3887-89, § 1; Ord. No. 6611-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40-247. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Any person engaged in the short-term rental business shall collect the rental tax from the lessee of the short-term rental property at the time of the rental. The lessor of the short-term rental property shall transmit a quarterly return to the commissioner of the revenue indicating the gross, not later than the fifteenth day following the end of each calendar quarter, reporting the gross rental proceeds derived from the short-term rental business. The commissioner of the revenue shall assess the tax due, and the commissioner of the revenue shall collect the daily rental property tax pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. The short-term rental business shall pay the tax so assessed not later than the last day of the month following the end of the calendar quarter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, no tax shall be collected or assessed on: (1) rentals by the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the United States; or (2) any rental of durable medical equipment as defined in Subdivision 10 of § 58.1-609.10 of the Code. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue shall receive taxes in the following manner: 
(1)  Commissioner of the revenue to receive taxes. The commissioner of the revenue of the City of Newport News shall collect the daily rental property taxes and continue to collect the amount due and payable for the quarterly payments, up to and including the due date, without penalty or interest thereon. 
(2)  Failure to file return or remit payments; fraudulent return; civil penalties. Any person failing to remit the payments of daily rental property taxes on or before the due dates shall incur a penalty thereon of six (6) percent if the failure is for not more than one (1) month, with an additional six (6) percent for each additional month, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continues, not to exceed thirty (30) percent in the aggregate. In no case, however, shall the penalty be less than ten dollars ($10.00) and such minimum penalty shall apply whether or not any tax is due for the period for which such return was required. If such failure is due to providential or other good cause shown to the satisfaction of the commissioner of the revenue, such return with or without remittance may be accepted exclusive of penalties. In the case of a false or fraudulent return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, or in the case of a willful failure to file a return with the intent to defraud the city of any such tax, a specific penalty of fifty (50) percent of the amount of the proper tax shall be assessed. All penalties and interest imposed by this article shall be payable by the lessor and collectible by the commissioner of the revenue in the same manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed. 
(3)  Interest on taxes and penalties not paid when due. Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall be computed and collected from the lessor upon the taxes and penalty from the date such taxes and/or penalty were due. 
(Ord. No. 3887-89, § 1; Ord. No. 6441-07, § 1, eff. 1-1-08; Ord. No. 6611-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40-247.1. - Penalty for failure to file return or making false return. 
Any lessor subject to the provisions of this article willfully failing or refusing to file a return herein required to be made, or willfully failing or refusing to file a supplemental return or other data required by the commissioner of the revenue, or who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax hereby levied, or who makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund, or who willfully violates any other provision of this article, punishment for which is not otherwise herein provided, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 6441-07, § 1, eff. 1-1-08)  
Sec. 40-248. - Renter's certificate of registration. 
(a)  Every person engaging in the business of short-term rental of tangible personal property shall file an annual application for a certificate of registration with the commissioner of the revenue. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue and shall set forth the name under which the applicant operates or intends to operate the rental business, the location of the business and such other information as the commissioner may require. 
(b)  Each applicant shall sign the application as owner of the rental business. If the rental business is owned by an association, partnership, limited liability company or corporation, the application shall be signed by a member, partner, executive officer or other person specifically authorized by the association, partnership, limited liability company or corporation to sign. 
(c)  Upon approval of the application by the commissioner, a certificate of registration shall be issued. The certificate shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the place of business for which it is issued. 
(d)  The certificate is not assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and the place of business designated. 
(e)  A person who has not previously been engaged in the short-term rental business who applies for a certificate or registration pursuant to this section shall be eligible for registration upon his certification that he anticipates meeting the requirements of subdivision (1) or (2) of subsection (b) of section 40-245 above, designated by the applicant at the time of application, during the year for which registration is sought. 
(f)  In the event that the commissioner of the revenue makes a written determination that a rental business previously certified as a short-term rental business has failed to meet either of the tests set forth in section 40-245(b) during a preceding tax year, such business shall lose its certification as a short-term rental business and shall be subject to the business personal property tax with respect to all rental property for the tax year in which such certification is lost and any subsequent tax years until such time as the rental business obtains recertification. In the event that a rental business loses its certification as a short-term rental business pursuant to this subsection, such business shall not be required to refund to customers daily rental property taxes previously collected in good faith and shall not be subject to assessment for business personal property taxes with respect to rental property for tax years preceding the tax year in which the certification is lost unless the commissioner of the revenue makes a written determination that the business obtained its certification by knowingly making materially false statements in its application, in which case the commissioner may assess the taxpayer the amount of the difference between short-term rental property taxes remitted by such business during the period in which the taxpayer wrongfully held certification and the business personal property taxes that would have been due during such period but for the certification obtained by the making of the materially false statements. Any such assessment, and any determination not to certify or to decertify a rental business as a short-term rental business as defined in this section may be appealed pursuant to the procedures and requirements set forth in § 58.1-3983.1 of the Code of Virginia for appeals of local business taxes. 
(g)  A rental business that has been decertified pursuant to the provisions of subsection (f) shall be eligible for recertification for a subsequent tax year upon a showing that it met one (1) of the tests provided in section 40-245(b) for at least ten (10) months of operations during the present tax year. 
(Ord. No. 3887-89, § 1; Ord. No. 6611-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40-249. - Exemptions. 
All exemptions applicable in Chapter 6 of Title 58.1, Taxation, of the Code shall apply to the short-term rental property tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3887-89, § 1; Ord. No. 6611-09, § 1)  
Secs. 40-250—40-254. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - TAX ON PURCHASERS OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. No. 4239-91, adopted July 23, 1991, amended the effective date of Ord. No. 4199-91 from July 1, 1991 to August 1, 1991. 
 
Sec. 40-255. - Levies; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each and every purchaser of cable television service inside the corporate limits of the city, a tax in the amount of seven (7) percent of the charge for cable television service made by the seller thereof against the purchaser. 
(b)  Cable television service furnished in the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed a utility service. 
(Ord. No. 4199-91, § 1)  
Sec. 40-256. - Applicability generally. 
The tax imposed and levied under this article on purchasers with respect to cable television services shall apply to all charges made for cable television services, except any charge made for a remote control tuning device. 
(Ord. No. 4199-91, § 1)  
Sec. 40-257. - Exemptions. 
The United States of America, the State of Virginia and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of cable television service used by such governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 4199-91, § 1)  
Sec. 40-258. - Duty of seller to collect and remit; seller's reports. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of cable television service, in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax imposed and levied by this article at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the service. The tax collected during such calendar month shall be reported and remitted by the seller to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the last day of the second calendar month thereafter. At the same time, the seller shall report the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay such tax. The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  All remittances received hereunder by the commissioner of the revenue shall be promptly turned over to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 4199-91, § 1)  
Sec. 40-259. - Seller's records. 
Each and every seller of cable television service shall keep complete records showing all purchases of such service in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Ord. No. 4199-91, § 1)  
Sec. 40-260. - Violation of article by seller. 
Any seller violating the provisions of this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4199-91, § 1)  
Sec. 40-261. - General duty of treasurer to collect. 
The city treasurer shall be charged with the power and the duty of collecting the tax levied and imposed under this article and shall cause the same to be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4199-91, § 1)  
Sec. 40-262. - Assessment and collection of delinquencies. 
It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to assess taxes reported by the seller to be unpaid under this article against the purchaser, together with a penalty of five (5) percent, but in no case less than one dollar ($1.00). These assessments shall be turned over to the city treasurer, who shall collect the taxes and penalty in the same manner as other delinquent taxes are collected. 
(Ord. No. 4199-91, § 1)  
Chapter 40.1 - UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION OF LINES AND PIPES AND THEIR RELATED FACILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Underground Utility Damage Prevention Act, Code of Virginia, § 56-265.14 et seq. 
 
Sec. 40.1-1. - General. 
The city council hereby finds and determines that the installation of underground utilities and facilities within the city is a matter that affects the public health, safety and welfare in that the design and implementation of public improvements directly affect the activities of citizens who are utilizing the streets, roadways and other public properties of the city and the visual character of the city. There is, therefore, the necessity of providing a comprehensive system of regulation of these activities and conversions of specific areas with aboveground utilities which have been designated as "underground utilities district." 
(Ord. No. 3366-85)  
Sec. 40.1-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context otherwise indicates: 
(1)  Customer utility services are all those poles, towers, wires, lines, cables and appurtenant equipment located between the distribution line and wall of the building or structure occupied or intended to be occupied by a customer in the case of any service such as electricity, telephone, telegraph, cable television, traffic control, fire alarm or police communication, and all those conduits, pipes and appurtenant equipment located between the main and the wall of the building or structure occupied or intended to be occupied by a customer in the case of any service such as gas, water, steam or petroleum. 
(2)  Distribution lines are all those wires, cables and appurtenant equipment located between the customer utility services and the transmission line. 
(3)  Transmission lines are those high-capacity conductors (such as 115 KV and above for electrical service) and associated structures which are used to carry the service from points of generation to distribution points (such as electrical substations). 
(Ord. No. 3366-85)  
Sec. 40.1-3. - Customer utility services to be placed underground. 
Existing aboveground customer utility services supplied by any existing aboveground facilities which are relocated, all new customer utility services, and extensions of existing customer utility services shall, after the effective date of this chapter (September 5, 1985), be installed below the surface of the ground; provided that: 
(1)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals, telephone pedestals, terminals and other similar equipment, which is normally installed aboveground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground systems may be so installed. 
(2)  Meters, service connection and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the premises it serves may continue to be so installed. 
(3)  Aboveground customer utility services existing as of the effective date of this chapter may be maintained or repaired as above-ground services as long as they are supplied by aboveground mains. 
(4)  Temporary aboveground facilities required for construction purposes will be permitted. 
(5)  All such facilities installed underground and repairs, replacement or increase in capacity thereof shall be performed in accordance with accepted standards of utility practice for underground construction. 
(6)  Aboveground installation of utilities is permissible for new customer utility service to detached single-family development when service is available from adjacent aboveground facilities. 
(7)  An individual scrap metal processing machine (but not including its shelter structure) that requires a business license pursuant to section 23-93(b) of the Code of the City of Newport News may be connected to an existing aboveground power source so long as such installation is located no more than one hundred (100) feet from the existing aboveground power source. 
(Ord. No. 3366-85; Ord. No. 3848-89; Ord. No. 3854-89)  
Sec. 40.1-4. - Distribution lines to be placed underground. 
All poles, towers, wires, lines, cables, conduits, pipes, mains and appurtenances used or intended to be used to distribute any service such as electric current, telephone, telegraph, cable television, traffic control, fire alarm, police communication, gas, water, steam or petroleum, whether or not on the streets, alleys or other public places of the city, shall, after the effective date of this chapter [September 6, 1985], be installed below the surface of the ground or below the surface in the case of bridges and elevated highways if such poles, towers, wires, lines, cables, conduits pipes, mains and appurtenances are located in an underground utilities district and are to be relocated and are within an area, the length of which is the length of a block or five hundred (500) feet, whichever is the lesser; or an extension of service which would involve installation of new poles whether located in an underground utilities district or not; provided that: 
(1)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switch-gear, metal pedestals, telephone pedestals, terminals and other similar equipment, which is normally installed above ground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution systems may be so installed. 
(2)  Aboveground facilities existing as of the effective date of this chapter may be repaired provided such repair does not involve relocation. 
(3)  Temporary aboveground facilities required for construction purposes will be permitted. 
(4)  All such facilities installed underground shall be performed in accordance with accepted standards of utility practice for underground construction. 
(5)  Facilities may be installed above ground upon approval of city council if such facilities are being relocated as part of a road construction or similar project in which governmental units are participants. 
(Ord. No. 3366-85)  
Sec. 40.1-5. - Creation of Underground Utilities Districts. 
The following special geographic areas to be known as "Underground Utilities Districts" are hereby designated by the city council for the purpose of converting all aboveground utilities to underground utilities in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public: 
(1)  Downtown: 
(a)  The Downtown District shall be defined as the geographic area lying within the boundaries created by 39th Street on the north; CSX right-of-way on the east; 23rd Street right-of-way on the south; and the James River on the west, excluding non-publicly-owned land zoned M-1 or M-2. 
(b)  For those areas within the Downtown District which are also within the Newport Centre boundaries and under Newport Centre Sector zoning, then Zoning Ordinance Section 2629, "Utilities," also applies. For the areas within the Downtown District but outside Newport Centre Sector zoning, this chapter applies. 
(2)  Rights-of-Way Districts: The following rights-of-way within the city as of the date of this chapter [August 27, 1985], and subsequent modifications to these rights-of-way as may be made by the city, shall be designated Underground Utilities Districts: 
Right-of-Way 	From 	To 
Jefferson Avenue 	Southern terminus 	Northern terminus 
Warwick Boulevard 	Southern terminus 	Northern terminus 
Huntington Avenue 	Southern terminus 	Northern terminus, 
72nd Street 
Washington Avenue 	Southern terminus 	Northern terminus, 
50th Street 
39th Street 	Westerly terminus 	Easterly terminus 
Mercury Boulevard 	Westerly terminus 	Easterly terminus 
Main Street 	Warwick Boulevard 	Easterly terminus 
Harpersville Road 	Warwick Boulevard 	Terrace Drive 
Oyster Point Road 
(realigned) 	Warwick Boulevard 	Easterly terminus 
J. Clyde Morris Boulevard 	Warwick Boulevard 	Easterly terminus 
Denbigh Boulevard 	Old Courthouse Way 	Easterly terminus 
Ft. Eustis Boulevard 	Warwick Boulevard 	Easterly terminus 
Yorktown Road 	Warwick Boulevard 	Easterly terminus 
Middle Ground Boulevard 
Extension, VDOT UPC 11816 	Fishing Point Drive 	Warwick Boulevard 
Maxwell Lane 	Warwick Boulevard 	Quillen Terrace 
Nettles Drive 	Within the limits of the Middle Ground Boulevard Extension 
 project, VDOT UPC 11816 
Atkinson Boulevard 
VDOT UPC 4483 	Jefferson Avenue 	Warwick Boulevard 
Relocated Route 60 
VDOT UPC 14598 	Fort Eustis Boulevard 	James City County Line 
 
(Ord. No. 3366-85; Ord. No. 6646-09)  
Sec. 40.1-6. - Relation of chapter to other laws. 
The provisions contained in this chapter shall be considered separate from, supplemental to and additional to the provisions contained elsewhere in this Code or other city ordinances. Nothing contained in this chapter shall excuse any person from compliance with all other applicable provisions of this Code or other city ordinances, including those relating to requirements for underground utilities in urban design districts or redevelopment areas as designated by the city council. In the event of a conflict between any provisions of this chapter and any provisions of this Code or other city ordinances, the more restrictive provision shall control. Notwithstanding the above, nothing herein shall be construed to amend any provision of any franchise granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3366-85)  
Sec. 40.1-7. - Exemption from chapter. 
(a)  An exemption from the provisions of this chapter shall apply in the following instances: 
(1)  For all buildings and structures for which a building permit shall have been duly and regularly issued by the city on or before the effective date of this chapter [September 6, 1985] and for which the permit has not expired. 
(2)  For all buildings, structures and alterations to buildings or structures for which a final or conditional site plan approval shall have been duly and regularly issued on or before the effective date of this chapter, and for which the site plan approval has not expired. 
(3)  For any state or federal highway or bridge project for which a utility relocation agreement has been decided upon on or before the effective date of this chapter. 
(b)  For a period of ninety (90) days after the effective date of this chapter, an exemption shall apply for any city project requiring utility installation or relocation or for any project requiring a right-of-way permit from the city. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the provisions of this chapter shall apply prospectively to buildings, structures, alterations to buildings and structures, subdivisions of land, and city, state, federal and private highway and bridge projects after completion of such buildings, structures, alterations to buildings and structures, subdivisions of land, and city, state, federal and private highway and bridge projects. 
(Ord. No. 3366-85)  
Chapter 40.2 - ENTERPRISE ZONES, TECHNOLOGY ZONES, TOURISM ZONES AND DEFENSE PRODUCTION ZONES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7249-16, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2016, changed the title of Ch. 40.2 from "Enterprise Zones and Technology Zones and Tourism Zones" to read as herein set out. 
 
ARTICLE I. - ENTERPRISE ZONES 
 
Sec. 40.2-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to set forth the boundaries of the city's enterprise zones as approved by the State of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 3531-87; Ord. No. 4697-95; Ord. No. 4759-95; Ord. No. 4863-96; Ord. No. 6580-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6596-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-2. - Boundary description. 
The boundaries of the city's enterprise zones are hereby established as shown on "the Enterprise Zone Maps," collectively consisting of 2008 Newport News Enterprise Zone 1 (formerly North) Maps, twenty-nine (29) in number; 2008 Newport News Enterprise Zone 1A (formerly North) Maps, eighteen (18) in number; 2008 Newport News Enterprise Zone 1B (formerly North) Maps, eight (8) in number; 2008 Newport News Enterprise Zone 2 (formerly Mid-City) Maps, fifty-three (53) in number; 2008 Newport News Enterprise Zone 2A (formerly Mid-City) Maps, twenty-seven (27) in number; 2008 Newport News Enterprise Zone 3 (formerly South) Maps, seventy-four (74) in number; and 2008 Newport News Enterprise Zone 3A (formerly South) Maps, twenty-two (22) in number. The Enterprise Zone Maps are hereby declared to be a part of this article and to have the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth and described herein. The Enterprise Zone Maps shall be kept on file in the office of the department of development. 
(Ord. No. 3531-87; Ord. No. 4697-95; Ord. No. 4863-96; Ord. No. 6141-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6580-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6596-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6596-09, § 1, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed § 40.2-3, which pertained to certified public accountant reimbursement pool; administration of pool, and derived from Ord. No. 4863-96. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Secs. 40.2-4—40.2-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TECHNOLOGY ZONES 
 
Sec. 40.2-11. - Purpose. 
The City Council of the City of Newport News finds that the development of its commercial and industrial tax base requires incentives, and determines that an appropriate method of offering incentives for the areas described below is to create technology zones as guided and authorized by section 58.1-3850 of the Code of Virginia. The city council finds that the establishment of technology zones will foster development of commercial and industrial businesses engaged in technological research, design and manufacturing to the benefit of public health, safety, welfare and convenience through the enhancement of public revenues and the creation of employment opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 6580-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-12. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 6580-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-13. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the following meanings: 
Business firm means any corporation, partnership, electing small business (subchapter S) corporation, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia, and any subsidiaries thereof. 
Hampton Roads means that geographic area consisting of the cities of Chesapeake, Franklin, Hampton, Newport News, Norfolk, Poquoson, Portsmouth, Suffolk, Virginia Beach and Williamsburg, and the Counties of Gloucester, James City, Isle of Wight, Southampton and York, and any successors thereto. 
New positions means jobs of indefinite duration at a business firm located within one (1) of the city's technology zones requiring each employee to report for work within the technology zone and requiring: (1) a minimum of thirty-five (35) hours of the employee's time per week for the entire normal year of the business firm's operation, which "normal year" must consist of at least forty-eight (48) weeks; (2) a minimum of thirty-five (35) hours of the employee's time per week for the portion of the calendar year in which the employee was initially hired for or transferred to the business firm; or (3) a minimum of one thousand six hundred eighty (1,680) hours of the employee's time per year. 
"New positions" shall not include seasonal or temporary positions. 
Prevailing average wage means that amount determined by the Virginia Employment Commission, as reported by the Virginia Economic Development Partnership, to be the average wage paid workers in the city, without regard to fringe benefits. 
Qualifying activity means: (1) providing engineering, professional or business services to the non-carbon-based energy development industry or to the shipbuilding industry; (2) the design or development of technology-based products, processes or services for lease, sale or license; or (3) other technological research and development. "Technology-based products, processes or services" means the products, processes or services of the modeling and simulation, photonics, nanotechnology or aerospace industries. The mere use or sale of products derived from such industries does not constitute a qualifying activity. 
Qualified technology business means a business firm that meets the following criteria, to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee. A qualified technology business must: 
(1)  Be located in an established technology zone; 
(2)  Perform a qualifying activity, which it has not previously performed in the City of Newport News, in an established technology zone within the City of Newport News; 
(3)  Create at least twenty-five (25) new positions engaged in the qualifying activity, paying an average annual salary of at least one hundred fifty (150) percent of the prevailing average wage for the City of Newport News; and 
(4)  Not transfer positions from an existing location in Hampton Roads to the Newport News location performing the qualifying activity. Transferring positions includes the creation of a new position performing substantially the same duties as an existing position while eliminating or failing to fill the existing position. 
(Ord. No. 6580-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-14. - Boundaries of technology zones. 
The boundaries of the city's technology zones are hereby established as shown on the "technology zone maps." The technology zone maps are hereby declared to be a part of this article and to have the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth and described herein. The technology zone maps shall be kept on file in the office of the department of development. 
(Ord. No. 6580-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-15. - Business license tax abatement. 
(a)  A qualified technology business shall be eligible to receive a partial abatement of the business license tax liability imposed on it by Chapter 23 of the Newport News City Code, if it satisfies all of the conditions of this section. This abatement will be equal to fifty (50) percent of the business license tax levied on the qualifying activity performed by the qualified technology business. 
(b)  To qualify to receive an abatement under this section, a business firm must apply to the city manager or his designee within sixty (60) days of the due date for payment of its business license tax liability to the city. The business firm shall have the burden of demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee, that it meets the definition of a qualified technology business and that it satisfies all applicable criteria for a business license tax abatement. To maintain eligibility for this abatement, each year thereafter the business firm must reapply within sixty (60) days of the due date for payment of its business license tax liability to the city, and must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee, that it continues to operate as a qualified technology business. 
(c)  If a business firm applies in accordance with subsection (b), and is deemed a qualified technology business prior to payment of its business license tax liability to the city, such tax liability shall be reduced by an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the business license tax levied on the qualifying activity performed by the qualified technology business. If a business firm applies in accordance with subsection (b) and is deemed a qualified technology business after it has paid its business license tax liability to the city in full, it shall receive a refund equal to fifty (50) percent of the business license tax levied on the qualifying activity performed by the qualified technology business. 
(d)  A business firm must apply for an abatement under this section, if at all, no later than five (5) years after starting to engage in a qualifying activity in a technology zone in the city. A qualified technology business shall be eligible to receive benefits pursuant to this section for a period of ten (10) calendar years, starting in the year in which the business firm first applies for the abatement, and ending in the tenth year thereafter. A business firm shall not receive an abatement under this section in any year during which it does not operate as a qualified technology business. 
(e)  To qualify to receive an abatement under this section, a performance agreement must be executed with the Economic Development Authority of the City of Newport News, Virginia, the terms of which shall include, but not be limited to, performance standards that the business firm must meet, and the repayment to the city of certain benefits received by the business firm under this section if the performance standards are not met. Performance agreements entered pursuant to this section will be subject to the approval of the Newport News City Council. 
(f)  A business firm which is currently receiving an enterprise zone, formerly known as an urban enterprise zone, business license fee abatement, or which has previously received such an abatement, shall not be eligible to receive a technology zone business license tax abatement for the qualifying activity for which it received the previous abatement. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the above, the eligibility of any business firm to receive benefits pursuant to this section shall be subject to approval by the Newport News City Council. 
(Ord. No. 6580-09, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-16. - Non-waiver. 
Unless expressly stated herein, this article shall not be construed to waive the requirement of any ordinance, regulation or policy of the City of Newport News, including, but not limited to, those ordinances, regulations and policies which require permits and approvals for land use and construction. Additionally, unless otherwise stated herein, nothing in this article shall be construed as waiving the right of the City of Newport News to enforce its ordinances, regulations or policies to collect any taxes, fees, fines, penalties or interest imposed by law on a qualified technology business or upon real or personal property owned or leased by a qualified technology business. The City of Newport News reserves the right to remove qualified technology business status for any business that is not compliant with any city ordinance, regulation, policy or other legal requirement. 
(Ord. No. 6580-09, § 1)  
ARTICLE III. - TOURISM ZONES  
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 40.2-17. - Purpose. 
The City Council of the City of Newport News finds that the further development of its tourism tax base requires incentives and regulatory flexibility, and determines that an appropriate method of offering incentives for the areas described below is to create tourism zones as guided and authorized by section 58.1-3851 of the Code of Virginia. The city council finds that the establishment of tourism zones will create a more business-friendly environment and will foster development of tourism related businesses to the benefit of public health, safety, welfare and convenience through the enhancement of public revenues and the creation of employment opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 6843-12, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-18. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall develop criteria and guidelines for the level of investment required for any particular range of tax incentive and regulatory flexibility. The city manager or his designee is authorized to negotiate performance agreements with potential new or expanded qualified tourism businesses. The city manager or his designee is authorized to enter into performance agreements in instances where incentives included regulatory flexibility and where tax incentives are derived from the remittance of a portion of a qualified tourism business' business, professional, and occupational license tax. In addition, the incentives may include a combination of sales taxes, food and beverage taxes, lodging taxes and/or amusement taxes attributable to the qualified tourism business. 
(Ord. No. 6843-12, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-19. - Boundaries of tourism zones. 
The boundaries of the city's tourism zones are hereby established as shown on the "tourism zone maps." The tourism zone maps are hereby declared to be a part of this article and to have the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth and described herein. The tourism zone maps shall be kept on file in the office of the department of development. 
(Ord. No. 6843-12, § 1)  
DIVISION 2. - UPPER WARWICK BOULEVARD/DENBIGH TOURISM ZONE 
 
Sec. 40.2-20. - Eligibility requirements. 
(a)  Economic incentives and regulatory flexibility may be made available to any new or expanded qualified tourism business which seeks to attract customers from outside the City of Newport News. The qualified tourism business must advance the city's strategic goals as identified in the City of Newport News City-Wide Tourism Development Plan, the Newport News Retail Development Strategy, and the city's comprehensive plan. The qualified tourism business must commit to a performance agreement based upon investment, jobs, sales revenue, or other significant criteria. 
(b)  An existing qualified tourism business must make a capital investment of at least one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) or create and sustain at least two (2) new full time jobs in order to be eligible for economic incentives. A new qualified tourism business must make a capital investment of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or create and sustain at least four (4) new full time jobs in order to be eligible for economic incentives and regulatory flexibility. 
(c)  Economic incentives may be provided for up to twenty (20) years through the performance agreement. In the case of multi-year incentives, the qualified tourism business shall establish its qualification for the economic incentives and regulatory flexibility on an annual basis. 
(d)  Regulatory flexibility may be provided for up to ten (10) years through the performance agreement. In the case of multi-year incentives, the qualified tourism business shall establish its qualification for the economic incentives and regulatory flexibility on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 6843-12, § 1)  
DIVISION 3. - SOUTHEAST COMMUNITY TOURISM ZONE 
 
Sec. 40.2-21. - Eligibility requirements. 
(a)  Economic incentives and regulatory flexibility may be made available to any new or expanded qualified tourism business which seeks to attract customers from the Newport News region and beyond. The qualified tourism business must advance the city's strategic goals as identified in the City of Newport News City-Wide Tourism Development Plan, the Newport News Retail Development Strategy, and the city's comprehensive plan. The qualified tourism business must commit to a performance agreement based upon investment, jobs, sales revenue, or other significant criteria. 
(b)  An existing qualified tourism business must make a capital investment of at least one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) or create and sustain at least two (2) new full time jobs in order to be eligible for economic incentives. A new qualified tourism business must make a capital investment of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or create and sustain at least four (4) new full time jobs in order to be eligible for economic incentives and regulatory flexibility. 
(c)  Economic incentives may be provided for up to twenty (20) years through the performance agreement. In the case of multi-year incentives, the qualified tourism business shall establish its qualification for the economic incentives and regulatory flexibility on an annual basis. 
(d)  Regulatory flexibility may be provided for up to ten (10) years through the performance agreement. In the case of multi-year incentives, the qualified tourism business shall establish its qualification for the economic incentives and regulatory flexibility on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 6843-12, § 1)  
DIVISION 4. - PATRICK HENRY TOURISM ZONE 
 
Sec. 40.2-22. - Eligibility requirements. 
(a)  Economic incentives and regulatory flexibility may be made available to any new or expanded qualified tourism business which seeks to attract customers from outside the City of Newport News. The qualified tourism business must advance the city's strategic goals as identified in the City of Newport News City-Wide Tourism Development Plan, the Newport News Retail Development Strategy, and the city's comprehensive plan. The qualified tourism business must commit to a performance agreement based upon investment, jobs, sales revenue, or other significant criteria. 
(b)  An existing qualified tourism business must make a capital investment of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or create and sustain at least four (4) new full time jobs in order to be eligible for economic incentives. A new qualified tourism business must make a capital investment of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) or create and sustain at least eight (8) new full time jobs in order to be eligible for economic incentives and regulatory flexibility. 
(c)  Economic incentives may be provided for up to twenty (20) years through the performance agreement. In the case of multi-year incentives, the qualified tourism business shall establish its qualification for the economic incentives and regulatory flexibility on an annual basis. 
(d)  Regulatory flexibility may be provided for up to ten (10) years through the performance agreement. In the case of multi-year incentives, the qualified tourism business shall establish its qualification for the economic incentives and regulatory flexibility on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 6843-12, § 1)  
DIVISION 5. - GREATER HILTON TOURISM ZONE 
 
Sec. 40.2-23. - Eligibility requirements. 
(a)  Economic incentives and regulatory flexibility may be made available to any new or expanded qualified tourism business which seeks to attract customers from outside the City of Newport News. The qualified tourism business must advance the city's strategic goals as identified in the City of Newport News City-Wide Tourism Development Plan, the Newport News Retail Development Strategy, and the city's comprehensive plan. The qualified tourism business must commit to a performance agreement based upon investment, jobs, sales revenue, or other significant criteria. 
(b)  An existing qualified tourism business must make a capital investment of at least one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) or create and sustain at least two (2) new full time jobs in order to be eligible for economic incentives. A new qualified tourism business must make a capital investment of at least two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or create and sustain at least four (4) new full time jobs in order to be eligible for economic incentives and regulatory flexibility. 
(c)  Economic incentives may be provided for up to twenty (20) years through the performance agreement. In the case of multi-year incentives, the qualified tourism business shall establish its qualification for the economic incentives and regulatory flexibility on an annual basis. 
(d)  Regulatory flexibility may be provided for up to ten (10) years through the performance agreement. In the case of multi-year incentives, the qualified tourism business shall establish its qualification for the economic incentives and regulatory flexibility on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 6843-12, § 1)  
Secs. 40.2-24—40.2-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEFENSE PRODUCTION ZONES 
 
Sec. 40.2-30. - Purpose. 
The city council of the City of Newport News finds that the further development of its defense production tax base requires incentives and regulatory flexibility, and determines that an appropriate method of offering incentives for the areas described below is to create a defense production zone as guided and authorized by the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3853, as amended. The city council finds that the establishment of a defense production zone will create a more business-friendly environment and will foster development of defense production related businesses to the benefit of public health, safety, welfare and convenience through the enhancement of public revenues and the creation of employment opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 7249-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-31. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the following meanings: 
Defense production business means a business engaged in the design, development, or production of materials, components, or equipment required to meet the needs of national defense, or a business that performs functions ancillary to or in support of the design, development, or production of such materials, components or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 7249-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-32. - Administration. 
This article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall develop criteria and guidelines for the level of investment required for any particular range of tax incentives and regulatory flexibility. The city manager or his designee is authorized to enter into performance agreements with defense production businesses. 
(Ord. No. 7249-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-33. - Boundaries of defense production zone. 
The boundaries of the city's defense production zone are hereby established as shown on the "defense production zone map." The defense production zone map is hereby declared to be a part of this article and to have the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth and described herein. The defense production zone map shall be kept on file in the office of the department of development. 
(Ord. No. 7249-16, § 1)  
Sec. 40.2-34. - Incentives and regulatory flexibility. 
The city manager or his designee, through a performance agreement, may provide incentives to a defense production business located in a defense production zone for up to twenty (20) years. Such incentives may include, but are not limited to (i) reduction of permit fees, (ii) reduction of user fees, (iii) reduction of any type of gross receipt tax, (iv) permit process reform, (v) any other incentive adopted by ordinance, and (vi) economic development incentive grants with payment of the grants conditioned upon the defense production business making certain real property or capital investments, creating and maintaining new jobs, or performing or meeting other economic development objectives. 
(Ord. No. 7249-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7253-16, § 1)  
Secs. 40.2-35—40.2-39. - Reserved.  
Chapter 40.3 - VEGETATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Tree conservation ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1127.1; planting of trees destroyed during construction, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-960. 
 
Sec. 40.3-1. - General. 
The city council hereby finds and determines that damage to city trees, shrubs and other landscape plants and vegetation on city properties and rights-of-way is a matter that affects the public health, safety and welfare. The city council, therefore, concludes that regulations affecting activities that result in such damage are necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 5679-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40.3-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context otherwise dictates: 
(1)  Director shall mean the director of parks and recreation or his designee. 
(2)  Person shall include any individual except for city employees engaged in the performance of their duties or persons working by lawful authority for the city. 
(Ord. No. 5679-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40-3.3. - Pruning, removing, damaging, etc., generally. 
(a)  No person shall, without a permit from the director, prune, spray, remove, destroy, cut, girdle or deface any tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation located on city property or injure the same by root cutting or exposure or by placing any chemical or substance on the ground around such tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation; provided, however, that permits for the activities listed in this subsection affecting any tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation located within city rights-of-way shall be issued by the department of engineering after review and recommendation by the director. 
(b)  No person shall, without a permit from the director, injure, disturb, misuse or remove any device placed to protect any tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation located on city property; provided, however that permits for the activities listed in this subsection affecting any tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation located within city rights-of-way shall be issued by the department of engineering after review and recommendation by the director. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any cutting or trimming of grasses upon city rights-of-way by the owner of property adjacent to such right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 5679-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40.3-4. - Trimming by utility companies. 
No electric light company, telephone company, telegraph company, cable television company or other entity authorized to occupy city property shall trim any tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation located on city property without a permit from the director. 
(Ord. No. 5679-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40.3-5. - Unauthorized attachments. 
No person shall, without a permit from the director, attach or keep attached a sign, rope, wire, or any other device to a tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation located on city property, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 5679-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40.3-6. - Impeding entrance of air and water to roots. 
No person shall, without a permit from the director, place or maintain upon city property any stone, cement or other substance which might impede the free entrance of water and air to the roots of any tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation on city property. An open space of ground shall be maintained outside the trunk of any such tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation. Such open space shall not be less than four (4) square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 5679-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40.3-7. - Conflict with local ordinances, statutes or regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this chapter establish a requirement that is more stringent than a similar requirement contained in any other local ordinance, statute or regulation, the regulations of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other local ordinance, statute or regulation establish a requirement that is more stringent than a similar requirement contained in this chapter, the regulations of such ordinance, statute or regulation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 5679-01, § 1)  
Sec. 40.3-8. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of this chapter shall constitute Class 1 misdemeanors. 
(b)  If any person shall commit any of the acts prohibited herein upon more than one (1) tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation, a separate violation of this chapter shall be deemed to have occurred with respect to each such tree, shrub, landscape planting or other vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 5679-01, § 1)  
Chapter 41 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 26; disorderly conduct on public conveyances, § 28-11. 
State Law reference— Local permits for vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2015. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 41-1. - Chapter does not constitute guarantee or assumption of responsibility by city. 
The city makes no guarantee and assumes no responsibility for any injury or damage done to any person or property by reason of granting a certificate of public convenience and necessity under this chapter or by reason of any requirement or provision in this chapter, which chapter is adopted by the city as a further protection of its citizens and others who may be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 18; Ord. No. 109, § 18; Code 1961, §§ 11-3, 38-19)  
Sec. 41-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, each violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 19; Ord. No. 109, §§ 19, 48; Code 1961, §§ 11-11, 38-20, 38-61)  
Secs. 41-3—41-12. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 41-13. - Liability insurance or cash or collateral deposit. 
(a)  If a certificate of convenience and necessity is granted under this article, the certificate holder shall, before operating under the provisions of this article, procure and file with the city manager a policy, which shall be a fleet policy in the event more than one (1) bus is used by the certificate holder, of liability insurance in a company authorized to do business in the state, in form to be approved by the city attorney, indemnifying such certificate holder in the sum of at least thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for injury to one (1) person, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person in the same accident, for which the certificate holder, operator or driver of such bus may be held liable, and five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for property damage. Such policy shall contain a clause obligating the insurance company to give ten (10) days' written notice to the city manager before cancellation or change of such policy, and the certificate granted under this chapter shall, ipso facto, be revoked by the lapse, cancellation or termination of such policy of insurance, unless the same shall have been renewed or replaced or a new policy obtained and filed as herein required by the certificate holder. 
(b)  In lieu of the insurance policy required by subsection (a) above the certificate holder may deposit either cash or collateral of such a value and subject to such conditions as meet with the approval of the city manager for the protection of the public against personal injuries and property damage resulting from negligence on the part of the certificate holder. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 7; Code 1961, § 11-2)  
Sec. 41-14. - Interior lights. 
All vehicles used as buses under this article shall have suitable interior lights which shall be kept lighted at all times when such bus is transporting passengers between one-half (½) hour after sunset and one-half (½) hour before sunrise. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 16; Code 1961, § 11-4)  
Sec. 41-15. - Doors. 
All buses operated under this article shall be equipped with a front and a rear door, or alternately, a front and a side door, which shall, at all times, be in a proper and usable condition, and under the control of the operator or driver of the bus. Both doors on the bus shall be available and usable for the prompt discharge of passengers at all times. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 17; Code 1961, § 11-5)  
Sec. 41-16. - Maintenance; excessive noise. 
All vehicles used as buses under this article shall be kept in a neat and clean condition, and no vehicle shall be used which cannot be operated with safety and comfort to passengers, or which produces an unusual or excessive noise. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 13; Code 1961, § 11-6)  
Sec. 41-17. - Bus stops. 
The city manager shall establish bus stops, for the convenience of the public using bus service. Such stops shall be designated by suitable signs. Stopping of other vehicles at such points is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 11; Code 1961, § 11-1)  
Sec. 41-18. - Smoking on bus. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while on a passenger bus, to smoke any cigarette, cigar, pipe or any other form of tobacco. 
(b)  Printed copies of subsection (a) above or an appropriate "No Smoking" sign, to be approved by the city manager, shall be conspicuously posted by the owner in all buses operating in the city. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 14; Ord. No. 173, § 63; Code 1961, §§ 11-7, 25-48) 
Cross reference— Smoking, Ch. 33.1.  
Sec. 41-19. - Fares generally. 
The fare charged on buses operating under this article shall be set by the state corporation commission. No person who is a passenger on such a bus shall fail to pay the legal fare or charge, when requested to do so by the operator, owner or person lawfully in charge of the bus. 
(Ord. No. 68, §§ 12, 15; Code 1961, §§ 11-8, 11-10)  
Sec. 41-20. - Fare not to be collected or money changed while bus in motion. 
No driver or other person in charge of a bus shall collect any fare or make change for any money while such bus is in motion. All money shall be collected and change made while such bus is completely stopped. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 14; Code 1961, § 11-9)  
Secs. 41-21—41-25. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
 
Sec. 41-26. - Required. 
Any person desiring to operate a bus transportation system or service in the city shall, before operating any part of such system or service, obtain from the city manager a certificate of public convenience and necessity in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 1; Code 1961, § 11-12)  
Sec. 41-27. - Application generally. 
Any person desiring a certificate of public convenience and necessity under this division shall make written application therefor to the city manager. Such application shall state the name of the applicant, the place of business or principal office of the applicant and the number and type of buses to be operated. Such application shall also show cause why such certificate of public convenience and necessity should be granted and give evidence of the applicant's ability to operate such public transportation system or service, including the maintenance of reasonable schedules on all of the routes over which the applicant proposes to operate. 
(Ord. No. 68, §§ 1, 2; Code 1961, § 11-13)  
Sec. 41-28. - Hearing on application. 
Upon receipt of an application filed under this division, the city manager shall, after giving not less than five (5) days' notice to the applicant of the time, place and purpose of such hearing, hold a public hearing for the purpose of ascertaining whether all of the requirements of the city applicable to the conduct of such business have been or, before commencing operation, will be complied with, whether there is a public need for such service in the city and whether the financial responsibility and business qualifications of the applicant are adequate for the proper conduct of such business. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 3; Code 1961, § 11-14)  
Sec. 41-29. - Issuance or denial. 
If, upon a hearing held as provided in section 41-28, the city manager shall be of the opinion that all of the requirements of the city applicable to the conduct of the business have been, or before the commencement of operation, will be complied with, and that there is a public need for such service in the city and that the financial responsibility and business qualifications of the applicant are adequate for the proper conduct of such business, the city manager shall issue the certificate of public convenience and necessity. If not of such opinion, the city manager shall deny such certificate. 
(Code 1961, § 11-15)  
Sec. 41-30. - Appeal from denial. 
An appeal by an applicant from denial of a certificate of public convenience and necessity, as provided for in section 41-29, shall lie to the city council, whose decision shall be final. Notice of such appeal must be presented by the applicant, in writing, to the city clerk within ten (10) days after such denial. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 4; Code 1961, § 11-16)  
Sec. 41-31. - Revocation—Generally. 
(a)  Any certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to this division may be revoked by the city manager for failure by the holder to render proper and adequate service to the public or for the holder knowingly permitting or acquiescing in the violation of any ordinances of the city or laws of the state. Before taking such action, the city manager shall give the certificate holder at least thirty (30) days' written notice, setting forth with reasonable particularity the reasons wherein the certificate holder has failed to render proper and adequate service to the public, or has knowingly permitted or acquiesced in the violation of any of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state. If the certificate holder shall, in the opinion of the city manager, within such period, satisfactorily correct the conditions set forth in the notice, the notice of hearing to revoke, as provided for in subsection (b) below, shall not be given. 
(b)  If the certificate holder shall, in the opinion of the city manager, fail to correct the conditions set forth in the notice given under subsection (a) above, the city manager shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the certificate shall be revoked, after first giving the certificate holder at least thirty (30) days' written notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing, which notice shall set forth with reasonable particularity the reasons for such contemplated action. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 5; Code 1961, § 11-17)  
Sec. 41-32. - Same—Appeal. 
An appeal from the revocation provided for in section 41-31 shall lie to the city council, whose decision shall be final. Notice of such appeal shall be presented in writing to the city clerk, within ten (10) days after such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 68, § 6; Code 1961, § 11-18)  
Secs. 41-33—41-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1, adopted March 13, 2012, shall be in effect on and after May 1, 2012. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 2007, effective Nov. 1, 2007, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate taxicabs and similar for-hire vehicles, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-310, 46.2-2062 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 41-40. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings attached to them as follows: 
Applicant means a person who has applied for a certificate pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Certificate means the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the department to an applicant authorizing the transportation of passengers over the public streets of the city in a specific taxicab pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Certificate holder means a person who holds a certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his designee. 
City means the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
City Code means the Code of the City of Newport News, Virginia, as amended. 
Commissioner of the revenue means the commissioner of the revenue for the city or his designee. 
Commonwealth means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Department or police department means the Newport News Police Department unless the language of a provision clearly indicates otherwise. 
Law enforcement officer means a police officer, a special conservator of the peace, or any other person authorized by federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations to enforce federal, state or local laws, rules or regulations, including Newport News taxicab inspectors. 
Manifest means a written document required by this article that shall be present in all taxicabs at all times indicating various information required therein. 
Moving violation means a violation of law involving a motor vehicle which results in points being assessed against a person pursuant to the Virginia Uniform Demerit Point System. 
Person means person, firm, proprietor, partnership, company, corporation or any other legal entity, unless the context of a provision of this article clearly indicates that the term "person" means only a human being. 
Police officer means a sworn member of any county, city, town, police or sheriff's department; the Virginia State Police; or a federal law enforcement agency. 
Public taxicab stand means a parking area for taxicabs on a public street or other public property which has been approved by the chief of police for use by taxicabs for the purpose of waiting for passengers. 
State code means the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Taxicab means any motor vehicle having a seating capacity of not more than six (6) passengers, excluding the driver, not operating on a regular route or between fixed terminals, used in the transportation of passengers for hire or for compensation (regardless of whether the taximeter charge is paid by the passenger or a third party), and not a common carrier, restricted common carrier or a nonemergency medical transportation carrier as defined in the state code. A motor vehicle used to provide paratransit services under the authority of the Transportation District Commission of Hampton Roads shall not be considered a taxicab for purposes of this article when such vehicle is being operated to provide those paratransit services. 
Taxicab driver means the person actually operating a taxicab. 
Taxicab driver's permit or permit means a document issued by the chief of police pursuant to division 4 of this article which authorizes a person to operate a taxicab in the city. 
Taxicab rate card means the document that is required to be conspicuously displayed inside a taxicab which indicates the rates of fare set by the city for the hire of taxicabs. 
Taximeter means any instrument or device used in a taxicab by which the charge for hire of the taxicab is calculated mechanically or electronically and on which such charge is plainly indicated. 
Street means any public highway, alley, avenue or other public way designed for vehicular travel in the city. 
Virginia taxicab permit means a permit issued by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles to operate a taxi service on an intrastate basis on the public highways of the Commonwealth outside the jurisdictional limits of cities or towns. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6493-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6947-13, § 1)  
Sec. 41-41. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle as a taxicab in the city in violation of any provision of this article. 
(b)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense for the same violation. 
(c)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, any person violating any provision of this article shall, in addition to the criminal penalties provided in this section, be subject to the suspension or revocation of his certificate or taxicab driver's permit as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-42. - Business license required. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 41-44 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle as a taxicab in the city without maintaining a current business license for such operation from the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-43. - Insurance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle as a taxicab upon the streets of the city unless the taxicab is covered by a current policy of motor vehicle liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth in such amounts as are required in Title 46.2 of the state code for motor carriers. Such policy, or certificate evidencing the required coverage, shall contain a provision obligating the insurance company or agent to give at least thirty (30) days' written notice to the chief of police before cancellation of such policy. 
(b)  A properly completed, current and executed certificate of insurance from an insurance company, or its agent, authorized to do business in the Commonwealth evidencing the required insurance coverage shall be provided the chief of police at all times the taxicab is available for operation. In lieu of a such a certificate, a current certificate of self-insurance issued by the Commissioner of the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles shall satisfy the requirements of this section. Failure to provide or maintain with the chief of police evidence of current insurance or self-insurance coverage shall be cause for revocation of the certificate after reasonable notice to the certificate holder that a hearing for that purpose will be conducted by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-44. - Reciprocity. 
(a)  Taxicab companies which do not have a certificate from Newport News and which maintain a business location in another locality in Virginia may drop off passengers in Newport News, if those passengers were picked up at a location in such other locality, without the necessity of obtaining a Newport News certificate for the company or a taxicab driver's permit for the driver (herein referred to as "reciprocity"). 
(b)  The reciprocity granted by this section to taxicab companies, and taxicab drivers, maintaining a business location in another locality in Virginia is specifically subject to proof that the following conditions have been met prior to entering the city with a passenger: 
(1)  The Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles has issued a Virginia Taxicab Permit to the taxicab company authorizing it and the vehicle to operate in more than one (1) locality; and 
(2)  A manifest is maintained in the taxicab that contains (i) entries that identify the date, time, and location of when and where the passenger was picked up; and (ii) the date, time, and location of the delivery of such passenger. 
(3)  The taxicab is otherwise operated in accordance with the provisions of all other federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-45. - Responsibility of certificate holder for violations by taxicab drivers. 
It shall be unlawful for a certificate holder to knowingly cause or permit a driver operating a taxicab to violate the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-46. - Use of the term "taxi," "taxicab," "cab," etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use the term "taxi," "taxicab," "cab" or like term or derivation in advertising; or hold such person out as the operator, driver or owner of a taxicab unless such person shall have complied with the provisions of this article to the extent that it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-47. - Unlawful to operate a taxicab in another manner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a vehicle for which a certificate has been issued under the provisions of this article for any purpose other than as a taxicab, to provide non-emergency medicaid transportation under the authority of the Virginia Department of Medical Assistance Services, or to provide paratransit services under the authority of the Transportation District Commission of Hampton Roads. A taxicab owner or corporate representative may operate a taxicab to a repair facility or to the taxi inspector's office for purposes of repairs to or inspection of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6947-13, § 1)  
Sec. 41-48. - State permit required for taxicab service. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab or other motor vehicle performing a taxicab service to operate in the city on an intrastate basis without first obtaining from the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles a permit in accordance with the provisions of Title 46.2 of the state code. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-49. - Advisory board. 
An advisory board composed of representatives of the city government, taxicab industry representatives and the general public is hereby created to review taxicab regulations and advise city council with regard to appropriate provisions of any ordinance pertaining to taxicabs. The advisory board shall be composed of the chief of police, or his designated representative, who shall be an ex-officio member with full voting powers. In addition, city council shall appoint three (3) representatives from the taxicab industry and one (1) citizen representative. Two (2) of the initial taxicab industry representatives shall be appointed for a one-year term commencing January 1, 2008, and ending December 31, 2008; the citizen representative and one (1) taxicab industry representative shall each be appointed for a two-year term commencing January 1, 2008, and ending December 31, 2010. Thereafter, all taxicab industry and citizen representatives shall be appointed for two-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 6465-08; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
DIVISION 2. - RATES OF FARE 
 
Sec. 41-50. - Rates of fare prescribed. 
(a)  Generally. Unless otherwise provided in this article, the rates prescribed by this section shall be charged and collected for the transportation of passengers by a taxicab, and no different rate shall at any time be charged or collected for such service. 
(b)  Meter rates. Except as otherwise provided in this division, the rates used to calculate the charge for service by taxicabs shall be determined exclusively by taximeters, regardless of the destination, whether within or beyond the corporate limits of the city, and shall be as follows: 
For the first one-seventh (1/7) of a mile the rate shall be two dollars and seventy-five cents ($2.75), and for each additional one-seventh (1/7) of a mile the rate shall be thirty cents ($0.30). 
(c)  Additional charges. Additional charges based upon the meter mileage may also be levied for such destinations outside the city so long as the taxicab driver provides the passenger(s) with a written rate sheet prior to engagement of the taximeter which clearly identifies the additional charges and the passenger(s) sign(s) the rate sheet agreeing to pay the additional charges. In lieu of using the taximeter and charging an additional fare, taxicab drivers may charge a flat rate for discharges outside the city so long as the driver provides the passenger(s) with a written rate sheet prior to hire which clearly identifies the flat rate charge and the passenger(s) sign(s) the rate sheet agreeing to pay the flat rate. 
(d)  Waiting time charges. Taxicabs may charge thirty cents ($0.30) for each one (1) minute of waiting time. Waiting time shall include: (i) the time when the taxicab is stopped or moving at a speed less than twelve (12) miles per hour, (ii) the time when the taxicab is not in motion beginning five (5) minutes after its time of arrival at the place to which it has been initially called, and (iii) the time consumed while it is standing or waiting at the direction of the passenger. No charge shall be made for time lost on account of inefficiency of the taxicab or its operation or time consumed by premature response to a call. 
(e)  Baggage, parcels, etc. Taxicabs may charge an additional total sum of fifty cents ($0.50) for transportation of up to five (5) parcels or baggage, other than ordinary handbags. A charge of an additional total sum of seventy-five cents ($0.75) may be made for the transportation of more than five (5) parcels or baggage, other than ordinary handbags. A charge of five dollars ($5.00) may be made for the transportation of non-pedestrian carried items, or the driver may refuse to transport such items. 
(f)  Elderly and handicapped discounts; military discounts. The certificate holder of a taxicab may authorize his taxicab drivers to offer transportation and services to passengers at a reduced fare upon receipt of satisfactory proof that such passenger is sixty (60) years of age or older, or is qualified for the Handi-Ride program operated by the Transportation District Commission of Hampton Roads or successor. Proof of entitlement to such a discount may be by presentment of a Medicare card or a Handi-Ride card, and satisfactory proof of the identity of the holder of such card, or by any other proof that may be deemed satisfactory in lieu thereof. Additionally, the certificate holder of a taxicab may authorize his taxicab drivers to offer transportation and services to passengers at a reduced fare upon receipt of satisfactory proof that such passenger is an active duty member or veteran of the United States Armed Forces. The size of such discounts shall be predetermined and filed by the certificate holder with the chief of police prior to offering such discounts to qualified passengers. Such discounts shall be applied to all qualifying passengers equally. 
(g)  Receipt. A taxicab driver shall provide a receipt indicating the driver's name, the time, date, place of origin and destination of the trip, taxicab company name and vehicle number, and the amount of the final fare and charges when requested to do so by a passenger. 
(h)  Intercity rates. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, taxicabs operating under a certificate, or the equivalent, from another locality which are transporting passengers from outside the city to a destination within the city may charge the rates of fare prescribed by such other locality in lieu of the rates prescribed herein. 
(i)  Airport flat rate. A minimum fare of ten dollars ($10.00) will apply to all taxicab rides originating at the Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport. 
(j)  Toll charges. Taxicabs may charge an additional fee to cover toll charges, as permitted by section 41-137 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6861-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7391-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6861-12 shall be in effect on and after May 1, 2012.  
Sec. 41-51. - Rate card generally; display of rates of fare. 
(a)  Upon approval of a certificate pursuant to this article, the chief of police shall cause two (2) rate cards to be issued for each vehicle covered by the certificate. The rate cards shall have printed thereon the name, business address and telephone number of the certificate holder, together with the approved rates of fare. 
(b)  The rate cards issued by the chief of police shall be displayed in the interior of the taxicab by affixing one (1) card to the right front sun visor area and the other card within the rear passenger compartment. The rate cards shall be enclosed in a clear plastic shield through which its contents may be fully discernible and clearly legible to passengers within the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7515-18, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7515-18, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2018, amended the title of § 41-51 to read as herein set out. The former § 41-51 title pertained to rate card generally; display of rates of fare on outside of taxicab.  
Sec. 41-52. - Issuance of replacement rate card. 
Should it become necessary for a certificate holder to obtain another rate card due to loss or defacement of the original, the chief of police shall issue the certificate holder replacement cards upon payment of a re-issuance fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for each replacement card. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-53. - Carrying more than one passenger; division of fare among passengers. 
(a)  Not more than one (1) passenger shall be transported at one (1) time by a taxicab without the consent of the person first engaging the taxicab. 
(b)  If the hirer of a taxicab consents to another passenger occupying the taxicab with him or her, the passenger first arriving at his or her destination shall pay in accordance with the meter charge, whereupon the taxicab driver shall immediately clear the taximeter and set the same for immediate operation for the next passenger who shall pay the meter charge upon arrival at his or her destination. The same method shall be followed for each succeeding passenger. 
(c)  When two (2) or more passengers are bona fide traveling together to the same destination, the charge shall be made as if the taxicab were hired by one (1) passenger. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-54. - Failure to pay fare; advance payments; receipts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the lawful fare and charges of a taxicab after having hired same for transportation. 
(b)  Taxicab drivers may require the estimated lawful fare and charges to be paid in advance before undertaking the transportation of a passenger; however, if the final total fare and charges are less than the advance payment, the taxicab driver shall return the unearned portion of the advance payment. If the final total fare and charges are more than the advance payment, the passenger or passengers shall be responsible for payment of the balance of the final total fare and charges. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Secs. 41-55—41-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 
 
Sec. 41-60. - Certificate required for operation as a taxicab; violation. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any vehicle as a taxicab in the city unless a valid certificate for its operation as such has been issued by the chief of police. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any such vehicle under an expired, suspended, or revoked certificate. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated any vehicle as a taxicab unless the certificate or a copy of the certificate authorizing its operation as such is located in the taxicab and immediately available for presentation to any member of the public, any law enforcement officer, or any taxicab inspector requesting same. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make or cause to be made, either directly or indirectly, any false statement on an application for a certificate required under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-61. - Required; renewal; exception. 
(a)  A person desiring to operate a vehicle as a taxicab within the city shall apply to the chief of police for a certificate to do so. 
(b)  The initial certificate issued to a person pursuant to the provisions of this division shall expire on the last day of the calendar month, one (1) year following its issuance. In the event the certificate holder desires to renew the certificate, he must file a renewal application at least ten (10) business days prior to the expiration of the existing certificate. In the event a renewal application is not filed prior to such ten-day period, the procedure required for new certificates shall be followed by the applicant, and the then existing certificate shall expire according to its terms. 
(c)  If the chief of police denies the initial application for a certificate or any renewal thereof, the applicant may appeal the decision pursuant to section 41-72 of this Code. 
(d)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, taxicabs operating under a lawful certificate, or the equivalent, from another locality may transport passengers from outside the city to a destination within the city; but may not pick up passengers in the city unless such other locality has been granted reciprocity by the chief of police in accordance with section 41-44 of this chapter, and such other locality provides reciprocity to taxicabs operating under certificates issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-62. - Filing and contents of application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a certificate required by this division shall file an application therefore with, and on forms provided by, the chief of police. Such application shall set forth at least the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, business address, and business telephone number in the city. 
(2)  The trade name under which the applicant proposes to do business in the city. 
(3)  The location of the premises in the city from which the applicant proposes to operate its business. 
(4)  The number of vehicles the applicant desires to certificate. 
(5)  The seating capacity of each vehicle. 
(6)  The coloring, lettering or marks to be used on each vehicle. 
(7)  The make, model, and vehicle identification number of each vehicle. 
(8)  Written permission for the chief of police to conduct necessary criminal history and motor vehicle records checks for initial applications and all renewals. 
(9)  Any other information which may be required by the chief of police as necessary for consideration of the application. 
(b)  Applications for renewal certificates shall be filed with and on forms provided by the chief of police, and such applications shall include information the chief of police requires to adequately consider such renewal application. 
(c)  The application shall be made under oath by the applicant or an authorized representative of the applicant in the event the applicant is a partnership, corporation or other legally operating entity, that the information contained in the application is true and exact to the best of the applicant's knowledge and belief. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-63. - Evidence required of applicant. 
(a)  It shall be the applicant's burden to provide proof of the following by clear and convincing evidence: 
(1)  That the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicab(s) in the city which are designated in the application. 
(2)  That the applicant is of good moral character with no conviction, nor plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony within the past five (5) years; or if the applicant is a business entity, that each of the officers of the corporation or business entity are of good moral character, with no convictions, nor pleas of guilty or nolo contendere to a felony within the past five (5) years. 
(3)  That the applicant is financially fit and able to carry on the business of operating taxicabs under such certificate. 
(4)  That the vehicle to be operated under such certificate is properly titled and registered with the Commonwealth. 
(5)  That the location of a business office within the city, where all logs, manifests, and dispatch records will be maintained, complies with all requirements of the city Code, specifically including the zoning provisions of the City Code. 
(6)  That, if the applicant is other than a human being, it is in good standing with the Virginia State Corporation Commission if registration with the Virginia State Corporation Commission is required, or is otherwise properly authorized to conduct business in the Commonwealth. 
(7)  That the applicant is able to provide adequate and efficient service in accordance with section 41-131 of this chapter. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide written permission for the police department to conduct a federal and state, motor vehicle and criminal history records investigation prior to the issuance of a certificate, during the term of such certificate, and for purposes of any renewals of such certificates. The permission shall also include a statement by the applicant which authorizes the police department to obtain information and records from any other public or private source concerning the applicant's criminal history, driving record, character, and general reputation for truth and veracity. To this end, and to facilitate such investigations, the applicant shall also submit to fingerprinting and provide personal descriptive information to be forwarded through the Virginia Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation sufficient for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information regarding the applicant pursuant to section 15.2-1503.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(c)  The applicant may provide any additional supporting information the applicant wants to include with the application. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6493-08, § 1)  
Sec. 41-64. - Certificate fees. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate under this division or an application for a change in location, a non-refundable fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be paid to the city to cover the cost of processing the application, including time expended for police investigation, cost of notice to the public and the like; together with a non-refundable fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each vehicle listed on the application. 
(b)  A non-refundable fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each listed vehicle shall be paid to the city for each annual renewal, together with a non-refundable fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each vehicle's annual inspection. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-65. - Hearing on application for a certificate; issuance or refusal. 
(a)  The chief of police shall hear and determine applications filed under this division which shall be accepted only on a quarterly basis. All applications shall be filed with the chief of police. During the months of January, April, July, and October of each year, all applications received since the last public hearing date shall be scheduled for public hearings. The chief of police shall conduct such public hearings after providing at least ten (10) days notice thereof, in writing, to the applicant and all holders of such certificates as are then active and in good standing. Such notice shall be mailed by first class mail to the applicant and the holders of such certificates to the addresses as shown on the application and on the active certificates, and shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which meets the requirements imposed by Section 8.01-324 of the state code. 
(b)  All applications filed prior to a period provided for in subsection (a) above and prior to the issuance of the notice fixing the date for such hearing, shall be considered at the same time. The decision to issue or refuse to issue a certificate shall be based only on the evidence presented at such hearing. 
(c)  The chief of police shall (i) determine whether or not the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicabs included on an application in the city, in addition to those vehicles being operated at the time such application is made; (ii) whether or not the applicant is qualified pursuant to the provisions of this article; and (iii) shall preliminarily approve or refuse to approve certificates therefor. If refused in whole or part, the chief of police shall provide the applicant the reason's) for the disapproval. 
(d)  Upon preliminary approval of an application, the applicant shall apply for a business license, if one has not already been issued, listing the certificate owner's name and business address, and pay to the city the required business license tax. The business license shall list the same trade name and business address as that listed on the application and certificate. 
(e)  Upon presentation of a business license to the chief of police, the chief of police shall issue a certificate subject to the provisions of this division and all other laws and ordinances governing the operation of a taxicab for-hire in the city conditioned upon compliance with all other requirements of this article within thirty (30) days of the date of issuance. Failure to comply with the requirements of this article within such thirty-day period shall be grounds for revocation of the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-66. - Certificate contents. 
Certificates issued under the provisions of this division shall designate the name of the applicant to whom granted; the applicant's trade name; the city business address of the certificate holder; the make, model, vehicle identification number and seating capacity of each vehicle; the coloring, lettering or marks used on the vehicles to be operated as taxicabs under such certificate; and the location of the premises from which such vehicles are to be operated. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-67. - Transfer. 
Certificates issued under the provisions of this division may be transferred to another person at the request of the certificate holder, if such transfer is first approved by the chief of police. No certificate shall be transferred unless the person to whom the certificate is proposed to be transferred, and the taxicab to which it applies, shall in all respects qualify for a certificate in accordance with the provisions of this article. Prior to the transfer of a certificate pursuant to this section, a non-refundable fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be paid to the city for each certificate to be transferred. A certificate transferred pursuant to this section may not be transferred again for a period of one (1) year from the date of the most recent transfer of that certificate. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-68. - Substitution of vehicles. 
The holder of a certificate issued under the provisions of this division may substitute new or other satisfactory vehicle in place of a vehicles that has become worn, damaged or obsolete, provided that such certificate holder notifies the chief of police in advance of such substitution, together with all identification information. Such substitution vehicle must first pass inspection by the city prior to commencing operations as a taxicab, and a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the city for inspection of each replacement vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-69. - Compliance with specifications. 
(a)  The person to whom a certificate has issued under the provisions of this division shall operate the taxicab covered by the certificate in accordance with the specifications contained in the certificate, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab if the make, model, identification number, class of vehicle, the seating capacity, and coloring, lettering or identification information used on such vehicle are at variance with the specifications in the certificate issued under this division, except upon written authorization by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-70. - Holder to give notice of termination of operation. 
The holder of a certificate issued under the provisions of this division shall notify the chief of police in writing within ten (10) days of the termination of the operation of the vehicle covered by such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-71. - Suspension and revocation of certificate. 
(a)  A certificate issued under the provisions of this division may be suspended by the chief of police, after reasonable notice and hearing, for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure of such holder to comply with any requirements of this article. 
(2)  Knowingly permitting or acquiescing in the use of a taxicab in a misdemeanor violation of any provision of federal, state or local law. 
(3)  Failure to maintain evidence of current vehicular insurance with the chief of police as required by this article. 
(4)  Failure to maintain the taxicab in good order and repair in accordance with division 7 of this article. 
(b)  A certificate issued under the provisions of this division may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police, after reasonable notice and hearing, for the following reasons: 
(1)  Charging rates of fare or other charges not provided for in division 2 of this article. 
(2)  Failure to properly and adequately render reasonable service to the public. 
(3)  Failure to provide adequate and efficient service as defined in section 41-131. 
(4)  Unknowingly using a vehicle as a taxicab after lapse, cancellation or termination of insurance coverage as required by this article. 
(5)  Failure to obey an order of a law enforcement officer issued pursuant to section 41-122 of this chapter. 
(6)  Failure to maintain a current business address in the city and business telephone number with the chief of police. 
(c)  A certificate issued under the provisions of this division shall be revoked by the chief of police, after reasonable notice and hearing, for the following reasons: 
(1)  Three (3) or more violations of subsection (a)(1) through (4) of this section within a twelve-month period. 
(2)  Knowingly permitting or acquiescing in the use of a taxicab in a felony violation of any provision of federal or state law. 
(3)  Knowingly using a vehicle as a taxicab after lapse, cancellation or termination of insurance coverage as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-72. - Appeal. 
An appeal shall lie to the city manager from a decision of the chief of police denying, revoking, suspending, refusing to transfer or failing to renew a certificate issued under this division. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the city manager within ten (10) days after such adverse action on forms prescribed by the chief of police. 
The city manager shall respond to the appellant within ten (10) days after receipt by his office of the written appeal. The city manager's response must either grant the relief requested or schedule a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of his response in order to afford the appellant an opportunity to be heard in the matter. A decision by the city manager shall be communicated to the appellant within ten (10) days after the hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be final; no further appeals are authorized or provided. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-73. - Limit in number. 
The number of taxicabs which shall be authorized and for which certificates of public convenience and necessity may be issued shall not be more than two hundred forty (240). No new certificate shall be issued unless the total number of vehicles for which certificates are outstanding is less than two hundred forty (240), provided that renewal of an existing certificate shall not be regarded as a new certificate for purposes of this section. On an annual basis, the city manager shall evaluate and make a recommendation to the taxicab advisory board as to whether this limit should continue, be changed, or be repealed. 
(Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Secs. 41-74—41-79. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 41-80. - Driver's permit required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall drive a taxicab within the city, unless such person has a current taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this division, which taxicab driver's permit (i) shall be in addition to any other driver's license required by law, and (ii) authorizes the holder of the taxicab driver's permit to operate any taxicab in the city for which a current certificate has been issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-81. - Application. 
(a)  The application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the chief of police, sworn to, and filed with the chief of police. In the interest of public welfare and safety, and for the express purpose of consideration of an applicant's qualifications for a taxicab driver's permit, or renewal thereof, it is necessary to obtain and confirm certain information, including the past criminal conduct of the applicant, to insure the applicant's qualifications are compatible with operating taxicabs in the city. To that end, such application shall include at least the following information concerning the applicant: 
(1)  Full name, current home address, and places of residence within the past five (5) years. 
(2)  Personal descriptive information to include age, height, race, color of eyes and hair, sex, and place of birth. 
(3)  Whether or not the applicant is a citizen of the United States; and if not a citizen, the nature of the authorization for the applicant's presence in the United States. 
(4)  Whether or not previously employed or licensed as a for hire driver or chauffeur, and if so, whether or not such license has ever been suspended, revoked or refused, together with the dates and cause of such action. 
(5)  That applicant is of good moral character with no conviction, plea of guilty, or nolo contendere to a felony within the past five (5) years, and if so, the nature of the offense and date of each conviction. 
(6)  Written permission by the applicant for the police department to conduct a federal and state, motor vehicle and criminal history records investigations prior to the issuance of an initial taxicab driver's permit, during the term of such permit, and for purposes of any renewals of such permits. Such permission shall also include a statement by the applicant which authorizes the police department to obtain information and records from any other public or private source concerning the applicant's criminal history, driving record, character, and general reputation for truth and veracity. To this end and to facilitate such investigations, applicant shall also submit to fingerprinting and provide personal descriptive information to be forwarded through the Virginia Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation sufficient for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information regarding the applicant pursuant to section 15.2-1503.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. The applicant shall be required to pay the cost of fingerprinting and the criminal records check. 
(b)  The application filed under this section and any exhibits attached thereto shall be kept by the chief of police so long as the applicant has an active taxicab driver's permit issued by the city and for three (3) years thereafter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any statement on any application filed under this section that such person knows or should have known is false. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6493-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-82. - Applicant's qualifications. 
No taxicab driver's permit shall be issued by the chief of police to an applicant if: 
(1)  The applicant has ever used a taxicab for illegal purposes. 
(2)  The applicant has any physical or mental infirmity which might render such driver unfit for the operation of a taxicab. 
(3)  The applicant's current privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked. 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past five (5) years. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted in any court of driving under the influence of alcohol or other self-administered drug within the past twelve (12) months. 
(6)  The applicant has been convicted in any court of a violation of any federal, state or city law regulating the ownership or operation of taxicabs within the past twelve (12) months. 
(7)  The applicant has been convicted in any court of three (3) or more moving violations of the motor vehicle codes of any city or state, or a combination thereof, within the past twelve (12) months. 
(8)  The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(9)  The applicant does not possess a valid and current Virginia driver's license to drive a motor vehicle on the highways of the Commonwealth. 
(10)  The applicant has provided false information on the application that is material to the chief of police's determination to issue or not issue a taxicab driver's permit, or the applicant has been denied a taxicab driver's permit within the past twelve (12) months based on having provided false information on a previous application. 
(11)  Information and records obtained by the chief of police through the application investigation process indicates that the applicant is not qualified to obtain a taxicab driver's permit. 
(12)  The applicant is required to register or has registered as a sex offender in any state or by the federal government, or has ever been convicted of a crime which would require the applicant to register as a sex offender under current laws. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-83. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of an application under this division, and payment of the fee to the city under section 41-84, the chief of police shall conduct an investigation, including such examination and hearings as the chief of police may deem proper, of the qualifications and fitness of the applicant to drive a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-84. - Fee. 
A non-refundable fee for the initial application of a taxicab driver's permit to cover the cost of processing the application shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). A non-refundable fee for the annual renewal of such taxicab driver's permit to cover the cost of processing the renewal application shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-85. - Issuance or refusal. 
If, upon investigation, the chief of police is satisfied that the applicant for a taxicab driver's permit meets the requirements of this division and is otherwise qualified and fit to drive a taxicab, the chief of police shall issue the applicant a taxicab driver's permit. 
If, upon investigation, the chief of police is not satisfied that the applicant for a taxicab driver's permit meets the requirements of the law and this division, or is otherwise disqualified or unfit to drive a taxicab, the chief of police shall not issue the applicant a taxicab driver's permit. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-86. - Term; renewal. 
A taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid for a term of twenty-four (24) months from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. On or before the expiration date of such permit, the holder thereof may renew the same upon payment of the renewal fee prescribed in this division, and completion of a renewal application on a form prescribed by the chief of police, sworn to and filed with the chief of police. If a taxicab driver's renewal permit application is not properly completed and submitted on or before the expiration date, the holder must apply for a new taxicab driver's permit in accordance with the provisions of this division and pay the fee prescribed herein for the initial issuance of a taxicab driver's permit. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7002-13, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7002-13, adopted Sept. 24, 2013, shall be in effect on and after October 1, 2013.  
Sec. 41-87. - Duplicate taxicab driver's permit. 
Should it become necessary for a holder of a taxicab driver's permit, during the term of such taxicab driver's permit, to obtain another taxicab driver's permit due to the loss or defacement of the original, the chief of police shall issue the holder another taxicab driver's permit, upon the payment of a non-refundable re-issuance fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-88. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be revoked by the chief of police after reasonable notice to the driver and an opportunity to be heard, if: 
(1)  The permit holder uses a taxicab for illegal purposes. 
(2)  The permit holder has any physical or mental infirmity for a period of more than ninety (90) days which renders such driver unfit for the operation of a taxicab; 
(3)  The permit holder's privilege to operate a motor vehicle has been revoked. 
(4)  The permit holder has been convicted in any court of a felony since issuance of the taxicab driver's permit. 
(5)  The permit holder has been convicted in any court of driving under the influence of alcohol or other self-administered drug for the second time within the past twelve (12) months. 
(6)  The permit holder has been convicted in any court of two (2) violations within a twelve-month period, or three (3) or more violations at any time, of any city or state code provisions, or a combination thereof, regulating the ownership or operation of taxicabs. 
(7)  The permit holder has been convicted in any court of three (3) or more moving violations within a twelve-month period of the motor vehicle codes of any city or state, or a combination thereof. 
(8)  The permit holder does not possess a valid and current Virginia driver's license to drive a motor vehicle on the highways of the Commonwealth. 
(9)  The permit holder provided false information on the application that is material to the chief of police's determination to issue or not issue a taxicab driver's permit. 
(10)  The permit holder's taxicab driver's permit has been suspended a second time for the same cause or a third time for any cause in the last twelve (12) months. 
(11)  The permit holder fails to obey an order of a law enforcement officer issued pursuant to section 41-122 of this chapter. 
(12)  The permit holder registers or is required to be registered as a sex offender in any state or by the federal government. 
(b)  A taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be suspended by the chief of police for the periods indicated, after reasonable notice to the driver and an opportunity to be heard. 
(1)  If the permit holder has any physical or mental infirmity which renders such driver unfit for the operation of a taxicab, his permit may be suspended for an indefinite period until proof is provided by the driver that such infirmity has been corrected, except that if the period of infirmity lasts longer than ninety (90) days, the taxicab driver's permit shall be revoked by the chief of police. 
(2)  If the permit holder has been convicted in any court of driving under the influence of alcohol or other self-administered drug within the past twelve (12) months, his permit shall be suspended until such time as the conviction is more than twelve (12) months old. 
(3)  If the permit holder has been convicted in any court of a violation of any city or state code provisions regulating the ownership or operation of taxicabs, his permit shall be suspended for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(4)  If the permit holder fails to post the taxicab driver's permit card as provided in this division, his permit shall be suspended for a period not to exceed seven (7) days. 
(5)  If the permit holder fails to comply with the requirements of division 8 of this article, taxicab operating regulations, his permit shall be suspended for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(6)  If the permit holder receives an unacceptable rating in the areas of cleanliness or driver's manifest during any inspection, and fails to pass reinspection within a thirty-day period from the date of the inspection, his permit shall be suspended for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days. 
(c)  In the event of the suspension or revocation of such taxicab driver's permit, the taxicab driver's permit shall be forthwith surrendered to the chief of police. In case of suspension, the taxicab driver's permit shall be returned to the driver at the expiration of the period of suspension. In the case of revocation, the driver may reapply to the chief of police for a taxicab driver's permit at any time after the expiration of one (1) year from the date of revocation, or at the expiration of any period of revocation, whichever occurs later. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-89. - Appeal. 
An appeal shall lie to the city manager from a decision of the chief of police denying, revoking, suspending or failing to renew a taxicab driver's permit as provided in this division. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the city manager within ten (10) days after such adverse action on forms prescribed by the chief of police. 
The city manager shall respond to the appellant within ten (10) days after receipt by his office of the written appeal. The city manager's response must either grant the relief requested or schedule a hearing within ten (10) days of the date of his response in order to afford the appellant an opportunity to be heard in the matter. A decision by the city manager shall be communicated to the appellant within ten (10) days after the hearing. The decision of the city manager shall be final; no further appeals are authorized or provided. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-90. - Records to be kept. 
The department shall keep a complete record of all taxicab driver's permits issued under the provisions of this division and of renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof so long as the driver has an active taxicab driver's permit and for three (3) years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-91. - Posting of taxicab driver's permit. 
The taxicab driver's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed in the right front sun visor area of every vehicle operated as a taxicab so as to be apparent to all passengers for hire. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-92. - Revocation of taxicab driver's permit by operation of law. 
(a)  A taxicab driver's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be immediately revoked and become void by operation of law, without notice or hearing, upon the conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere of any of the following by a permit holder: 
(1)  A felony; or 
(2)  Any crime or infraction that results in the suspension or revocation of the applicant's privilege to operate a motor vehicle in the Commonwealth of Virginia or any other state. 
(b)  A taxicab driver's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be immediately revoked and become void by operation of law if the permit holder has registered or is required to register as a sex offender in any state or by the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-93. - Surrender of taxicab driver's permit. 
It is the affirmative duty of the holder of a taxicab driver's permit which has been revoked pursuant to the provisions of this division to immediately surrender such permit to the chief of police. Failure to do so is a violation of the terms of the issuance of the permit and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Secs. 41-94—41-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TAXI METERS 
 
Sec. 41-100. - Required; operating. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law, all taxicabs operating on the streets of the city shall be equipped with a taximeter of a type approved by the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection 41-50(c) of this chapter, taximeters shall be operating during all times that passengers are being transported in the taxicab, regardless of the method used to calculate the fare's. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6493-08, § 1)  
Sec. 41-101. - Sealing generally; software-based devices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or permit to be used any vehicle as a taxicab unless a taximeter: 
(1)  Shall have first been installed and sealed by a state certified technician with the official designated seal and verified by the chief of police; or 
(2)  Is a software-based device approved by the chief of police that utilizes GPS or other measurement data in the calculation of time-and-distance fares for taxicab service. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6493-08, § 1; Ord. No. 7515-18, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7515-18, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2018, amended the title of § 41-101 to read as herein set out. The former § 41-101 title pertained to sealing generally.  
Sec. 41-102. - Tampering with seal or meter; operation of cab with broken seal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to (i) break a seal on a taximeter, (ii) tamper with a taximeter, or (iii) manipulate a taximeter in such manner as to cause it to inaccurately measure the distance traveled by the taxicab or the amount of the charges based upon the distance traveled. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab with a broken seal on the taximeter. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-103. - Location. 
Taximeters installed under the provisions of this division shall be so placed in the taxicab that the reading dial or face showing the amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily discernible by the passenger riding in such taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-104. - Taximeter display. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to engage the "hire" button on the taximeter when such vehicle is not actually transporting for hire passengers, or to fail to disengage the "hire" button on the taximeter at the termination of each and every for hire service. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-105. - Taximeter operating condition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab with a taximeter that is not in proper operating condition. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-106. - Inspection; procedure upon discovery of inaccuracy. 
(a)  All taximeters installed in taxicabs shall be inspected by the police department on an annual basis. 
(b)  In addition to the required annual inspection, a taximeter installed on a taxicab operating in the city shall be subject to inspection by any police officer or inspector designated to inspect taximeters at any time; and upon the discovery of any inaccuracy in such taximeter, may order the taxicab unfit for operation until such time as the taximeter is repaired or replaced, and reinspected. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab in violation of an order issued pursuant to subparagraph (b) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6493-08, § 1)  
Sec. 41-107. - Removal and reinstallation of taximeter. 
It shall be unlawful to utilize a taximeter that has been removed from one (1) taxicab and replaced in the same taxicab or another taxicab without first having the taximeter reinspected and resealed in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Secs. 41-108, 41-109. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - TAXICAB STANDS 
 
Sec. 41-110. - Operation from public stands. 
(a)  The chief of police may, after conducting a hearing thereon which is open to the public, designate such places on the public streets or other public property of the city as public taxicab stands as will best serve the public convenience and necessity of the citizens of the city. He shall further prescribe the number of taxicabs that may be parked at each such stand at any one (1) time. Such public stands shall be available for use only by taxicabs certificated under the provisions of this article and only so long as the chief of police determines that the stand is necessary for the public's convenience and necessity. The hearing shall be advertised in a local newspaper of general circulation at least once not less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Such advertisement shall invite public comment, advise the public of the location, time and date of the hearing, and state the purpose for which the hearing will be held. 
(b)  Any driver of a taxicab for which a certificate has been issued by the chief of police, and which is then available for hire, shall have the privilege of parking or stopping at such public taxicab stands to await the hiring or dispatch of his taxicab by a passenger when space is available therefore. 
(c)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when such stand has been designated and signed or marked as such by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Secs. 41-111—41-119. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - ANNUAL TAXICAB INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 41-120. - Unlawful to operate taxicab without taxicab inspection sticker. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or allow to be operated any taxicab that does not display a valid taxicab inspection sticker issued by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-121. - Annual inspections required; inspection procedure; cost of inspection sticker. 
(a)  Inspection required. Each taxicab for which a certificate has been issued pursuant to the provisions of division 3 shall be annually inspected by a person or persons designated to do so by the chief of police. 
(b)  Inspection procedure: 
(1)  Every certificate holder shall arrange for each taxicab certificated under the provisions of this article to be inspected annually by contacting the chief of police. Initial inspections of each taxicab shall be conducted upon receipt of the initial certificate applicable to each such taxicab; successive annual inspections shall be at staggered intervals as scheduled by the chief of police. 
(2)  Each taxicab shall be inspected for the following: 
a.  Mechanical condition, including but not limited to all lights, tires, taximeter and any other mechanical or electrical operating system on the taxicab. 
b.  Color, lettering, and numbering, including but not limited to clarity, legibility, and accuracy, including consistency with any other cabs operating under the same trade name. 
c.  Cleanliness of the exterior and interior of the taxicab as required by section 41-144. 
d.  Condition of the exterior as required by section 41-144. 
e.  Condition of the interior as required by section 41-144. 
f.  Unless equipped with an approved software-based device in accordance with section 41-101, the integrity of the taximeter seal which must not be broken or missing. 
g.  Current Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles Certificate of Authority to Operate. 
h.  Current state license plates. 
i.  Current Virginia vehicle safety inspection. 
j.  Age at time of initial or substitution inspection. Each taxicab for which a certificate of public convenience is issued on or after January 1, 2019 shall not be more than ten (10) model years old at the date of the initial inspection of the taxicab pursuant to section 41-121(b)(1). Each taxicab being inspected as a substitute or replacement vehicle as required by section 41-68 shall not be more than ten (10) model years old at the date of the inspection required for substitution. This age limit shall not apply to successive annual inspections of taxicabs after the initial inspection or inspection required for substitution, including inspections occurring after the transfer of a taxicab with a valid certificate of public convenience pursuant to section 41-67. 
(3)  All items listed in subparagraph (b)(2) of this section must be found acceptable before an inspection sticker may be issued. 
(4)  Each annual inspection shall include all items listed in subparagraph (b)(2) of this section; however, a reinspection of a rejected vehicle during the period of validity of the inspection sheet shall include the item or items previously found defective but may include any item susceptible to inspection, whether or not it was previously inspected. 
(5)  The inspection sheet rejecting such vehicle shall serve as a rejection notice and shall have a validity period of thirty (30) days beyond the day of issuance for cosmetic items and fifteen (15) days beyond the day of issuance for all other items. A complete inspection shall be performed on any vehicle which has an expired rejection inspection sheet. 
(6)  An non-refundable administrative fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be charged for each initial inspection, or reinspection after the rejecting inspection sheet has expired. 
(7)  A non-refundable fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be made for each reinspection of a vehicle previously rejected if such vehicle is submitted for reinspection within the validity period stated on the rejecting inspection sheet. 
(8)  Nontransferable inspection stickers shall be issued for each taxicab upon successful completion of the required inspection. Stickers shall be affixed to the rear bumper of the taxicab after issuance. 
(9)  A valid inspection sticker may be replaced, for a non-refundable fee of two dollars ($2.00), on a taxicab upon a viewing of the taxicab by the city's taxicab inspector in the event an inspection sticker is stolen or becomes damaged so as to be illegible. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7515-18, § 1; Ord. No. 7527-19, § 1)  
Sec. 41-122. - Inspection of taxicabs; orders to cease use of vehicle as a taxicab. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter related to inspection of taxicabs, and in addition thereto, any law enforcement officer may compel the certificate holder, owner, driver, or operator of any taxicab operating within the city to submit their taxicab to an inspection of the vehicle and present required documentation at any time to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  A law enforcement officer may require the certificate holder of any taxicab operating within the city to cease operation of the certificated vehicle as a taxicab until such time as mechanical deficiencies are corrected, and the taxicab reinspected, if the law enforcement officer observes a condition of the taxicab which places persons or property in eminent danger of accident or injury. At such time as the taxicab's deficiencies are corrected and the certificate holder has requested a reinspection, city personnel designated to conduct re-inspections shall endeavor to reinspect the taxicab within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of the reinspection request, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and city holidays. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the order of a law enforcement officer issued pursuant to this section, and such failure may result in the suspension or revocation of the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued to the subject taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Secs. 41-123—41-129. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - TAXICAB OPERATING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 41-130. - Lettering and numbering; display of advertising; lights other than those required by law. 
(a)  All taxicabs operated under certificates issued pursuant to the provisions of this article which are operated under one (1) trade name shall be of unique and uniform color and lettering as approved by the chief of police, shall display the trade name of the taxicab on both sides and rear of the vehicle in letters at least three (3) inches in height, and shall be uniquely numbered with numbers at least three (3) inches in height on both sides and the rear of the taxicab. Such numbers shall be placed on both sides and the rear of each taxicab in a prominent place. Lettering and numbers shall be affixed to the taxicab by painting thereon or by stick-on letters and numbers that are not easily removed without damage to the letters and numbers. Letters and numbers shall not be magnetically attached to the taxicab. 
(b)  No advertising shall be displayed in or on a taxicab, except advertising on a panel affixed to the rear bumper of the taxicab. Such panel shall neither obscure the rear view vision of the driver, nor shall it obscure any licensing, lettering, lights or signals required to be displayed on the rear of the taxicab. 
(c)  No lights shall be added to a vehicle used as a taxicab other than the outside roof mounted light designating the vehicle as a taxicab and those lights otherwise required by law. 
(d)  Outside roof mounted lights shall be turned on and in proper operating order during all times as the taxicab is hired or available for hire. 
(e)  Taxicabs may display telephonic, internet, or other contact information that can be used to arrange taxicab service, which displays shall not be considered advertising for purposes of this section. A maximum of three (3) means of contact may be displayed on a taxicab. Each means of contact may be displayed once on both sides and the rear of the vehicle, provided that such displays shall not obscure any licensing, lettering, lights or signals required to be displayed on the taxicab. Any changes to contact information must be pre-approved by the chief of police or his designee before such changes are made to ensure compliance with the specifications of the certificate, per section 41-69 of this Code. Changes to contact information displayed on a taxicab will require that taxicab to be subject to inspection, including applicable fees, in accordance with section 41-121 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1; Ord. No. 7081-14, § 1)  
Sec. 41-131. - Adequate and efficient service required. 
(a)  All taxicab companies shall provide adequate and efficient service throughout the city at all times by: 
(1)  Providing radio, mobile telephone or other electronic dispatch service; 
(2)  Maintaining a business office and business records within the city; and 
(3)  Providing twenty-four-hour service. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a taxicab company includes an association of certificate holders operating taxicabs under the same trade name. 
(c)  No taxicab for which a certificate has been issued shall be out of service for a period of ten (10) or more consecutive days unless authorized by the chief of police for good cause shown prior to being out of service. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7351-17, § 1)  
Sec. 41-132. - Consent required for change of location of operations. 
The location of the business office in the city from which taxicabs are to be operated pursuant to a certificate shall not be changed from that specified in the certificate without the written consent of the chief of police and the issuance of an amendment to the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-133. - Parking while awaiting employment. 
Except while waiting for a passenger who has already engaged the services of such vehicle, no taxicab shall park or stand awaiting employment on any public street, nor on private property in a residential zoning district, except at an approved public taxicab stand. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the parking of a taxicab operated by its owner or designated driver on any street in the city while such owner or designated driver is in the course of transacting private, personal business; however, at such times, the dome light must be turned off indicating that the taxicab is not available for hire. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-134. - Parking on street in front of taxicab driver's or certificate holder's residence. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the chief of police may include in a certificate issued under the provisions of this article permission to park one (1) taxicab on the street in front of the residence of the designated driver or certificate holder of such taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-135. - Taking on passengers when taxicab parked in front of driver's or certificate holder's residence. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab to take on passengers from a location at which such taxicab may be parked when parked on the street in front of the residence of the driver or certificate holder of such taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-136. - Calls to be accepted in order. 
It shall be the duty of every certificate holder, dispatcher, and driver to give preference to calls for service in order of their receipt, regardless of the location or destination of the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-137. - Use of shortest practicable route required; use of toll facilities. 
The driver of every taxicab operated in the city shall operate the same over the shortest practicable route, or as otherwise directed by the passenger, from the place of the beginning of the trip to the place of destination. When such route requires the payment of a toll, the driver shall transport the passenger by way of a toll facility when the passenger agrees to pay the toll charge incurred with respect to the trip. The driver shall use a global positioning system (GPS) to determine the shortest practicable route. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Sec. 41-138. - Limitation on number of passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver to transport, in a taxicab, more than two (2) passengers in the front seat or more than four (4) passengers in the rear seat at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-139. - Refusal to carry an orderly person. 
Drivers of taxicabs operating in the city shall not refuse to carry any orderly person anywhere in the city, unless previously engaged or physically unable to do so. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-140. - Violation by passengers; misdemeanor; ejection. 
All persons who fail, while using transportation services of a taxicab to act in an orderly manner so as to permit the safe operation of a vehicle by the driver, or who fail to obey the directions of any such driver, operator, or other person in charge to act in such orderly manner, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Furthermore, such persons may be ejected from any such vehicle by any driver, operator, or person in charge of such vehicle, or by any police officer or other conservator of the peace; and in case such persons ejected have paid their fare upon such vehicle, they shall not be entitled to the return of any part of the same. For the refusal of any such passenger to abide by the direction of the person in charge of such vehicle as aforesaid, and his consequent ejection from such vehicle, neither the certificate holder, driver, operator, person in charge, owner, manager, nor common carrier or restricted common carrier operating such vehicle shall be liable for damages in any court. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-141. - Driver not to permit passengers to enter or leave on traffic side of taxicab. 
No taxicab driver shall willfully permit any passenger to enter or leave such taxicab on a public street by a left side door, except on one-way streets when such vehicle is lawfully stopped on the left side of the street for the purpose of taking on or discharging a passenger; nor shall such driver willfully permit any passenger to enter or leave such taxicab on a public street by a right side door, except when such vehicle is lawfully stopped on the right side of the street for the purpose of taking on or discharging a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-142. - Driver's manifest. 
(a)  A vehicle manifest shall be maintained by the certificate holder and taxicab driver in and for each vehicle used as a taxicab in the city. Except for taxicabs equipped with approved software-based devices as set forth in section 41-101 of this Code, for which an electronic manifest is being generated, the certificate holder shall furnish the driver with a written driver's manifest in a format approved by the chief of police. All manifests shall provide for a record of the following: 
(1)  Certificate holder's full name and business trade name, business telephone number, and Newport News business address. 
(2)  Taxicab driver's full name and taxicab driver's permit number. 
(3)  Date and time taxicab driver begins duty and ends duty. 
(4)  Taxicab vehicle number approved by the chief of police. 
(5)  Odometer reading at beginning of duty and ending of duty or total miles traveled during the taxicab driver's shift. 
(6)  Starting point of the trip (address or place), finishing point of the trip (address or place) and time of each trip. 
(7)  Number of passengers for each trip. The number of passengers may be recorded either in the manifest or via separately maintained photographic log. 
(8)  Taximeter rates for each trip. 
(9)  Additional fees and total amount charged to passengers, including tolls. 
(b)  A manifest shall be in the possession of and maintained by the taxicab driver in the taxicab at all times during the operation of the taxicab, and a separate manifest shall be kept for each day of operation of the vehicle, provided that a driver operating a taxicab at 12:00 midnight may continue to use the manifest bearing the date the work period commenced through the end of such work period. The manifest shall be delivered to the certificate holder within twenty-four (24) hours of the termination of each driver's assignment. 
(c)  Each taxicab driver shall maintain the manifest in a clear, neat and readable condition. 
(d)  At the beginning of each trip, the taxicab driver shall record on the manifest the time of beginning the trip and the place where the passenger is picked up. At the end of the trip, the driver shall record the total trip meter rate, time of ending and place where the passenger was discharged. The fare collected for each trip shall be recorded immediately after collection. 
(e)  For the purpose of this section, the word "trip" shall mean the entire time and distance that one (1) person, or more than one (1) person, as provided for in section 41-53 of this article, has engaged the service of a taxicab beginning with the actual service until such time as service has been terminated and the fare has been paid. 
(f)  Manifests and any other record required by this article shall be available for inspection, either in the taxicab while it is in operation, or at the certificate holder's place of business in the city, by any law enforcement officer. All such manifests and records shall be preserved for at least twelve (12) months; however, a manifest may be required to be preserved for a longer period as the chief of police shall require upon written notice to the certificate holder. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a driver or certificate holder to refuse or fail to immediately make the driver's current manifest available for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer. 
(h)  Manifests required by this article shall not include records of non-emergency medicaid transportation provided under the authority of the Virginia Department of Medical Assistance Services, or paratransit services provided under the authority of the Transportation District Commission of Hampton Roads. Any logs required for those trips shall be kept separately from the manifest required herein. 
(i)  A manifest required by this article may be maintained in a written or electronic format, so long as the manifest meets all of the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6493-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6947-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7351-17, § 1; Ord. No. 7515-18, § 1)  
Sec. 41-143. - Disposition of property left in taxicabs. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab to knowingly fail, refuse or neglect to preserve any property left in such taxicab by any passenger. The driver shall deliver such property to the certificate holder's place of business in the city, and such certificate holder shall inventory and preserve same for the passenger who left the property in the taxicab. The inventory shall include the date the property was discovered in the taxicab, a description of the property, the driver, the date of disposition and the disposition of the property. Property of an apparent value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be delivered to the chief of police on a weekly basis, who shall mark the same for identification and preserve same for the passenger who left the property in the taxicab. When the property has been identified and ownership established, it shall be promptly delivered to its owner upon the owner's request. Any property which is not called for within sixty (60) days of the date of the inventory or delivery to the chief of police may be disposed of according to law. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1)  
Sec. 41-144. - Cleanliness and condition of taxicabs and drivers. 
(a)  The interior of all taxicabs shall be maintained in a clean condition, free of trash and debris at all times while available for service. 
(b)  The interior seats, floor coverings, headliners, window shelves, interior panels, and dashboards of all taxicabs shall (i) be maintained in a clean condition, free of holes, tears, and frays; and (ii) contain no sharp corners or protrusions which may cause injury or damage to passengers, their clothing or carry-ons. 
(c)  The exterior of all taxicabs shall be clean, well maintained, free of major damage, and contain no sharp corners or protrusions which may cause injury or damage to passengers, their clothing or carry-ons. 
(d)  At all times while operating a taxicab, taxicab drivers shall be fully and neatly dressed and shall exhibit good personal hygiene without offensive body odor. All clothing shall be clean, free of rips, holes or tears, and shall present a professional appearance. Clothing shall not exhibit any obscene symbols, phrases or renderings. Clothing shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Male drivers are required to wear long pants or knee-length shorts, shirts with sleeves and fold-down collars, and shoes. Pullover "polo" shirts, with fold-down collars, buttons and short sleeves are permitted. Sweaters may also be worn. Shoes shall be clean, closed-in and worn with socks. Hair, beards and/or moustaches must be neat, must be trimmed and must present a groomed appearance. 
(2)  Female drivers are required to wear long pants, knee-length shorts, or a knee-length skirt or dress, shirts with sleeves and fold-down collars or a dress blouse, and shoes. Pullover "polo" shirts, with fold-down collars, buttons and short sleeves are permitted. Sweaters may also be worn. Shoes shall be clean, closed-in and worn with socks or stockings. Hair must be neat and must present a groomed appearance. 
(Ord. No. 6428-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6851-12, § 1)  
Chapter 42 - WATER SUPPLY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6233-06, adopted April 25, 2006, amended Ch. 42, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 42 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Responsibility of department of public utilities as to waterworks system, § 2-432; running water required at barbershops and beauty parlors, § 9-5; building regulations, Ch. 13; health and sanitation, Ch. 20; use of water from open wells or springs and condemnation of unsafe wells, springs, etc., § 20-5; water system for mobile home parks, § 25-41; regulations governing use of Diascund Creek and Little Creek reservoirs, § 29-54 et seq,; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; sidewalk vaults not to interfere with water pipes, § 38-126; water supply for swimming pools, § 39-10; public water supply required in subdivisions, App. B, § 9-05. 
State Law reference— Public water supply, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq.; authority of city to acquire, establish, maintain and operate waterworks, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2109, 15.2-2143, 15.2-2146. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter provides for the operation, regulation and protection of the Newport News Waterworks System. The Waterworks Department of the City of Newport News shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter, and the director shall have the authority to promulgate policies, rules and regulations governing the waterworks system. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 7204-19)  
Sec. 42-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Consumer. A person or business that uses water provided by the waterworks system. 
Customer. A person or business that makes application for and may use water provided by the waterworks system, and that is responsible for payment of the bill. 
Department. The Waterworks Department of the City of Newport News. 
Director. The Director of the Waterworks Department of the City of Newport News or his designated representative. 
Newport News Waterworks System or waterworks system. Any portion of the water system owned by the City of Newport News and operated by the waterworks department. 
Water service. Can mean either the provision of drinking water to a customer or consumer, or the pipeline through which water flows from the water main through the meter. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 7204-15)  
Sec. 42-3. - City to authorize tap and approve and control service pipe and meter. 
The tapping of a water main may be authorized by the city. City water service pipes and meters shall be approved and controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6805-11, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6805-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 42-4. - Unauthorized persons tapping, drilling into or cutting water mains or pipes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee or agent of the city, or approved contractor, to tap, drill into or cut any water main or pipe of the waterworks system. Agents of the city and contractors shall be approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-5. - Unauthorized disconnection of pipe, moving or disturbing meter, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to disconnect a water pipe, move or disturb a water meter, or turn on or off the water at any water service of the waterworks system. 
(b)  Any person who tampers with a water meter device, including turning on or off the water, removing a meter, removing the lock from a meter, or installing a meter or other device to obtain water service, without the authorization of the department, shall be charged a meter tampering fee. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 7419-17)  
Sec. 42-6. - City not responsible for damage caused by defective plumbing; consumers deemed to accept conditions of pressure and water service, etc. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable for any damage to persons or property caused by defective plumbing or open outlets when water is turned on at the request of the customer or his agent. 
(b)  All customers and consumers of water service shall be required to accept and by such acceptance shall be deemed to have consented to such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the city's distribution system at the location served and to waive all claims against the city for any damages arising out of low pressure or high pressure conditions, interruptions of service, or quality of water. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-7. - City not responsible for damage caused by use of water or by pipes and appurtenances not owned and maintained by the city or by failure to deliver water. 
The city shall not be liable for any damage to persons or property caused in any manner by the use of water by the customer or consumer; nor by water from any pipe or appurtenance not owned and maintained by the city; nor shall it be liable for any damages resulting from its failure to deliver water for any length of time. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6805-11, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6805-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 42-8. - Each house or dwelling unit to have separate service. 
(a)  On and after May 1, 2006, for residential buildings, no application for water service shall be approved for more than one (1) dwelling unit to be served from one (1) meter. For the purposes of this section, a dwelling unit includes individual condominium units and other units providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation with exception of apartment units under one (1) roof with multiple dwelling units. The apartment building (units within one (1) building structure) may be served from one (1) meter. Connection of apartment buildings via breezeway or similar type structures shall not be considered as one (1) apartment building. All conversions from apartment units to condominiums (individually owned residential units) subsequent to initial application, will require provision of one (1) meter per dwelling unit. 
(b)  Approval from the director is required to provide fewer meters than is stipulated in section (a) if it can be shown that separate meter service for each dwelling unit or building is not practically feasible. Approval of reduction in number of meters shall be at the sole discretion of the director. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-9. - Space adjacent to meter, valve box, hydrant or detector check to be free of obstructions. 
Each customer and consumer of city water shall be responsible for keeping the space adjacent to the water meter, valve box, hydrant and fire sprinkler service connection serving the property free and clear of all obstructions which may in any way interfere with the free access to same by city employees. Failure to do so shall constitute authorization for the department, after notice in writing to clear any such obstruction within seven (7) calendar days of such notice, to clear such obstruction and charge the cost thereof to the customer or consumer. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-10. - Unauthorized use of water. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to draw water from any water service, fire hydrant, blow off, main, valve or any other facility of the waterworks system, without first arranging with the department for same and paying all applicable charges pertaining thereto. This section shall not apply to the use of water for the legitimate purpose of extinguishing fires. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to confiscate any attachments found on any appurtenance, hydrant or water service of the waterworks system. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-11. - Supplying water to other premises. 
No person shall extend any pipe or use any hose, device or attachment to supply water to any other premises. Water service may be discontinued to the service address by the city for violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-12. - Moving of water service, generally. 
Should it be necessary to move a water service on account of construction of a driveway or sidewalk, or should the owner request moving a water service for any reason, the work shall be done by the department or an authorized agent at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-13. - Shutting off water for repairs, connections, etc. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to shut off the water in the mains and water services at any time, for the purpose of repairing or making connections or extensions, or for any other pur- 
pose that may be deemed necessary. If practicable, due notice will be given; but if emergencies arise when it is impracticable to give such notice, due to bursting of the main or other unforeseen causes, the city shall not be liable for any damage to persons or property caused thereby. 
(b)  The city permits licensed plumbers, on behalf of the customer, to shut off water at the meter for repairs or similar activities for the customer. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-14. - Field service fee for turning water on or off at request of customer after hours. 
Upon request, water may be turned on or off by the department between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. during regular work days. A field service fee may be charged for turning water on or off at any other time, pursuant to section 42-32. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-15. - Stopping service through cut off or removal of water meter, generally. 
(a)  Water service may be stopped through cut off or removal of the water meter by the city for any of the following reasons, until the defects or defaults have been corrected: 
(1)  For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, or otherwise. 
(2)  For the use of water through fire sprinkler service for any other purpose than fire protection. 
(3)  In case of vacancy of the premises. 
(4)  For nonpayment for water service, sewer service, or other fees accrued or accruing pursuant to this chapter, when such charges are sixty (60) days past due. 
(5)  For violation or noncompliance with any state health department regulation. 
(6)  For blocking a water meter in a manner that impairs or prohibits reading or servicing a meter in violation of section 42-9. 
(7)  For tampering with a meter device. 
(8)  For unauthorized use or diverting water from the water system. 
(9)  When requested, in writing, by another governmental agency, or by the jurisdiction in which the water service is located, when allowed by law. 
(b)  In case water is cut off under this section, the field service fee will apply. 
(c)  Upon removal of the meter for a violation of this section, the meter out fee will be charged. 
(d)  When water has been cut off, as provided for in this section, water service will be restored upon a proper application, only when the conditions under which such service was stopped are corrected and upon the payment of all applicable fees or making satisfactory provision therefor. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 7209; Ord. No. 7277-16, § 1)  
Sec. 42-16. - Discontinuing service through removal of water service connection, generally. 
(a)  Water service may be discontinued through removal of the water service connection for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Repeated violations of section 42-15. 
(2)  The water service has become inactive with no use for a period of five (5) years. 
(3)  When requested in writing by the owner. 
(4)  When requested in writing by the jurisdiction in which the water service is located, when allowed by law. 
(b)  For water service applied for at locations where there has been previous service, and such previous service was discontinued as provided for in this section, service will be renewed upon a proper application and all applicable fees being paid at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Secs. 42-17—42-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM CAPACITY EXPANSION AND EXTENSION 
 
Sec. 42-23. - Waterworks system capacity expansion. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. To finance growth-related capacity expansion and improvement of the waterworks system, a system development fee is imposed for each new connection made to the waterworks system. 
(b)  System development fee. 
(1)  Effective July 1, 2016, the system development fee for a ?? meter will be $2,520.00. 
(2)  The system development fee shall be based on the size of the meter to be installed and the meter's capacity to withdraw water from the distribution system. The system development fee will be set for a ?? meter. Effective July 1, 2006, for all meters above ??, the system development fee will be based on their capacity ratio relative to the ?? meter as provided in the table below: 
  Capacity Ratio Table 
Meter
Size (inches) 	Capacity Ratio 
5/8 	1.0 
3/4 	1.5 
1 	2.5 
1½ 	8.5 
2 	11.5 
3 	26.7 
4 	62.5 
6 	132.0 
8 	216.7 
10 	346.7 
 
(3)  When the size of the meter serving any premises is increased, the developer, applicant or owner requesting the increase shall pay a fee equal to the difference between the current system development fee for the existing meter capacity and the current system development fee for the larger capacity meter to be installed. 
(4)  When the capacity of any meter serving any premises is to be decreased, no system development fee nor capacity credit applies. 
(5)  When a new water service is requested where previous service existed, the developer, applicant or owner will receive system development fee credit for the capacity of the previous service equal to the current system development fee for that service capacity regardless whether a system development fee was paid for the previous service. Evidence of prior service is the responsibility of the developer, applicant or owner and is subject to approval by the director. 
(6)  When a larger meter is requested by the developer, applicant or owner in order to provide greater water flow for fire protection or fire fighting purposes through fire sprinkler systems or fire hydrants, and for related testing, and such arrangement is approved by the fire department in the jurisdiction where water service will be provided, the system development fee will be calculated based upon the size of the meter needed to provide water service excluding the incremental increase in the meter for fire protection, fire fighting, and testing purposes in accordance with departmental policy. 
(7)  The system development fee payment shall be made prior to meter installation. 
(8)  The system development fee imposed by this section shall be in addition to all other fees for water service imposed under this chapter. 
(c)  System development fee funds. All funds received in payment of the system development fee imposed under this section shall be used to finance growth-related capacity expansion and improvement of the waterworks system, including the payment of debt service on bonds issued to expand and improve the waterworks system. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6245-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6805-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7266-16, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7266-16 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2016.  
Sec. 42-24. - Waterworks system extensions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Extensions of the waterworks distribution system shall be provided under an extension agreement in accordance with applicable departmental policies for (1) individual water service installation; (2) extension of water pipelines; and (3) adjustment of water pipelines. 
(b)  Extension agreements. 
(1)  The director is authorized to approve, execute, and modify agreements for the extension of water services on behalf of the city, provided that the form of the agreement is approved by the city attorney. 
(2)  Each agreement shall require payment by the developer, applicant or owner of the total cost of the extension, to include pipeline, water meters, water services, connection fees, fire protection, inspection, and any other applicable fees and charges. 
(3)  Plans for distribution system extension shall be submitted to the department for approval and shall meet: 
i.  The criteria of the currently approved design and distribution standards. 
ii.  Fire protection standards as required by the appropriate fire official of the jurisdiction in which the development or service is located. 
(4)  No water services shall be installed until an agreement has been executed and fees have been paid, and the developer, applicant or owner has designated a proper location for each water service. Water services may only be installed by the city, or a contractor certified by the director in conjunction with an agreement. Meter installation shall be approved and controlled by the city. 
(5)  All necessary easements and licenses shall be furnished without cost to the city. Any cost for maintaining such easements and licenses shall be the responsibility of the developer, applicant or owner. 
(6)  Title to the water pipeline and its appurtenances shall vest in the "City of Newport News" upon completion of the requirements in each agreement. The city shall have the right to make or permit additional extensions, adjustments and connection to all extensions and adjustments after their completion. 
(7)  Fees shall be forfeited and the agreement shall be void if water services or meters are not installed within three (3) years from the date of the agreement. Thereafter, the installation of water services and meters shall require payment of current fees and the completion of a new extension agreement. 
(c)  Betterment. If the waterworks system requires either a pipeline larger than that required to serve the needs of the proposed project, or additional pipeline installation to improve the regional distribution system, the city shall pay the betterment cost, which is the incremental increase in the cost of the improvements beyond those necessary for the developer's, applicant's or owner's project. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Secs. 42-25—42-31. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER RATES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 42-32. - Rates and fees defined. 
Advance fee. A fee billed to customers upon initiation of service. Once the advance fee has been paid in full, it will be retained and, at the time service is terminated, it will be applied to the bill as a credit. 
After hours fee. A fee charged when a customer makes a request at a time or in such a manner that will require waterworks staff to conduct a service visit other than during regular work day (non-weekend, non-holiday) hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
Bill request administrative fee. A fee charged to customers who request paper or electronic copies of billing history. 
Field service fee. A fee charged to the customer when water service is scheduled to be discontinued due to violations of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the department, including, but not limited to, non-payment of all fees due. This fee will also be charged for the second and subsequent trips to a service location for the same activity necessitated by the failure to be present of customer or his agent. 
Fire hydrant fee. An annual fee, payable monthly, for fire hydrants supplied with water by the city for public and private fire protection. 
Fire hydrant meter. A meter equipped with special connectors and a backflow preventer that can be used to withdraw water from a fire hydrant. Fire hydrant meters are intended for use on specialty projects and events where a typical service tap and meter assembly is not available nor practical to install. Fire hydrant meters are not to be used as a source for potable water. 
Fire hydrant meter advance fee. A fee charged to customers prior to receipt of a fire hydrant meter. The fee will be returned to the customer upon return of the fire hydrant meter in acceptable condition. 
Fire hydrant meter fee. A monthly fee charged, in addition to the water consumed, based upon meter size. This fee is for expenses associated with the periodic billing procedures, maintaining distribution service facilities, and testing of the fire hydrant meter and backflow preventer. 
Fire hydrant meter no-reading fee. A fee charged to fire hydrant meter customers who fail to inform the department of the monthly hydrant meter reading each month. 
Fire protection service fee. A fee for fire hydrants supplied with water by the city for public and private fire protection in lieu of the fire hydrant fee. The local governing body of the jurisdictions in which the service is located may impose a fire protection service fee to be paid directly to the department by the water customer, provided that the fire protection service fee shall produce on an annual basis an amount which is not less than that which would be due under the fire hydrant fee. The fire protection service fee shall be added to the service fee set forth in this chapter. When the fire protection service fee is added to the service fee, the fire protection service fee may be based upon the meter size and shall be established by the local governing body. 
Fire sprinkler fee. A monthly fee for water standby service furnished by the city for fire sprinklers. 
Fire sprinkler service connection fee. A fee charged for a connection to the Waterworks System that includes a meter to detect flow and may include backflow preventer, valves and vault. 
General customers. Accounts in the waterworks system that are not industrial or single metered residential customers. 
Industrial customers. Industrial customers in the waterworks system that are establishments that use water primarily for manufacturing or processing and are classified as industrial in the billing system of the department. Rates for water usage will be charged in accordance with the designated "I" block rates of "I1 - first tier" and "I2 - second tier." 
Laboratory fee. A fee charged when the laboratory analyzes water samples for the public or other governmental agencies. 
Late payment fee. A fee charged if billing is not paid by the due date. 
Meter out fee. A fee charged when a meter is removed for violations of this chapter or violations of the rules and regulations of the department, or when requested by the customer. 
Meter re-read/flow test. A fee charged when a customer requests that a meter be re-read, and the original reading is determined to be accurate, or when a customer requests a flow test and the flow is determined to be adequate. 
Meter testing fee. A fee charged as a result of a customer requested water meter test when reading is considered accurate in accordance with section 42-37(c). 
New account fee. A fee charged for establishing a new account and turning on the water. 
Service fee. A monthly or bi-monthly fee charged, in addition to the water consumed, based upon meter size. This fee is for expenses associated with the periodic billing procedures and maintaining distribution service facilities. 
Single metered residential customers. Residential accounts in the waterworks system in which residences are individually metered and may include single family homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums, townhouses and apartments that have one (1) meter per dwelling unit and are classified as such in the billing system of the department. For purposes of this article, a "dwelling unit" means a separate residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. Rates for water usage will be charged in accordance with the designated "R" block rates of "R1 - lifeline tier," "R2 - normal tier," and "R3 - conservation tier." 
System development fee. A fee charged for each new connection made to the waterworks system based on the size of the meter to be installed. 
Water consumption rates. Rates to be charged to customers for each one hundred (100) cubic feet (HCF) or fraction thereof of water consumed. 
Water exam fee. A fee charged when a water exam is conducted at a customer's request. A water exam consists of a trained water service inspector visiting a customer's location for the purpose of determining whether a leak exists on the customer's side of the meter. 
Water meter yoke, meter box and meter installation fee. A fee charged for installation of meter yokes, meter boxes and meters by the department where the water service pipeline installation has been performed by the developer, applicant or owner pursuant to a water pipeline extension agreement and not by the department. 
Water service installation. Includes water service pipeline, meter yoke, meter box and meter. 
Water service installation fee. A fee charged for the installation by the department of water service pipelines, meter yokes, meter boxes and meters. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6363-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6784-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7055-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 70554-14, § 1, adopted May 13, 2014, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2014.  
Sec. 42-33. - Rates and fees. 
Advance fee: 
Meter Size
(inches) 	Fee 
? 	$50.00 
¾ 	73.00 
1 	120.00 
1 ½ 	217.00 
2 	333.00 
3 	600.00 
4 or greater 	933.00 
 
After hours fee: $ 100.00 
Bill request administrative fee: $ 10.00 
Field service fee: Per occurrence: $ 50.00 
Fire hydrant fee: $ 216.00 annually 
Fire hydrant meter advance fee: 
Meter Size
(inches) 	Fee 
1" 	$390.00 
3" 	855.00 
 
Fire hydrant meter fee: 
Meter Size
(inches) 	Fee 
1" 	$42.00 
3" 	160.00 
 
Fire hydrant meter no-reading fee: $ 25.00 
Fire sprinkler fee: 
Connection Size (inches) 	Monthly Fee 
2 	$5.25 
3 	6.83 
4 	8.33 
6 	13.58 
8 	16.67 
10 	19.83 
12 	24.00 
 
Fire sprinkler service connection fee: The fee shall be at cost, and shall be paid by the applicant. 
Laboratory fees: 
1.  Bacteriological Analyses 
A.  Total Coliform and E.Coli (Presence/Absence) .....$27.00 
B.  Total Coliform and E.Coli (Quantified) .....35.00 
C.  Enterococci (Quantified) .....36.00 
2.  Conductivity .....18.00 
3.  Alkalinity .....26.00 
4.  Total Hardness .....24.00 
5.  Chloride .....24.00 
6.  Fluoride .....28.00 
7.  Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) .....28.00 
8.  Ortho-Phosphorus .....29.00 
9.  Silica .....29.00 
10.  Nitrite .....39.00 
11.  Nitrate .....35.00 
12.  Ammonia .....35.00 
13.  UV254 .....30.00 
14.  Total Organic Carbon (TOC) .....38.00 
15.  Dissolved Organic Carbon (DOC) .....41.00 
16.  Ion Scan (Fluoride, Chloride, Bromide, and/or Sulfate) by EPA 300.1 .....57.00 
17.  Bromate by EPA Method 300.1 .....57.00 
18.  Trihalomethanes (THM) by EPA 524.3 .....101.00 
19.  Haloacetic Acids (HAA5) by EPA 552.3 .....219.00 
20.  Metal Scan by EPA Method 200.7 .....34.00 
21.  Single Metal Analysis by EPA Method 200.7 .....25.00 
22.  Trace Metal Scan by EPA Method 200.8 .....55.00 
23.  Lead & Copper or single Metal by EPA Method 200.8 .....38.00 
24.  Metal Prep .....21.00 
NOTE: No compliance Clean Water Act or DEQ monitoring program samples can be accepted due to the laboratory's Virginia Environmental Laboratory Certification Program. 
Late payment fee: 
Fees, penalties and interest for delinquent charges due to the city shall be calculated and imposed in accordance with Section 2-12.1 of this code. Anywhere the term "late payment fee" or "late penalty fee" occurs in this chapter shall refer to said fees, penalties and interest. 
Meter out fee: Per occurrence per customer request: $50.00 
Meter out fee: Per occurrence for non-payment of service fee, other waterworks fees, and sewer fees: $65.00 
Meter re-read/flow test: $25.00 
Meter tampering fee: Per occurrence for tampering with a water meter device: $100.00 
Meter testing fee: 
Meter Size (inches) 	Fee 
?" to 1" 	$75.00 
greater than (>) 1" 	100.00 
 
New account fee: $50.00 
Service fee: 
Meter Size (inches) 	Monthly Fee 
? 	$13.00 
¾ 	16.45 
1 	23.40 
1½ 	40.75 
2 	62.40 
3 	144.00 
4 	208.00 
6 	383.00 
8 	593.00 
10 	832.00 
 
System development fee (SDF): See Article II. Sec. 42-23. ;b0; Waterworks system capacity expansion. 
Water consumption rates per one hundred (100) cubic feet (HCF) per billing period: 
Single metered residential customer usage: 
R1—lifeline tier—0 to 2 HCF 	$3.21/HCF 
R2—normal tier—greater than (>) 2 to 25 HCF 	$3.69/HCF 
R3—conservation tier—greater than (>) 25 HCF 	$7.38/HCF 
 
Industrial customer usage: 
I1—first tier—0 to 40,000 HCF 	$3.69/HCF 
I2—second tier—greater than (>) 40,000 HCF 	$3.21/HCF 
 
General customer usage: 
G—all usage 	$3.69/HCF 
 
Water exam fee: $50.00 
Water service installation fee: 
Water Service Connection Meter Size (inches) 	Service Installation Fee by City Forces 
? 	$1,200.00 
¾ 	1,250.00 
1 	1,360.00 
1½ 	2,500.00 
2 	2,800.00 
 
Sizes larger than those listed above shall be at cost, and shall be paid by the applicant. 
Water meter yoke, meter box and meter installation fees: 
Meter Yoke, Meter Box and Meter for Water Service Connections Meter Size (inches) 	Installation Fee When Service Pipeline Installed by Certified Contractor 
? 	$350.00 
¾ 	400.00 
1 	475.00 
1½ 	1,260.00 
2 	1,315.00 
 
A cost estimate based on specific site conditions for sizes larger than those listed above shall be provided to the applicant, and the cost shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6245-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6363-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6384-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6486-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6606-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6682-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6784-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6874-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6961-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7055-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7167-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7209-15; Ord. No. 7266-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7370-17; Ord. No. 7419-17; Ord. No. 7469-18, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7266-16, § 1, adopted May 10, 2016, shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2016.  
Sec. 42-34. - Water service installation, generally. 
Application for water service installation shall be made at the office of the waterworks department by the owner or agent of the premises to be supplied, at which time the water service installation fee shall be paid by the applicant, and such applicant shall give the location of such premises, with subdivision, section/phase, block, lot number and legal street address where possible. All meters and water services shall be located on a right-of-way or easement dedicated to the city, and shall be located in compliance with state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 7204-15)  
Sec. 42-35. - Other required payments. 
In addition to the water service installation fee and the water meter yoke, meter box and meter installation fee, the owner or agent shall be required to pay the cost to the department for any permit required of the department and the cost of any street, sidewalk, and related repair and restoration associated with the installation work. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-36. - Sufficiency of rates. 
The water rates fixed by the council shall be fair and just, but shall be such that the revenue therefrom shall be sufficient to pay for the cost of maintenance, extension, operation and administration of the waterworks system, the cost of insurance against loss by injury to persons or property, and any other cost or expense growing out of or appertaining to the waterworks system, including interest on bonds. Such rates shall also be sufficient to pay, at or before maturity, annually, all bonds issued on account of the waterworks system and to provide a fair and proper return as provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-37. - Adjustment to bills for water service and testing of meters. 
(a)  The director is authorized to adjust and settle claims against the department for incorrect consumption billings. 
(b)  If it is determined by the department that a customer's bill has been incorrectly calculated, the department reserves the right to make adjustments and bill accordingly. 
(c)  On request of a customer or in the discretion of the department, water meters may be tested. If, as the result of a customer requested test (performed in accordance with American Water Works Association Standards latest revision) the meter registers inaccurately, the customer shall not be charged for the test. If accurate, the customer shall be charged a meter testing fee. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-38. - All metered water to be paid for; adjustment of bill for undiscovered leaks. 
All water passing through the meter shall be charged and paid for, whether used or wasted; provided, however, that where undiscovered leaks occur in customer's water pipes or appurtenances and the owner or customer, upon discovery or notice thereof, promptly makes all necessary repairs, the director may make a bill adjustment in accordance with departmental policy. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-39. - Application for water service; responsibility for payment of bill. 
The director is hereby authorized to furnish water service to a customer upon application of the customer or agent of the premises connected to the waterworks system. A customer who has made application is responsible for payment of the bill. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-40. - When and where bills are due and payable; delinquency. 
(a)  Bills shall be due and payable on or before the due date printed on the bill at places designated by the city. If not received by the city by the due date, the bill shall be considered delinquent and the customer shall be charged a late penalty fee. If payment for the full amount of the charges, late penalty fee and interest is not received by the city within thirty (30) days thereafter, the city shall notify the customer of the delinquency. If the full amount of the charges, late fee, and interest is not received by the city within sixty (60) days after the late penalty fee and charges are due, service shall be discontinued unless satisfactory arrangements for payment of the bill are made with the department. Water service that is furnished to the same customer at different locations, may be discontinued when a bill for any of the customer's locations becomes delinquent for a period of two (2) months or more. At least ten (10) business days prior to ceasing the supply of water, the city shall supply the customer written notice of such cessation. 
(b)  When water has been discontinued pursuant to this section, it shall not be turned on again until all fees prescribed by this chapter have been paid or satisfactory arrangements have been made for the payment thereof. 
(c)  No customer who is delinquent in water payments at one (1) location shall have the right to water at any other location at which he is the applicant, provided notice has been provided as to each location affected. 
(d)  Unless a lien has been recorded against the property owner for nonpayment of water service or other fees under this chapter, water service shall not be denied to a new tenant based on a former tenant's delinquent bill. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6805-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7209-15; Ord. No. 7277-16, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7277-16 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2016.  
Sec. 42-41. - Application of rates and fees to all customers. 
The same rates and fees shall be applicable both inside and outside the city, unless otherwise agreed to by the city and the outside governing body. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-42. - Frequency of reading and size of meters. 
(a)  The director has discretion to bill customers monthly or bimonthly. For the purposes of this section, "bimonthly" shall mean once every two (2) months. 
(b)  Meter size shall be consistent with actual water use, and the city reserves the right to change any size meter, and to adjust the meter service fee to comply with this provision. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-43. - Change of water rates. 
Whenever water rates are changed by the city council, billings for water consumption shall be prorated based upon average daily water usage. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6805-11, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6805-11 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 42-44. - Estimated bills. 
(a)  Whenever a meter cannot be read or is faulty, the customer shall be charged based on prior consumption. 
(b)  Where prior consumption data is not available or incomplete, the department shall estimate consumption based upon the data available and upon data from activities of similar use characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Secs. 42-45—42-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 42-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To protect the public potable water supply of the waterworks system from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within a customer's internal distribution system, such contaminants and pollutants that could backflow into the waterworks system; 
(2)  To promote the elimination or control of cross connections, actual or potential, between a customer's in-plant potable water system and non-potable systems; and 
(3)  To provide for a program of cross connection control which will effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems by cross connections. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-52. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Air gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through a free atmosphere between the lowest opening of a water outlet and the flood-level rim of any receptacle. This distance will be a minimum of two (2) times the diameter of the outlet, but never less than one (1) inch. In the case of near-walls, this distance will be three (3) times the diameter of the outlet. 
Auxiliary supply. Any water source or system other than the public water supply that may be available in the building or premises. 
Backflow. The reversal of flow from its intended direction as a result of backsiphonage or backpressure. 
Backflow preventer. Any approved device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. 
Backpressure. Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, air/steam pressure, or any other means capable of creating a pressure higher than the supply pressure. 
Backsiphonage. Backflow caused by a negative or reduced pressure in the supply piping. 
Contamination. The introduction into pure water of any undesirable substance (chemical, physical, radiological or biological) which may create a health hazard. 
Cross connection. Any connection or structural arrangement, which has a direct or indirect effect on the waterworks system whereby backflow can occur, and includes any physical connection between a potable water supply and any waste pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain or any unapproved source or system; also, any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in waste and/or other source of contamination. 
Customer's service line. That portion of the customer's plumbing from the service connection to the first water outlet. 
Degree of hazard. The level of health hazard, as derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to health and the adverse effect upon the waterworks system. 
Double check valve assembly. A device composed of two (2) internally loaded, specially designed and independently operating check valves, situated between two (2) tightly closing, resilient-seated shutoff valves as an assembly, and equipped with properly located, resilient-seated test cocks. 
Existing ground level. The level above which surface water will not accumulate under normal conditions. 
Flood-level rim. The top edge of a receptacle over which water could overflow. 
Hazard. Any condition, device or practice in the water usage system and its operation which creates, or reasonably tends to create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
Office. The Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Health, Office of Drinking Water. 
Owner. The person having legal title to the property or the person in charge, care and control of the property where the facilities in question are located; also, the tenants of said property. 
Pollution. The presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water. 
Reduced pressure principal backflow preventer. A device consisting of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and below the first check valve. These units are located between two (2) tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves as an assembly and are equipped with properly located resilient-seated test cocks. 
Service connection. The terminal end of a water service from the waterworks system. If a meter is installed at the end of the water service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. 
Vacuum breaker, atmospheric. A vacuum breaker designed so as not to be subjected to continuous static line pressure, which prevents backsiphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a negative pressure or sub-atmospheric pressure in a water system. 
Vacuum breaker, pressure. A vacuum breaker designed to operate under conditions of static line pressure, which prevents backsiphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a negative pressure or sub-atmospheric pressure in a water system. A pressure vacuum breaker contains one (1) or two (2) independently operated spring-loaded check valves and an independently operated spring-loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check or checks. The device includes tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks for testing of the check valve(s). 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-53. - Inspections generally; notice to correct defects. 
The director shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises in the service area of the waterworks system as frequently as may be necessary to insure that such plumbing has been installed and is maintained in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution or contamination of the city water supply. The director shall notify or cause to be notified, in writing, the owner or agent of the owner of any such building or premises to correct, within a reasonable time set by the director, any plumbing installed or existing contrary to or in violation of this article, and which may create the risk of pollution of the city water supply or otherwise adversely affect the public health. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-54. - Inspection to be at reasonable hour, etc.; warrant to enable inspection; termination of service to uninspected premises. 
(a)  The director shall inspect all buildings or premises during reasonable hours and under such circumstances as to minimize the inconvenience to the owner of the building or premises. Should any owner or agent refuse to allow the director access to the building or premises for the purposes of conducting an inspection, or should the director not be able to contact the owner or agent for the purposes of obtaining permission to inspect, the director shall have the right to apply immediately to a magistrate or other judicial officer for a proper warrant to carry out the necessary inspection. The provisions of this section shall apply to all initial inspections and to such follow-up inspections as may be necessary. 
(b)  In addition to the warrant procedure set forth in subsection (a), the director may commence administrative proceedings to discontinue water service to the uninspected building or premises. Except in emergency cases involving the imminent risk of pollution of the city water supply, the director shall give ten (10) days written notice to the owner of the affected building or premises, or to a responsible agent, of the director's intention to terminate the water service. The director shall afford to the owner or agent a hearing on the question of whether water service shall be terminated. This hearing shall be scheduled and conducted in such a manner that, to the maximum extent feasible, the inconvenience and burden on the owner or agent shall be minimized. The hearing shall take place before the director. The director shall not terminate the water service to the building or premises in question, if it is found as a fact that: 
(1)  The owner or agent has presented clear, convincing and credible evidence that there are no cross connection hazards within the subject building or premises; and 
(2)  No purpose of this article would be served by conducting an on-site inspection of the building or premises. 
In all cases, the hearing provided by this subsection shall be held within the ten-day period immediately following the giving of written notice to the owner or agent. Upon a showing of good cause, the director may grant a reasonable continuance of the hearing so scheduled, but the director, nevertheless, shall retain the right to terminate the water service at the expiration of the ten-day notice period if, in his discretion, public health considerations require such action. The director shall, in all cases, render his decision immediately after the taking of all evidence at the hearing, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, but in no case later than twenty-four (24) hours following the termination of the taking of evidence. The director shall cause his findings of fact and disposition of the case to be reduced to writing. 
(c)  In emergency circumstances where the director has reasonable cause to believe that a cross connection hazard exists in the subject building or premises and that such hazard jeopardizes the integrity or the purity of the city water supply, he shall forthwith terminate the water service to the subject building or premises. The director shall thereafter immediately afford the owner or agent the notice and opportunity to be heard pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection (b). In all cases where the director shall summarily terminate water service as provided under this subsection, the director shall act with dispatch in notifying the owner or agent and shall exercise the utmost diligence in scheduling a prompt hearing on the matter. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b), the director shall not terminate any water service in cases where the director has reliable information from any sources indicating that cross connection hazards do not exist in the building or premises to which access for inspection cannot be gained. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-55. - General design, installation and maintenance standards for potable water supply system. 
A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner as to prevent nonpotable liquids, solids or gases, either harmful or benign, from being introduced into the potable water supply through cross connections. This shall be accomplished by protecting every water outlet from the potable water system which poses a possible cross connection. Whenever such outlets cannot be protected in accordance with the minimum air gap, a mechanical device shall be utilized to prevent backflow from backsiphonage or backpressure, as appropriate, according to the degree of hazard. In cases where access is denied or restricted, water usage is sufficiently complex, or the severity of the hazard warrants, the director may require a backflow preventer immediately downstream from the service connection or at a point approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-56. - Required backflow prevention devices and hazard, generally. 
(a)  The cross connection hazard and backflow preventers required shall be as set forth in the following chart: 
	Type of Device to be Used 
Type of Connection	1

Air Gap	2

Vacuum 

Breaker, 

Atmospheric	3

Vacuum 

Breaker, 

Pressure	4

Double 

Check 

Valve 

Assembly	5

Reduced Pres. 

Principle 

Backflow 

Preventer
I. Direct water connections, subject to backpressure from: 
 A. Pumps, tanks and lines containing: 
  1. Sewage substances 	X 				
  2. Toxic substances 	X 				
  3. Nontoxic substances 	X 			X 	X 
 B. Steam lines and steam boilers: 
  1. Boiler or steam connection to toxic substances 	X 				X 
  2. Boiler or steam connection to nontoxic substances (boiler blow-off or drains not connected directly to sewer) 	X 			X 	X 
II. Inlet type water connections not subject to backpressure: 
 A. Waste line (not subject to backpressure due to waste line stoppages) 	X 	X 	X 		X 
 B. Low inlet to receptacles containing toxic substances 	X 	X 	X 		X 
 C. Low inlet to receptacles containing nontoxic substances 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
 D. Low inlet into domestic water tanks 	NO PROTECTION REQUIRED 
 E. Lawn sprinkler systems 	X 	X 	X 		X 
 F. Coils or jackets used as heat exchangers in compressors, degreasers or other equipment: 
  1. In toxic substances 	X 	X 	X 		X 
  2. In nontoxic substances 	NO PROTECTION REQUIRED 
 G. Flush valve toilets 		X 			
 H. Toilet and urinal tanks 	X 	X 			
 I. Trough urinals 		X 			
 J. Valved outlets or other fixtures with hose attachments which may constitute a cross connection 	X 	X 	X 		X 
 
(b)  Where investigation discloses that unusual or extraordinary hazards require more stringent means of protection, the director shall have the authority to require the installation of the same. The director shall in all cases specify the facts constituting the greater hazard found to require more stringent protective measures. The more stringent protective measures shall be related to such unusual or extraordinary hazards and shall be no more burdensome than is reasonably necessary to alleviate or guard against such hazards. The director shall specify in writing to the owner the manner in which the more stringent protective measures alleviate or guard against the unusual or extraordinary hazards. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-57. - General prohibition against cross connections. 
Cross connections between the potable water system and other systems, equipment, or wells containing water or any substances of unknown or questionable safety are prohibited, except when and where, as approved by the director, a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer is installed, maintained and tested to insure proper operation on a continuing basis. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-58. - Potable connections to boilers. 
Potable water connections to boilers shall be made through an air gap or provided with an approved backflow preventer. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-59. - Potable connections to refrigerating units, etc. 
Potable water inlet connections to refrigerating unit condensers, cooling jackets and air conditioning cooling systems shall be air gapped or provided with an approved backflow preventer. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-60. - Protective devices for fire service systems. 
(a)  Fire service systems having direct connections from the waterworks system with no pumps or storage facilities, no connections to other water supplies, no pumper connections, no antifreeze or other chemicals added to the fire system, and all sprinkler heads discharging to the atmosphere, are not required to have positive protective devices. 
(b)  In systems the same as referred to in subsection (a), which have booster pumps installed in the connection from the waterworks system, provision shall be made to avoid lowering the pressure at the connection to the waterworks system below ten (10) psi. 
(c)  Systems the same as referred to in subsections (a) and (b) and having one (1) or more of the following: pumper connections; elevated storage tanks; fire pumps taking suction from above ground, covered reservoirs or tanks; and pressure tanks, must provide an air gap, a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer, or a double gate double check valve assembly. Double gate check valve assemblies will be allowed only when all storage facilities are filled with, or connected to, city water only; and the water in the tanks is maintained in a potable condition. 
(d)  Systems with direct connections to the waterworks system, which are comparable to the systems described in subsections (a) and (b) and which have a readily accessible auxiliary supply within one thousand seven hundred (1,700) feet of the pumper connection, may be required by the director to provide an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(e)  Fire service systems having direct connections to the waterworks system and interconnections with auxiliary supplies such as pumps taking suction from raw water sources, exposed storage tanks, industrial water supplies, connections to unapproved groundwaters, or where antifreeze or other chemicals are added, must provide an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(f)  Systems having direct connections to the waterworks system from buildings having combined industrial and fire systems, either with or without storage tanks or pump connections, must provide an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-61. - Vacuum breaker for hose outlets. 
(a)  Where hose outlets are concerned, vacuum breakers are required. The director may waive this requirement if, upon examination of all facts, the hose outlets are found to be designed and constructed so as to substantially eliminate the risk of pollution or contamination. 
(b)  Hose outlet vacuum breakers shall not be used under continuous pressure (more than twelve (12) hours). 
(c)  Hose outlets are not to be installed below ground and should be at least twelve (12) inches above existing ground level. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-62. - Connections to fire hydrants. 
All connections to fire hydrants shall be equipped with a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer except when supplying equipment with an approved, permanently air gapped arrangement. This shall not apply to hydrants being used by fire departments to extinguish fires or perform routine procedures. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-63. - Backflow preventer for lawn irrigation system. 
Every lawn irrigation system shall be equipped with a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer, a pressure vacuum breaker, or an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Systems with multiple zones, requiring control valves beyond the supply connection, must provide a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer or a pressure vacuum breaker. Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used only in systems where there are no control valves beyond the backflow preventer. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-64. - Low-pressure cut off for booster pumps. 
A low-pressure cut off shall be installed on all booster pumps on water pressure booster systems in such a manner as to maintain a minimum pressure of ten (10) psi on the suction side of the pump. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-65. - Backflow preventer on service lines. 
Whenever it is determined by the director that the potential hazard within any building or premises requires isolation from the waterworks system, an approved backflow preventer shall be installed on the customer's service line consistent with the degree of hazard. Whenever continuous service is imperative, a pair of backflow preventers may be installed in parallel. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-66. - Backflow protection where minimum air gap cannot be provided. 
Devices to protect against backpressure and backsiphonage shall be installed at all fixtures and equipment where backflow may occur and where a minimum air gap cannot be provided between the water outlet to the fixture or equipment and its flood-level rim. For connections not subject to backpressure, a pressure vacuum breaker may be installed in the supply line or an atmospheric vacuum breaker shall be installed on the discharge side of the last valve on the line serving the fixture or equipment. For connections subject to backpressure, a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer or a double check valve assembly shall be installed on the line serving the fixture or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-67. - When double check valve assemblies permitted. 
The director may authorize the installation of approved double check valve assemblies as protective devices against backflow in connections between a potable water system and other fluids which, in the judgment of the director, present no significant health hazards. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-68. - Standards for backflow preventers. 
Devices for the prevention of backflow shall be tested and certified to meet the standards of the agencies listed below: 
(1)  American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE). 
(2)  American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
(3)  American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(4)  University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection Control & Hydraulic Research (USCFCCCHR). 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-69. - Submission of plans prior to construction of certain facilities. 
Certified plans for the following types of facilities shall be submitted in duplicate to the director prior to construction: 
(1)  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, veterinary establishments, nursing homes, and medical buildings; 
(2)  Laboratories; 
(3)  Piers, docks, and waterfront facilities; 
(4)  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water pumping stations; 
(5)  Food and beverage processing plants; 
(6)  Chemical plants, dyeing plants, and pharmaceutical plants; 
(7)  Metal plating industries; 
(8)  Petroleum or natural gas processing or storage plants; 
(9)  Radioactive materials processing plants or nuclear reactors; 
(10)  Car washes and laundries; 
(11)  Lawn sprinkler systems and irrigation systems; 
(12)  Fire service systems; 
(13)  Slaughter houses and poultry processing plants; 
(14)  Farms, where the water is used for other than household purposes; 
(15)  Commercial greenhouses and nurseries; 
(16)  Health clubs with swimming pools, therapeutic baths, hot tubs, or saunas; 
(17)  Paper and paper products plants and printing plants; 
(18)  Pesticide or extermination companies and their vehicles with storage or mixing tanks; 
(19)  Schools or colleges with laboratory facilities; 
(20)  High-rise buildings (four (4) or more stories); 
(21)  Multi-use commercial, office, or warehouse facilities; and 
(22)  Others specified by the director or the office when reasonable cause can be shown for a potential backflow or cross connection hazard. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-70. - Location and installation requirements for protective devices. 
(a)  Backflow preventers shall be accessibly located, preferably in the same room with the fixture they serve, and in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. They shall not be installed in pits, confined spaces, or areas subject to flooding. If outside installation is necessary, devices must be protected against freezing. 
(b)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers shall be installed with the critical level at least six (6) inches above the highest outlet or the flood-level rim of the fixture they serve and on the discharge side of the last control valve to the fixture. 
(c)  Pressure vacuum breakers shall be installed with the critical level at least twelve (12) inches above the highest outlet or the flood-level rim of the fixture they serve. 
(d)  Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers and double check valve assemblies shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above existing ground level or flood level, whichever is greater, in a location easily accessible for testing and maintenance. 
(e)  Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers, double check valve assemblies, and pressure vacuum breakers must be tested and certified to meet the standards of the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection Control & Hydraulic Research. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-71. - Responsibility of owner as to installation, testing, repair, etc., of backflow preventers. 
(a)  The owner of any building or premises where approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventers, double check valve assemblies, or pressure vacuum breakers are installed shall have such devices tested at least once yearly, beginning at installation. The date of annual testing shall be within thirty (30) days before or thirty (30) days after the anniversary date of the installation. If the director concludes that more frequent testing is required, the director shall notify the owner of the building or premises in writing of such finding and shall further specify the basis for such conclusions. The director shall also promulgate a schedule for more frequent testing. 
(b)  Testing, repair, and maintenance shall be performed by individuals with current certification from the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation or from a Virginia-approved backflow prevention device worker school. Individuals installing backflow preventers must be licensed plumbers or have current Virginia-approved certification for the installation and shall be licensed in the trade classification of work being performed or be working under the supervision of such person. Installation and replacement of backflow preventers must comply with the Virginia Department of Health Waterworks Regulations, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and the Virginia Board for Contractors Regulations. 
(c)  Backflow preventers shall be installed, tested, repaired, or replaced as necessary at the expense of the owner. Records of such installation, test, repair and replacement shall be forwarded to the director. If, in the opinion of the director, tests are not being performed appropriately and/or records of such tests are not maintained and forwarded in a timely manner, the director may refuse to accept such test records and may require that devices be retested and records be resubmitted. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6839-12)  
Sec. 42-72. - Notice of violation of article; failure to correct violation. 
(a)  The director shall notify the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the building or premises in which there is found a violation of this article, advising such person of the facts of such violation. The director shall set a reasonable time for the owner to have such violation removed or corrected. Upon failure of the owner to have the violation corrected by the end of the specified time interval, the director may, if in the director's judgment a health hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated. 
(b)  Any owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the maintenance of the plumbing system in a building or premises, who knowingly permits a violation of this article to remain uncorrected after the expiration of the time set by the director shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Secs. 42-73—42-78. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVOIR PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 42-79. - General. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this article is to protect against and minimize the pollution and degradation of the drinking water supply reservoirs in the City of Newport News resulting from land development in the respective watersheds thereof. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply to areas in the city with stormwater runoff that would eventually be deposited into the Skiffe's Creek, Lee Hall, or Harwood's Mill Reservoirs. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-80. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Acreage. Any parcel of land described by metes and bounds and not shown on a plat of a recorded subdivision. 
Bulk storage. Storage equal to or exceeding six hundred sixty (660) gallons. 
Design Criteria Manual. The city's department of engineering Design Criteria Manual, latest revision. 
Development. Any construction, external repair, land-disturbing activity, grading, road building, pipe laying, or other activity resulting in a change in the physical character of any parcel of land. 
Intermittent stream. A stream or portion of a stream that flows only in direct response to precipitation which is identified as such on the most recent published United States Geological Survey quadrangle map, except that the designation of intermittent may go beyond the limits identified on this map based upon field verification by the department. 
Lot. Any piece, parcel or portion of real property created by a subdivision. 
Lot of record. A portion of a subdivision identified for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development on a plat which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court. 
Perennial stream. A stream that flows continuously, which is identified as such on the most recently published United States Geological Survey quadrangle map, except that the designation of perennial may go beyond the limits identified on this map based on field verification by the department. 
Reservoir. Any public impoundment of surface water used to provide public drinking water for the waterworks system. 
Reservoir protection appeals committee. A committee composed of the director, the city attorney and a citizen civil engineer appointed by the city council. 
Reservoir protection area. A special purpose area delineated as reservoir watershed drainage areas on maps in the department of engineering. 
Runoff control official. The director or his designated representative trained in runoff control who acts as the administrator of this article. The runoff control official shall be vested with all the necessary authority on behalf of the city to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Utility. A provider of essential energy or communication services to the general public. This includes but is not limited to: electric, natural gas, water, sewer, and telephone companies. 
Watershed. The portion of the city lying within the drainage basin of any reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-81. - Requirements for development. 
(a)  Runoff control permit. Except as herein expressly provided, it shall be illegal to engage in any development otherwise permitted by law in the watershed of any reservoir until a runoff control permit is issued by the city's runoff control official. It shall thereafter be illegal for anyone to willfully fail to conform to the provisions of said permit in carrying out such development or in operating and maintaining the activities or improvements so developed. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the approval of any subdivision plat where no physical development is to be carried out within any watershed. 
(1)  Any person applying for a runoff control permit shall submit an application to the runoff control official that includes a runoff control plan prepared by a registered professional engineer with specifications for the temporary and permanent control of surface water runoff sufficient in detail to meet the requirements of this article regarding the quantity and quality of surface runoff. If the runoff control official determines that the natural drainage system is sufficient to contain and decontaminate the runoff created by the development, and that the drainage system is under the control of the applicant and unavailable for future development, a permit may be granted without a specific runoff control plan or further review by staff. 
(2)  The runoff control official shall review the plans and specifications to ensure that the quality and quantity of surface water runoff will not be detrimental to the water quality of the reservoir. Plans should provide for a diversion/retention system that is equal to or more effective than wet ponds (outlined in the Design Criteria Manual) in containing and removing potential pollutants. Plans should also provide for the complete containment of a spill of any materials stored on the property and long-term maintenance of the system. 
(3)  In the event that the runoff control official shall determine that the plans and specifications are insufficient in any respect, the runoff control official shall promptly notify the applicant to correct the deficiencies. In addition, the runoff control official may require the submission of such additional data as may be reasonably necessary to carry out a thorough review of the application. 
(4)  In the event that the plans and specifications submitted are found to be adequate, the runoff control official may require, prior to issuing a permit, a bond with surety or other security satisfactory to the runoff control official sufficient for and conditioned upon completion of the controls specified in such plans and specifications, in the manner and within the time prescribed in such permit. 
(5)  Failure of the city to act on any permit application within sixty (60) days after all the necessary information has been properly filed with the runoff control official shall constitute approval of the application. The city shall be deemed to have acted whenever written notice of conditional approval, rejection or modification shall have been mailed by the runoff control official to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
(6)  In the event of any change in any plan for development, the developer shall submit to the runoff control official any additional data, plans and specifications as may be reasonably necessary to ensure the control of the quantity and quality of any additional surface water runoff occasioned by such change. The procedure for submission of such additional data shall conform to the original application procedure. 
(7)  Whenever any development is proposed to be carried out by any person, other than the owner of the land, the responsibility for complying with this article and with all conditions imposed pursuant hereto, including, but not limited to, the maintenance, repair and replacement of any temporary or permanent runoff control measure, shall remain on the property owner. 
(8)  In the event that a developer wishes to utilize a city-owned and maintained diversion/retention system to ensure that the quality and quantity of surface water runoff will not be detrimental to the water quality of the reservoir, the developer shall submit such request to the runoff control official with plans, specifications and calculations of sufficient detail for the runoff control official to determine if this is a feasible option. The runoff control official will approve or deny the request. Should approval be granted, the developer shall be responsible for a pro rata share of design, construction, maintenance costs and any required bond with surety or other security required by city, and shall enter into an agreement with the city for use of the diversion/retention system consistent with the department's best management practice cost sharing policy. 
(b)  Exceptions to permit requirements. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) hereof, no runoff control permit shall be required for any of the following activities: 
(1)  The installation, repair, replacement, enlargement or modification of any water supply intended to serve a total of not more than two (2) dwelling units; and 
(2)  The interior repair, remodeling or reconstruction of any existing structure. 
(c)  Existing uses. Any exterior modification to a use whether renovation, expansion or reconstruction, which results in an increase in impervious surface, requires a runoff control permit. 
(d)  Septic tanks and drain fields. Notwithstanding the city council's long-term goal to prohibit the installation of new septic tanks and drainage fields in the reservoir protection area, the council nevertheless promulgates the following regulations to permit such new installations in the reservoir protection area in accordance with the conditions prescribed below: 
(1)  New septic tanks and drainage fields may be installed in acreage or lots of record existing prior to September 13, 1988; provided that in no case shall such installation require use of the buffer zone described in paragraph (f) below; and provided further that the required health department approval is first obtained. 
(2)  From and after September 13, 1988, septic tanks and drainage fields may be installed in lots of newly created subdivisions provided that such lots are one (1) acre or larger in size; provided that in no case shall such installation require use of the buffer zone described in paragraph (f) below; and provided further that the required health department approval is first obtained. 
(3)  Properties in which septic systems are installed pursuant to this section must connect to the Newport News public sewer system when such public system is reasonably available. For the purposes of this section, the term "reasonably available" shall mean that a public sewer line to which connections are permitted is within one hundred (100) feet in length in a straight line or one hundred twenty-five (125) feet in length if a connection must be installed which circumvents an obstacle of a permanent nature. The distances are measured from the property line closest to the public sewer line to the public sewer line. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b)(1) and (2) hereof, it shall be illegal to do the following activities unless the activity is accessory to a utility and it can be proven to the satisfaction of the runoff control official that adequate measures can be taken to achieve the same degree of water quality with the acceptable best management practices (outlined in the Design Criteria Manual): 
(1)  Activities involving the manufacture, bulk storage, or any type of distribution of petroleum, chemical, asphalt products, or any hazardous substances as defined in Section 102 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 and substances designated under section 311(b)(2)(A) of the Clean Water Act (Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, as amended in 1977). 
(2)  Installing a new septic tank and drain field unless otherwise permitted by this article. This does not preclude the maintenance of existing septic tanks or drain fields. 
(f)  Buffer zones. It shall be illegal for any permitted development to occur within two hundred (200) horizontal feet from the center of any perennial stream or from the edge of any city reservoir and within one hundred (100) horizontal feet from the center of any intermittent stream. Crossing of perennial or intermittent streams, by roads, utilities and the like should be limited to the least impactive portion of the stream as verified by the department. Where such crossings are necessary for the development of the site and required by other city regulations, the standards for construction as outlined in the Design Criteria Manual shall apply. 
(g)  Waiver option. The buffer requirement may be reduced to no less than fifty (50) feet when it can be proven to the satisfaction of the runoff control official that the reduction would achieve the same degree of water quality with acceptable best management practices (outlined in the Design Criteria Manual) as with the two hundred- or one hundred-foot buffer. If it is determined a significant hardship exists after the maximum allowable waiver is granted, then the runoff control official may grant, after consultation with the director, an additional parcel waiver. This waiver will only be granted in the case of a proven hardship and would allow single-family development (one detached single-family structure with such accessory structures as are permitted in the city's zoning ordinance) on one-acre minimum lots or lots of record when parcel size is less than one (1) acre and would allow a buffer reduction to a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. A detail of an acceptable best management practice appears in the Design Criteria Manual. 
Under no circumstances will the following uses be permitted within either buffer area: 
(1)  Septic tanks and drain fields. 
(2)  Trash containers and dumpsters. 
(3)  Feed lots or other livestock impoundments. 
(4)  Any prohibited use as defined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(5)  Fuel storage in excess of fifty (50) gallons. 
(6)  No sewage pumping stations or sewage lines unless standards are met as defined in the Design Criteria Manual. 
(h)  Reservoir protection appeals committee. The reservoir protection appeals committee shall be responsible for reviewing and determining either to uphold or overturn decisions rendered by the runoff control official when appealed by a runoff control permit applicant. The reservoir protection appeals committee will also advise the city council on property acquisition for reservoir protection. The responsibilities of the reservoir protection appeals committee are as follows: 
(1)  Review of the runoff control official's denial of the runoff control permit applicant's request for full or partial "waiver of buffer" as outlined in subsection (g) of this section when review is requested by the applicant; 
(2)  Review of rejection of an application for a runoff control permit by the runoff control official when requested by the applicant; and 
(3)  Review of requests by property owners to have the city purchase partial or whole parcels which are claimed to be a severe hardship consistent with the department's reservoir protection property acquisition policy when requested by the property owner. Recommendations will be made to the city council regarding the purchase of property requests. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-82. - Review standards. 
The runoff control official shall prepare guidelines for the calculation of pre- and post-development runoff flow and characteristics, and for the control of such runoff for inclusion in the Design Criteria Manual. These guidelines shall be used to review all applications for runoff control permits submitted pursuant to this article; provided, however, that the runoff control official may approve any alternative runoff control measure which the official finds provides runoff control in accordance with standards that are set out in the guidelines. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the approval of any application or part thereof which is found by the runoff control official to pose a danger to the public health, safety and general welfare, or to deviate from sound engineering practices. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-83. - Inspections and enforcement. 
(a)  The runoff control official and his designated agents shall have the right to enter upon the property subject to this article at all reasonable times for the purposes of monitoring surface water runoff and of making inspections and investigations relating to compliance with the provisions of this article. The property owner shall permit access to all runoff control structures to facilitate said inspections. 
(b)  In the event a person fails to comply with the specifications of any permit previously issued, he shall be notified by the runoff control official to comply with the provisions of said permit. Any person failing to comply within the time specified shall be subject to the revocation of any runoff control permit previously issued and, in addition, be deemed in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any required runoff control structure or system shall be constructed in accordance with standards outlined in the Design Criteria Manual. The runoff control official may require a bond or other security for the maintenance of any permanent runoff control measure. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Sec. 42-84. - Violation; punishment. 
(a)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Revocation of the runoff control permit shall also result in the revocation of the certificate of use and occupancy for such development. 
(Ord. No. 6233-06, § 1)  
Secs. 42-85—42-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION 
 
Sec. 42-90. - General. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Water conservation provides a public benefit through the reduction of non-essential water use and water losses. To ensure the continued availability of a safe and adequate water supply for the customers of the Newport News Waterworks System, it is necessary to control the demand for water. During prolonged or extended periods of high temperatures and below average rainfall and streamflow, or in acute emergencies impacting the water supply, it will be necessary to reduce, restrict or curtail potable water use in order to conserve the water supply to protect the welfare, safety, and health of the public. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Alternate water source. A well or well system, which delivers ground water of suitable quantity and quality for the desired application. 
(2)  City water. Water supplied by the city's waterworks department. 
(3)  Minimize. Reduce water consumption to the lowest level technologically and economically feasible. 
(4)  Recycling system. A water system that captures and reuses a minimum of fifteen (15) percent wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 6155-05, § 1; Ord. No. 7204-15; Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1)  
Sec. 42-91. - Water conservation, generally. 
(a)  Flow rates for plumbing fixtures and public lavatories. In recognition of the growing demand for water in the service area and the importance of conservation as a means of ensuring that future water supplies will be sufficient to meet these demands, only fixtures conforming to the flow specifications of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be installed in buildings served by city water. 
(b)  Car washes. All drive through car wash installations using city water that are put in operation after July 1, 2020, shall be equipped with a water recycling system. Drive through car wash installations, which cannot install or maintain in good repair a water recycling system, shall use an alternate water source. Self-serve wash installations and mobile car wash systems shall maintain their pressure spray equipment according to the manufacturer's specifications for minimum water use. 
(c)  Waste of water, generally. No person shall permit or cause uncontrolled flow of water from any hydrant, meter, or other fixture without taking proper care to prevent waste. 
(d)  Waste of water, leak repairs. No owner of any residential unit or commercial or industrial establishment shall cause an excessive amount of water to be used due to leakage from water lines or plumbing fixtures on the premises. 
(e)  Continuous flow equipment. In all new construction and when any continuous flow devices are repaired or replaced, any water connector device or appliance requiring a continuous flow of five (5) gallons per minute or more and not covered by section 42-91(a), shall be equipped with a water recycling system. 
(Ord. No. 6155-05, § 1; Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1)  
Sec. 42-92. - Declaration of drought stages. 
(a)  Upon review of drought level indicators, including those contained in the Virginia Drought Assessment and Response Plan, such as precipitation deficits, streamflows, groundwater levels, reservoir levels, or such other indicators as may be specified in a policy promulgated by the director, the director may recommend to the city manager that a specific drought stage be declared. 
(b)  A drought watch (Stage 1) or drought warning (Stage 2) may be declared by the city manager upon a determination by the city manager that drought level indicators support such a declaration. A drought emergency (Stage 3) may only be declared by ordinance adopted by the Newport News City Council in accordance with section 15.2-924 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(c)  Prior to the declaration of a drought emergency by the Newport News City Council, the director shall report to the city manager and to the Newport News City Council the condition of the city water supply, stating the criteria utilized and the data relied upon in the report and shall recommend adoption of an ordinance declaring a drought emergency. The report shall be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall forthwith transmit a copy of each such report to the city manager or county administrator of each jurisdiction for which Newport News provides treated water or with which Newport News has a raw water agreement. 
(Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed § 42-92 and enacted a new § 42-92, as set out herein. The former section pertained to the declaration of water supply emergency and derived from Ord. No. 6155-05, § 1.  
Sec. 42-93. - Stage 1, drought watch. 
Upon declaration of a Stage 1 drought watch, the director shall disseminate information throughout the waterworks system service area indicating that a drought watch is in effect and that if the prevailing conditions persist, a significant drought event may occur. Drought watch notices are intended only to increase awareness of the existing climactic conditions and to prepare customers for the possibility of future management measures, if needed. 
(Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed § 42-93 and enacted a new § 42-93, as set out herein. The former section pertained to Tier 1, advisory and derived from the original Code.  
Sec. 42-94. - Stage 2, drought warning. 
Upon the declaration of a Stage 2 drought warning, the director shall disseminate information throughout the waterworks system service area advising that a drought warning is in effect and requesting that all customers voluntarily restrict or eliminate non-essential uses of city water, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The use of city water to wash down paved surfaces such as streets, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, garages, parking areas, service station aprons, tennis courts, patios and other hard surfaced areas, buildings, and structures, except as required for public health, safety and welfare concerns. 
(2)  The use of city water to wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, and any other type of mobile equipment, except in facilities operating with an alternate water source or with an approved water recycling system. Any facility operating with an approved recycling system must prominently display a sign stating such a recycling system is in operation. 
(3)  The use of city water for watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, and other vegetation, except when using an alternate water source, recycled water, or a hand-held container not exceeding three (3) gallons in capacity. Any such watering shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(4)  The use of city water in the operation of any ornamental fountains, artificial waterfalls, misting machines, reflecting pools, or for scenic or recreational ponds or lakes, except for fountains and other means of aeration used to support aquatic life. 
(5)  The use of city water from fire hydrants for construction purposes or any purpose other than fire suppression or other public emergency. 
(6)  The use of city water to fill or refill residential swimming pools except to protect structural integrity and public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  The use of city water for the serving of drinking water in restaurants, clubs, and other eating establishments, unless requested by a customer. 
(Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed § 42-94 and enacted a new § 42-94, as set out herein. The former section pertained to Tier 2, mandatory and derived from Ord. No. 6155-05, § 1.  
Sec. 42-95. - Stage 3, drought emergency. 
(a)  Following the adoption of an ordinance by the Newport News City Council declaring a drought emergency the restrictions on non-essential water uses listed in section 42-94 shall become mandatory for the duration of the drought emergency. 
(b)  The activation of mandatory water use restrictions in accordance with section 42-95(a) shall apply to water customers in all jurisdictions served by the waterworks system and shall become effective upon the same being printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the Newport News Waterworks System service area unless a later date is provided therein. In addition, notification of the imposition of water use restrictions shall be broadcast over one (1) or more radio or television stations serving the Newport News Waterworks System service area. The city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the city manager or county administrator of each jurisdiction served by the waterworks system information on the restrictions to be imposed. These restrictions shall be terminated upon a finding by the Newport News City Council that the water shortage is over and that the emergency measures are no longer required. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person charged with violating any provision of this section shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with section 42-96(d). 
(d)  The following exceptions to the mandatory non-essential water use restrictions shall be allowed: 
(1)  Newly sodded and seeded areas may be irrigated with city water to establish cover on bare ground at the minimum rate necessary for no more than a period of thirty (30) days, provided such activity was initiated prior to the declaration of the drought emergency by the Newport News City Council. Irrigation rates may not exceed one (1) inch of applied water in any seven-day period. Irrigation allowed pursuant to this exception must take place between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  Athletic fields may be irrigated with city water between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. at the minimum rate necessary, not to exceed one (1) inch of applied water in any ten-day period. All city water used as irrigation water must fall on playing surfaces with no outlying areas receiving irrigation water directly from irrigation heads, and all irrigation pursuant to this exception must be applied in a manner to assure that no runoff, puddling, or excessive watering occurs. Irrigation pursuant to this exception is not permitted on athletic fields that are not scheduled for use within the next one hundred twenty-day period. City water may be used for maintenance of pitching mounds, home plate areas, and base areas at the minimum rate necessary, with the use of hand-held containers not exceeding three (3) gallons. Skinned infield areas may use city water to control dust and improve playing surface conditions utilizing hand-held containers or hand-held hoses equipped with an automatic shutoff device at the minimum rate necessary no earlier than two (2) hours prior to the official start time of any game. 
(3)  Golf courses, including tees, greens, and fairways, may be irrigated with city water between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. at the minimum rate necessary, not to exceed one (1) inch of applied water in any ten-day period. Rough areas may not be irrigated. All irrigation pursuant to this exception must be applied in a manner to assure that no runoff, puddling, or excessive watering occurs. 
(4)  Tennis courts composed of clay or similar materials may be wetted with city water by means of a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shutoff device at the minimum rate necessary for maintenance, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(5)  Construction, emergency, and public transportation vehicles may be washed with city water as necessary to preserve the proper functioning and safe operation of the vehicle. Automobile dealers and automobile rental agencies may wash cars with city water no more than once per week, utilizing hand-held containers and hoses equipped with automatic shutoff devices or automatic facilities operating with an approved water recycling system. 
(6)  Marine engines may be flushed with city water for a period not to exceed five (5) minutes after each use. 
(7)  Outdoor swimming pools operated by commercial ventures, community associations, recreation associations, and similar institutions, open to the public, may be refilled with city water as long as: 
a.  The pool is covered when not in operation to reduce losses due to evaporation; 
b.  Water levels are maintained at mid-skimmer depth or lower; 
c.  Any visible leaks are immediately repaired; 
d.  Backwashing occurs only when necessary to assure proper filter operation; 
e.  Deck areas are washed with city water no more than once per calendar month (except where chemical spills or other health hazards occur); 
f.  All water features, other than slides, that increase losses due to evaporation are eliminated; and 
g.  Any slides are turned off when the pool is not in operation. 
(8)  Indoor pools and swimming pools operated by health care facilities used in relation to patient care and rehabilitation may be filled or refilled with city water as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed § 42-95 and enacted a new § 42-95, as set out herein. The former section pertained to Tier 3, severe and derived from Ord. No. 6155-05, § 1.  
Sec. 42-96. - Water rates and penalties during declared drought emergencies. 
(a)  If authorized by Newport News City Council in its ordinance declaring a drought emergency, at any point during a drought emergency the city manager, or when so authorized by him, the director, may impose higher water rates to further reduce water use. 
(b)  The activation of higher water rates shall apply to water customers in all jurisdictions served by the waterworks system and shall become effective upon the same being printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the Newport News Waterworks System service area unless a later date is provided therein. The city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the city manager or county administrator of each jurisdiction served by the waterworks system information on the higher water rates to be imposed. The higher water rates shall be in effect for the duration of the drought emergency, which shall be terminated upon a finding by the Newport News City Council that the water shortage is over and that the emergency measures are no longer required. 
(c)  Effective with meter readings beginning on the first business day following the imposition of higher water rates, a drought surcharge of forty (40) percent shall be applied to all water consumption in all rate categories except the low usage lifeline block, which shall continue to be billed at the current lifeline rate. 
(d)  Penalties. A civil penalty shall be charged to any customer account and added to the water bill upon the occurrence at the service address of a violation of any mandatory water use restriction declared pursuant to section 42-95(a). Penalties for such violations shall be assessed as follows: 
Violation 	Penalty 
First offense 	Written warning 
Second offense 	$50.00 fine 
Third offense 	$100.00 fine 
Fourth offense 	$250.00 fine and water service suspension 
 
(e)  Exemptions. Water customers who are engaged in activities in which water is essential for public health, such as health care facilities (including, but not limited to, hospitals, minor emergency centers, health care practices, dialysis centers, nursing homes, and convalescent centers), will be exempt from the higher water rates imposed during a drought emergency. 
(Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed § 42-96 and enacted a new § 42-96, as set out herein. The former section pertained to Tier 4, emergency and derived from Ord. No. 6155-05, § 1.  
Sec. 42-97. - Suspension of water service. 
In addition to the foregoing, water service may be suspended to any person who continues to violate the provisions of section 42-95, or any regulations promulgated hereunder during a drought emergency. If such water service is suspended by operation of this article, the person shall pay a reconnection fee and all outstanding charges before service is restored. 
(Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed § 42-97 and enacted a new § 42-97, as set out herein. The former section pertained to water rates and penalties during declared water supply emergencies and derived from Ord. No. 6155-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6962-13, § 1; and Ord. No. 7204-15.  
Sec. 42-98. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the issuance of a violation under section 42-96 may appeal the decision in writing to the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  An informal hearing shall be conducted unless the aggrieved person does not desire a hearing. All decisions shall be in writing and shall be mailed or delivered to the aggrieved person. All decisions are final. 
(Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed § 42-98 and enacted a new § 42-98, as set out herein. The former section pertained to suspension of water services and derived from Ord. No. 6155-05, § 1.  
Sec. 42-99. - Non-drought related water supply emergency. 
(a)  In the event of an immediate and sustained loss of the source of supply or major damage to critical water system infrastructure, including, but not limited to, failure of a main transmission line, intake, dam, or water treatment plant; a chemical spill into the waterworks system; or a malevolent attack that introduces a contaminant into the waterworks system, the city manager may call for immediate voluntary conservation measures. 
(b)  If the emergency causes or is expected to cause a water shortage for more than seven (7) days, the Newport News City Council may declare a water supply emergency by adopting an ordinance pursuant to section 15.2-924 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. Following the adoption of such an ordinance, all provisions of sections 42-95 through 42-98 shall be in effect for the duration of the water supply emergency. 
(Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7614-20, § 1, adopted April 14, 2020, in effect repealed § 42-99 and enacted a new § 42-99, as set out herein. The former section pertained to the water conservation appeals boards; appeals and derived from Ord. No. 6155-05, § 1; and Ord. No. 7204-15.  
Chapter 43 - WEAPONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Preemption of ordinances on firearms, ammunition, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-915; weapons, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-279 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 43-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Firearm. The word "firearm" shall mean any weapon that will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel single or multiple projectiles by the action of an explosion of a combustible material. 
Pneumatic gun. The term "pneumatic gun" shall mean any implement, designed as a gun, that will expel a BB or a pellet by action of pneumatic pressure. "Pneumatic gun" includes a paintball gun that expels by action of pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with paint for the purpose of marking the point of impact. 
(Ord. No. 265, §§ 1, 12; Ord. No. 1213, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 42-1, 42-4; Ord. No. 6043-04, § 1; Ord. No. 6882-12, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6882-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Sec. 43-2. - Concealed handgun permit application fee. 
Pursuant to § 18.2-308(K) of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the local law enforcement agency selected by the Newport News Circuit Court is authorized to charge a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for conducting background investigations for persons making applications or reapplications to the Newport News Circuit Court for concealed handgun permits. The circuit court clerk shall collect the fee when the concealed handgun permit application is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 6232-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6883-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6898-12, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6898-12 shall be in effect on and after July 10, 2012.  
Sec. 43-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6042-04, § 1, repealed §§ 43-2 and 43-3, which pertained to carrying concealed weapons; when lawful to carry and carrying of loaded firearms by minors. Subsequently, Ord. No. 6232-06 amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new § 43-2. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 43-4. - Sale or delivery of weapons to minors. 
If any person sells, barters, gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, to any person under18 years of age, a dirk, switchblade knife or bowie knife, having good cause to believe such other person to be under18 years of age, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 146; Ord. No. 265, § 12; Ord. No. 1213, § 1; Code 1961, §§ 42-1, 42-2; Ord. No. 6043-04, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309.  
Sec. 43-5. - Sale, etc., of toy firearms discharging blank or ball charges. 
(a)  No person shall sell, barter, exchange, furnish or dispose of by purchase, gift or in any other manner any toy gun, pistol, rifle or other toy firearm, if the same shall, by means of powder or other explosive, discharge blank or ball charges. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Each sale of any of the articles hereinbefore specified to any person shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the sale of what are commonly known as cap pistols. 
(Ord. No. 146; Code 1961, § 42-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-284.  
Sec. 43-6. - Sale, delivery, etc., blackjacks, metal knucks, switchblade knives and similar weapons. 
If any person sells or barters, or exhibits for sale or for barter, or gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, or has in his possession or under his control, with the intent of selling, bartering, giving or furnishing, any blackjack, brass or metal knucks, switchblade knife or like weapon, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The having in one's possession of any such weapon shall be prima facie evidence, except in the case of a conservator of the peace, of his intent to sell, barter, give or furnish the same. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-311.  
Secs. 43-7, 43-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6042-04, § 1, repealed §§ 43-7 and 43-8, which pertained to statement prerequisite to purchase or transfer of pistol from dealer and pistol dealer's records. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 43-9. - Discharge of firearms generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm within the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 2; Ord. No. 955, § 1; Code 1961, § 42-5; Ord. No. 3284-85; Ord. No. 3906-89; Ord. No. 6882-12, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6882-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate or prohibit the discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; discharging firearms in city street or other public places, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-280, 18.2-286.  
Sec. 43-10. - Pneumatic guns. 
(a)  Pneumatic guns may be used at facilities approved for shooting ranges, on other property where firearms may be discharged, or on or within private property with the permission of the owner or legal possessor thereof. Such use must be conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. 
(b)  Minors may use pneumatic guns under the following conditions: 
(1)  Minors under the age of 16 must be supervised by a parent, guardian, or other adult supervisor approved by a parent or guardian in all uses of pneumatic guns. 
(2)  Minors 16 years of age or older may use pneumatic guns with the written consent of a parent or guardian. 
(3)  Any minor, whether permitted by a parent or guardian to use a pneumatic gun or not, shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations, and restrictions governing the use of pneumatic guns. 
(4)  Training of minors in the use of pneumatic guns shall be done only under direct supervision of a parent, guardian, Junior Reserve Officers Training Corps instructor, or a certified instructor. Training of minors 16 years of age or older may also be done without direct supervision if approved by the minor's instructor, with the permission of and under the responsibility of a parent or guardian, and in compliance with all requirements of this section. Ranges and instructors may be certified by the National Rifle Association, a state or federal agency that has developed a certification program, any service of the Department of Defense, or any person authorized by these authorities to certify ranges and instructors. 
(c)  Commercial or private areas designated for the use of pneumatic paintball guns may be established and operated for recreational use in areas where such facilities are permitted by the city's zoning ordinance. Equipment designed to protect the face and ears shall be provided to participants at such recreational areas, and signs must be posted to warn against entry into the paintball area by persons who are unprotected or unaware that paintball guns are in use. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 6; Code 1961, § 42-6; Ord. No. 3284-85; Ord. No. 6882-12, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6882-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Sec. 43-11. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the use of firearms in self-defense, if such use is not otherwise contrary to existing law, or the use of firearms by any police officer, city sheriff, deputy sheriff or conservator of the peace, or to prohibit the discharge of blank cartridges in theatrical performances or sporting events or to prohibit the firing of salutes by firing squads at law enforcement and military funerals held at a cemetery or place of worship. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the shooting of firearms within the city on a gunnery range or in a shooting area operated in accord with article II of this chapter. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the discharge of blank cartridges by a nationally recognized veterans group and federal or state military representatives, in the commemoration of any state or national holiday, if written notice identifying the time, date, location and description of the intended discharge has been provided to the chief of police at least five days prior to the event. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the discharge of pyrotechnic bird scaring devices for dispersing birds and wildlife pests, provided that each use is first approved by the chief of police or his designee who may impose restrictions on the time, manner and use of such devices, and provided further, that the Peninsula Airport Commission and the Department of Parks, Recreation and Tourism need not obtain such approval prior to using the devices. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the killing of deer pursuant to Section 29.1-529 of the Code of Virginia, on a parcel of land of at least five acres that is zoned for agricultural use. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the discharge of a firearm by any law enforcement officer or any civilian employee of a law enforcement agency, in the course of their employment, for purposes of ballistics or other forensic testing. 
(Ord. No. 265, §§ 3, 7; Code 1961, §§ 42-8, 42-10; Ord. No. 5364-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5428-00; Ord. No. 6292-06; Ord. No. 6882-12, § 2; Ord. No. 7392-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6882-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Secs. 43-12—43-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GUNNERY RANGES AND SHOOTING AREAS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Applicability of noise ordinances to certain sport shooting ranges, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-917. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 43-21. - Violations of this article. 
Every violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor.  
Sec. 43-22. - Location of outdoor gunnery range. 
All outdoor gunnery ranges shall be so located as not to be within one hundred (100) yards, at the nearest point, of any dwelling house, commercial establishment or city street, alley, right-of-way, parkway, playfield, playground or other public property, except such areas of public property that may have been designated as a gunnery range. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 5; Code 1961, § 42-18)  
Sec. 43-23. - Marking of outdoor gunnery ranges. 
All outdoor gunnery ranges shall be clearly marked as such, with sufficient signs indicating the location of the gunnery range and warning the public thereof. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 5; Code 1961, § 42-19)  
Sec. 43-24. - Backstops for gunnery ranges. 
All outdoor gunnery ranges, and indoor gunnery ranges located entirely within an enclosed building, shall have adequate backstops to confine all shot, shell, bullets, pellets or other missiles of similar character. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 5; Code 1961, §§ 42-20, 42-21)  
Secs. 43-25—43-29. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 
 
Sec. 43-30. - Installation and operation of indoor and outdoor gunnery ranges and shooting areas. 
No person or entity shall install, set up or operate any indoor or outdoor gunnery range or shooting area within the city unless such installation and operation is in accordance with this Code, as well as all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to such an installation or operation, specifically including, but not limited to, the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 4; Code 1961, § 42-11; Ord. No. 5045-97)  
Sec. 43-31. - Application. 
Any person desiring a certificate of approval required by this division shall file a written application therefor with the chief of police. Such application shall be signed by the owner, lessee or person lawfully in possession of the land upon which is located the range or shooting area sought to be approved. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 4; Code 1961, § 42-12)  
Sec. 43-32. - Issuance; contents. 
(a)  A certificate of approval applied for under this division may be issued by the chief of police after inspecting the premises involved only upon a finding that the discharge of firearms upon the range or area in question will not jeopardize life or property and that such range or area complies with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(b)  The chief of police may issue certificates of approval for target, trap or skeet ranges and shooting areas, which certificates may specify the time and manner of shooting and the type of firearm or ammunition which may be used on such ranges or areas. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 4; Code 1961, § 42-13)  
Sec. 43-33. - Term. 
Any certificate of approval issued under the provisions of this division shall be valid for 24 months after its issuance, unless sooner revoked. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 4; Code 1961, § 42-15)  
Sec. 43-34. - Revocation. 
A certificate of approval issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the chief of police if the conditions upon which it was issued change. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 4; Code 1961, § 42-16)  
Secs. 43-35—43-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOWS AND ARROWS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Shooting of arrows, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-916. 
 
Sec. 43-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6882-12, § 4, adopted May 22, 2012, effective July 1, 2012, repealed § 43-45, which pertained to permit for archery ranges and derived from Ord. No. 1085, § 1; Code 1961, § 42-26.  
Sec. 43-46. - Shooting or discharging generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot an arrow from a bow in a manner that can be reasonably expected to result in the impact of the arrow upon the property of another without permission from the owner or tenant of such property. For purposes of this article, "bow" includes all compound bows, crossbows, longbows and recurve bows having a peak draw weight of ten pounds or more. The term "bow" does not include bows which have a peak draw of less than ten pounds or which are designed or intended to be used principally as toys. The term "arrow" means a shaft-like projectile intended to be shot from a bow. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 1; Code 1961, § 42-26; Ord. No. 6882-12, § 2) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6882-12 shall be in effect on and after July 1, 2012.  
Sec. 43-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6882-12, § 4, adopted May 22, 2012, effective July 1, 2012, repealed § 43-47, which pertained to shooting or discharging by minors and derived from Ord. No. 1085, § 1; Code 1961, § 42-26.  
Sec. 43-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 6882-12, § 4, adopted May 22, 2012, effective July 1, 2012, repealed § 43-48, which pertained to exemptions from article and derived from Ord. No. 1085, § 1; Code 1961, § 42-26.  
Sec. 43-49. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1085, § 1; Code 1961, § 42-26)  
Chapter 44 - WETLANDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1, adopted March 23, 1993, amended Ch. 44, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Watercraft, docks, piers and waterways, Ch. 11; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 35; water supply, Ch. 42; zoning, Ch. 45; subdivision regulations, App. B. 
 
Sec. 44-1. - Intent. 
The council of the city, acting pursuant to Chapter 13 of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia, adopts this chapter regulating the use and development of wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
(1)  Commission means the Virginia Marine Resources Commission. 
(2)  Commissioner means the commissioner of marine resources. 
(3)  Governmental activity means any of the services provided by the city to its citizens for the purpose of maintaining the city, including but not limited to such services as constructing, repairing and maintaining roads; providing sewage facilities and street lights; supplying and treating water; and constructing public buildings. 
(4)  Nonvegetated wetlands means unvegetated lands lying contiguous to mean low water and between mean low water and mean high water. 
(5)  Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture, or other legal entity. 
(6)  Vegetated wetlands means lands lying between and contiguous to mean low water and an elevation above mean low water equal to the factor one and one-half (1.5) times the mean tide range at the site of the proposed project in the city, and upon which is growing any of the following species: saltmarsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora), saltmeadow hay (Spartina patens), saltgrass (Distichlis spicata), black needlerush (Juncus roemerianus), saltwort (Salicornia spp.), sea lavender (Limonium spp.), marsh elder (Iva frutescens), groundsel bush (Baccharis halimifolia), wax myrtle (Myrcia sp.), sea oxeye (Borrichia frutescens), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), big cordgrass (Spartina cynosuroides), rice cutgrass (Leersia oryzoides), wildrice (Zizania aquatica), bulrush (Scirpus validus), spikerush (Eleocharis sp.), sea rocket (Cakile edentula), southern wildrice (Zizaniopsis miliacea), cattail (Typha spp.), three-square (Scirpus spp.), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bald cypress (Taxodium distichum), black gum (Nyssa sylvatica), tupelo (Nyssa aquatica), dock (Rumex spp.), yellow pond lily (Nuphar sp.), marsh fleabane (Pluchea purpurascens), royal fern (Osmunda regalis), marsh hibiscus (Hibiscus moscheutos), beggar's tick (Bidens sp.), smartweed (Polygonum sp.), arrowhead (Sagittaria spp.), sweet flag (Acorus calamus), water hemp (Amaranthus cannabinus), reed grass (Phragmites communis), or switch grass (Panicum virgatum). 
(7)  Wetlands means both vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands. 
(8)  Wetlands board or board means the Newport News Wetlands Board. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-3. - Uses of and activities on wetlands which are permitted. 
The following uses of and activities in wetlands are authorized if otherwise permitted by law: 
(1)  The construction and maintenance of noncommercial catwalks, piers, boathouses, boat shelters, fences, duckblinds, wildlife management shelters, footbridges, observation decks and shelters and other similar structures, provided that such structures are so constructed on pilings as to permit the reasonably unobstructed flow of the tide and preserve the natural contour of the wetlands; 
(2)  The cultivation and harvesting of shellfish, and worms for bait; 
(3)  Noncommercial outdoor recreational activities, including hiking, boating, trapping, hunting, fishing, shellfishing, horseback riding, swimming, skeet and trap shooting, and shooting on shooting preserves, provided that no structure shall be constructed except as permitted in subsection (1) of this section; 
(4)  Other outdoor recreational activities, provided they do not impair the natural functions or alter the natural contour of the wetlands; 
(5)  Grazing, haying, and cultivating and harvesting agricultural, forestry or horticultural products; 
(6)  Conservation, repletion and research activities of the Commission, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, the department of game and inland fisheries and other conservation-related agencies; 
(7)  The construction or maintenance of aids to navigation which are authorized by governmental authority; 
(8)  Emergency measures decreed by any duly appointed health officer of a governmental subdivision acting to protect the public health; 
(9)  The normal maintenance and repair of, or addition to, presently existing roads, highways, railroad beds, or facilities abutting on or crossing wetlands, provided that no waterway is altered and no additional wetlands are covered; 
(10)  Governmental activity in wetlands owned or leased by the Commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof; and 
(11)  The normal maintenance of manmade drainage ditches, provided that no additional wetlands are covered. This subdivision does not authorize the construction of any drainage ditch. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-4. - Wetlands board—Creation, appointment and terms. 
There is hereby created the Newport News Wetlands Board, which shall consist of seven (7) residents of the city, who shall be appointed by the council. Their terms of office shall be for five (5) years, except that original appointments shall be made for such terms that the term of one (1) member shall expire each year in the first, second, and third year after appointment and that the term of two (2) members shall expire each year in the fourth and fifth year after appointment. The chairman of the board shall notify the council at least thirty (30) days in advance of the expiration of any term of office and shall also notify the council if any vacancy occurs. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may serve successive terms. Members of the board shall hold no other public office in the city. A member whose term expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. Members of the board shall be compensated at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per regular board meeting which they attend. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-5. - Same—Officers, meetings, rules, records and reports. 
(a)  The board shall elect from its membership a chairman and such other officers as it deems necessary who shall serve one-year terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than four (4) members of the board. The board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedures, consistent with ordinances of the city and general laws of the commonwealth. The board shall keep a full public record of its proceedings and shall submit a report of its activities to the council at least once a year, and a copy of its report to the commission. 
(b)  The city manager, or someone from the administrative branch of the government designated by the city manager, shall attend meetings of the board and shall have the right to participate in its discussions. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-6. - Meeting space, services and removal of board member. 
The board shall be supplied reasonable meeting space for its use and such reasonable secretarial, clerical, legal and consulting services as it may need. Any board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause, by the city council, after hearing held after at least fifteen (15) days' notice. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-7. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person who desires to use or develop any wetland within the city, other than for the purpose of conducting the activities specified in section 44-3 of this chapter, shall first file an application for a permit directly with the wetlands board. 
(b)  The permit application shall include the following: the name and address of the applicant; a detailed description of the proposed activities; a map, drawn to an appropriate and uniform scale, showing the area of wetlands directly affected, the location of the proposed work thereon, the area of existing and proposed fill and excavation, the location, width, depth and length of any proposed channel and disposal area, and the location of all existing and proposed structures, sewage collection and treatment facilities, utility installations, roadways, and other related appurtenances or facilities, including those on adjacent uplands; a description of the type of equipment to be used and the means of equipment access to the activity site; the names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent land and known claimants of water rights in or adjacent to the wetland of whom the applicant has notice; an estimate of cost; the primary purpose of the project; any secondary purposes of the project, including further projects; the public benefit to be derived from the proposed project; a complete description of measures to be taken during and after the alteration to reduce detrimental offsite effects; the completion date of the proposed work, project, or structure; and such additional materials and documentation as the wetlands board may require. 
(c)  A nonrefundable processing fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall accompany each application to cover the cost of processing said application. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-8. - Public inspection of applications, maps, etc. 
All applications, maps and documents relating thereto shall be open for public inspection in the department of planning and development and specified in the advertisement for public hearing required under section 44-9. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-9. - Public hearing procedure. 
Not later than sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete application, the wetlands board shall hold a public hearing on the application. The applicant, the commissioner, owner of record of any land adjacent to the wetlands in question, known claimants of water rights in or adjacent to the wetlands in question, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, the department of game and inland fisheries, the water control board, the department of transportation, and any governmental agency expressing an interest in the application shall be notified of the hearing. The board shall mail these notices not less than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the hearing. The wetlands board shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published at least once a week for two (2) weeks prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in this city. The published notice shall specify the place or places within the city where copies of the application may be examined. The costs of publication shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-10. - Action of board. 
(a)  Approval of a permit application shall require the affirmative vote of four (4) members of the board. 
(b)  The chairman of the board, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Any person may testify at the public hearing. Each witness at the hearing may submit a concise written statement of his testimony. The board shall make a record of the proceeding, which shall include the application, any written statements of witnesses, a summary of statements of all witnesses, the findings and decision of the board, and the rationale for the decision. 
(c)  The board shall make its determination within thirty (30) days of the hearing. If the board fails to act within that time, the application shall be deemed approved. Within forty-eight (48) hours of its determination, the board shall notify the applicant and the commissioner of its determination. If the board fails to make a determination within the thirty-day period, it shall promptly notify the applicant and the commission that the application is deemed approved. For purposes of this section, "act" means taking a vote on the application. If the application receives less than four (4) affirmative votes, the permit shall be denied. 
(d)  If the board's decision is reviewed or appealed, the board shall transmit the record of its hearing to the commissioner. Upon a final determination by the commission, the record shall be returned to the board. The record shall be open for public inspection at the same office as was designated under section 44-9. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-11. - Bonds, revocations and suspension of permits. 
The board may require a reasonable bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it securing to the commonwealth compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in the permit. The board may, after hearing as provided herein, suspend or revoke a permit if the board finds that the applicant has failed to comply with any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of work as set forth in the application. The board, after hearing, may suspend a permit if the applicant fails to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-12. - Board to preserve wetlands while accommodating necessary development. 
In fulfilling its responsibilities under this chapter, the board shall preserve and prevent the despoliation and destruction of wetlands within its jurisdiction while accommodating necessary economic development in a manner consistent with wetlands preservation. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-13. - Review procedure. 
(a)  In deciding whether to grant, grant in modified form or deny a permit, the board shall consider the following: 
(1)  The testimony of any person in support of or in opposition to the permit application; 
(2)  The impact of the proposed development on the public health, safety, and welfare; and 
(3)  The proposed development's conformance with standards prescribed in Section 28.2-1308 of the Code of Virginia and guidelines promulgated pursuant to Section 28.2-1301 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The board shall grant the permit if all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The anticipated public and private benefit of the proposed activity exceeds its anticipated public and private detriment. 
(2)  The proposed development conforms with the standards prescribed in Section 28.2-1308 of the Code of Virginia and guidelines promulgated pursuant to Section 28.2-1301 of the Code of Virginia. 
(3)  The proposed activity does not violate the purposes and intent of this chapter or Chapter 13 (Section 28.2-1300 et seq.) of Title 28.2 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  If the board finds that any of the criteria listed in subsection (b) of this section are not met, the board shall deny the permit application but allow the applicant to resubmit the application in modified form. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-14. - Permits; form. 
The permit shall be in writing, signed by the chairman of the board, and notarized. A copy of the permit shall be transmitted to the Commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-15. - Expiration date and extensions. 
No permit shall be granted without an expiration date established by the board. Upon proper application, the board may extend the permit expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-16. - Permits; effect on zoning. 
No permit granted by a wetlands board shall in any way affect the applicable zoning and land use ordinances of this city or the right of any person to seek compensation for any injury in fact incurred by him because of the proposed activity. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-17. - Investigations and prosecution. 
The wetlands board shall have the authority to investigate all projects, whether proposed or ongoing, which alter wetlands located within the city. The wetlands board shall have the power to prosecute all violations of its orders and any violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-18. - Monitoring, inspections, compliance, and restoration. 
(a)  The board chairman may require a permittee to implement monitoring and reporting procedures they believe are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the permit and this chapter. 
(b)  The board chairman may require such on-site inspections as he believes are reasonably necessary to determine whether the measures required by the permit are being properly performed, or whether the provisions of this chapter are being violated. Prior to conducting any inspection, the board chairman shall provide notice to the resident owner, occupier, or operator, who shall be given an opportunity to accompany the site inspector. If it is determined that there is a failure to comply with the permit, the board chairman shall serve notice upon the permittee at the address specified in his permit application or by delivery at the site of the permitted activities to the person supervising those activities and designated in the permit to receive the notice. The notice shall describe the measures needed for compliance and the time within which these measures shall be completed. Failure of the person to comply within the specified period is a violation of this section. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this chapter from the designated enforcement officer, the board chairman may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in subsection (b) of this section, issue an order requiring all or part of the activities on the site to be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. In the case of an activity not authorized under this chapter or where the alleged permit noncompliance is causing, or is in imminent danger of causing, significant harm to the wetlands protected by this chapter, the order may be issued without regard to whether the person has been issued a notice to comply pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. Otherwise, the order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with the notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven (7) days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority, permittee, resident owner, occupier, or operator for appropriate relief to the circuit court of the jurisdiction where the violation was alleged to have occurred. Upon completion of corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the board chairman from taking any other action specified in section 44-17. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this chapter from a designated enforcement officer, the wetlands board may order that the affected site be restored to predevelopment conditions if the board finds that restoration is necessary to recover lost resources or to prevent further damage to resources. The order shall specify the restoration necessary and establish a reasonable time for its completion. The order shall be issued only after a hearing with at least thirty (30) days' notice to the affected person of the hearing's time, place, and purpose, and shall become effective immediately upon issuance by the board. The board shall require any scientific monitoring plan they believe necessary to ensure the successful reestablishment of wetlands protected by this chapter and may require that a prepaid contract acceptable to the board be in effect for the purpose of carrying out the scientific monitoring plan. The board may also require a reasonable bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it securing to the commonwealth compliance with the conditions set forth in the restoration order. The appropriate court, upon petition by the board, may enforce any such restoration order by injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy. Failure to complete the required restoration is a violation of this chapter. 
(e)  The duties of the board chairman under this section may be delegated to a designee; however, this designee shall not be a designated enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-19. - Violation of orders, rules and regulations. 
Any person who knowingly, intentionally, negligently or continually violates any order, rule or regulation of the wetlands board or violates any provision of the provisions contained in this chapter, or any provision of a permit granted by the wetlands board shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Following a conviction, every day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-20. - Injunctions. 
Upon petition of the wetlands board to the circuit court of the city, when any act is done or threatened which is unlawful under this chapter, the court may enjoin the unlawful act and order the defendant to take any steps necessary to restore, protect and preserve the wetlands involved. This remedy shall be exclusive of and in addition to any criminal penalty which may be imposed under section 44-18. 
(Ord. No. 4428-93, § 1)  
Sec. 44-21. - Local credit for in-lieu fees. 
Where an agreed-upon permit condition requires the contribution of in-lieu fees to offset permitted wetland losses, the Wetlands Board shall credit the applicant for any in-lieu fee payments made to the Virginia Aquatic Resources Trust Fund or another dedicated wetlands restoration fund with reference to the same activity. 
(Ord. No. 7090-14)  
Sec. 44-22. - Appeals under the stormwater ordinance. 
The Wetlands Board shall conduct appeals pursuant to section 37.1-37.1:1 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 7090-14)  
Chapter 45 - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1, adopted June 10, 1997, amended Ch. 45, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 45 pertained to zoning, subdivision and site development. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 5028-97 repealed App. A. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of said Ord. No. 5028-97. 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-5(7); responsibilities of department of planning, § 2-349; planning commission, § 2-462 et seq.; board of zoning appeals, § 2-676 et seq.; restrictions on location of poultry and animal yards, § 6-2; building regulations, Ch. 13; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16; mobile home parks, Ch. 25; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 26; parks, squares and recreational facilities, Ch. 29; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 35; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 38; applicability of zoning ordinance to swimming pools, § 39-4; urban enterprise zone boundaries, Ch. 40.2; water supply, Ch. 42; subdivision regulations, App. B. 
State Law reference— Zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq. 
Annotation—In the case of Segaloff v. City of Newport News, 163 SE 2d 135 (Va. SCA, 1968), it was held that a canopy extending over a parking area was within the meaning of "structure" under a former zoning ordinance and that, since the canopy violated the setback requirements of that ordinance, the city could withdraw a building permit previously issued and force removal of that part of the canopy within the required setback area. Issuance of the building permit did not amend the requirements of the ordinance. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE 
 
Sec. 45-101. - General. 
This chapter is enacted for the general purposes of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the public and of further accomplishing the objectives of Section 15.2-2200 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and to these ends it is designed to give reasonable consideration to each of the following purposes, where applicable: 
(1)  To provide for adequate light, solar access, air, convenience of access and safety from fire, flood, crime and other dangers; 
(2)  To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets; 
(3)  To facilitate the creation and maintenance of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community; 
(4)  To facilitate the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports, and other public requirements; 
(5)  To protect against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas; 
(6)  To protect against one (1) or more of the following: overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, or loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers; 
(7)  To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base; 
(8)  To promote the conservation of the community's natural resources and physical environment, to protect surface and ground water, and to protect against the destruction of or harmful encroachment upon designated environmentally sensitive areas and other lands of significance for the protection of the natural environment. 
(9)  To protect approach slopes and other safety areas of licensed airports including United States Government and military air facilities; 
(10)  To promote the creation and preservation of affordable housing; 
(11)  To promote and implement the goals, objectives, principles and concepts of the Comprehensive Plan (General Plan) as approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5267-99)  
Secs. 45-102—45-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 45-201. - Definition of certain words and terms. 
For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular number include the plural and the plural the singular; the use of any gender shall be applicable to all genders; the word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the word "land" includes only the area described as being above mean sea level; and the word "person" includes an individual, a partnership, association, or a corporation. 
Unless defined elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, the following terms shall be defined as herein indicated: 
Accessory structure. A structure subordinate to the principle building on the same lot or serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal building. 
Accessory use. Except as otherwise provided in the zoning district regulations, an accessory use is: 
(1)  A use which is conducted on the same lot as the principal use to which it is related, 
(2)  Clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with such principal use, and 
(3)  Operated and maintained substantially for the benefit or convenience of the occupants. 
Acreage. Any defined and described parcel of land not shown on a plat of a recorded subdivision legally admitted to record. 
Adaptive re-use. A non-residential building fifty (50) years or older, that will be adapted for a new use other than that for which it was originally intended. 
Administrative support offices or informational services. A physically self-contained business operation in which information processing is the primary activity. Such information processing takes place using computers, telephones or other means of communication and may include, but is not necessarily limited to, such functions as data entry, data processing, telephone-delivered customer service, order processing, purchasing, accounting and telemarketing. 
Adult book store. Any commercial establishment having its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes, (whether for viewing off premises or on premises), magazines and other periodicals, or sex aids or paraphernalia of which more than twenty-five (25) percent are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or having as its dominant theme or purpose, matters depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities. 
Adult day care facility. Any place, establishment, or institution, public or private operated or maintained for the provision of day care for adults who are aged, infirm, or disabled. Such facility may be operated during a part of the day only, because its purpose is to provide supplementary care and protection of individuals who reside elsewhere. 
Adult entertainment establishment. Any establishment where live performance, display or dance of any type, which has a significant or substantial portion of such activity or, when considered as a whole, has as its dominant theme or purpose, any actual or simulated performance of sexual activity, removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed. 
Adult motion picture theater. An establishment, which excludes minors by reason of age, and which is regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by or, when considered as a whole having as its dominant theme or purpose, emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to sexual activities for observation by a patron therein. 
Adult uses. Any adult book store, adult entertainment establishment or adult motion picture theater. 
Agriculture. See "farm." 
Alley. A permanent service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
Alteration. Change, improvement, and/or replacement of part(s), in buildings or structures not affecting the supporting members of such buildings or structures. 
Amateur radio tower/antenna(s). Any structure erected to support the broadcast or receiving of any frequency for any non-commercial use. 
Animal shelter. A public or non-profit facility with or without outside cages or runs, other than a private residential dwelling and its surrounding grounds, that provides a home for animals, which may or may not be offered for adoption, with veterinary services provided. 
Apartment house. (See dwelling-multiple-family.) 
Aquaculture. The growing, farming and husbandry of freshwater and marine organisms under controlled conditions including, but not limited to, hatcheries, and fish farming. 
Assisted living facility. A residential facility in which no more than eight (8) aged, infirm or disabled persons reside, with one (1) or more resident counselors or other staff persons and for which the Virginia Department of Social Services is the licensing authority. 
Assisted living facility, congregate. A congregate residential facility that provides or coordinates personal and health care services, 24-hour supervision, and assistance (scheduled and unscheduled) for the maintenance or care of four (4) or more adults who are aged, infirm or disabled persons, with one (1) or more resident counselors or other staff persons and for which the Virginia Department of Social Services is the licensing authority. 
Automobile body and paint shop. Building or premises where automobile body work including frame straightening and painting is undertaken, all work is performed within an enclosed structure and motor fuels are not sold. 
Automobile fuel and kerosene sales (supplemental). Automobile fuel and kerosene sales supplementary to other retail sales on the same premises, limited to one (1) island including no more than four (4) pumps, and where no mechanical work is undertaken. 
Automobile gasoline supply station. A facility where automobile fuels and kerosene are sold at retail, where other retail sales may occur but where no mechanical work is undertaken. 
Automobile gasoline supply station - unmanned. A facility where only motor vehicle fuels are sold by contract to commercial and industrial fleets and not at retail to the general public, and where no mechanical work is undertaken. 
Automobile leasing service. A facility with the primary function of leasing automobiles, limousines, vans, or motorcycles, where only minor repairs and maintenance of leased vehicles are undertaken, no body work is done on the premises, and no motor fuel is sold. 
Automobile sales, new car sales. A facility which includes all operations customarily associated with new car sales including the sale of recreational vehicles, campers, and motorcycles, and related used car sales with repair services, leasing and body repair performed in an enclosed building. 
Automobile sales, used car dealer. A facility with the primary function of selling used automobiles or used recreational vehicles, campers, and motorcycles with only minor repairs and minor body work or painting done on premises within an enclosed building and where no motor fuels are sold at retail. 
Banquet/function hall. A facility constructed with or without a kitchen, leased for the purpose of hosting private social events not open to the general public, with or without live entertainment, where food and/or drink may be consumed on site. 
Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
Bed and breakfast inn. An owner-occupied house containing no more than six (6) sleeping rooms rented for daily periods with board for guests only, and primarily for occupancy by tourists as distinguished from multiple-family dwellings and boardinghouses. 
Block. The area fronting on the same side of a public street or road situated between two (2) street intersections, except that where the distance between such street intersections is greater than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet, the area fronting on the same side of a public street or road not more than six hundred (600) feet on either side of the parcel, lot or tract of land being considered as a building site shall be considered to be a block for the purpose of this chapter; provided further, that in the case of a dead-end or cul-de-sac street, the intersection of the circular right-of-way with the extension of the street centerline shall be considered the terminus of the block. 
Boardinghouse. An owner-occupied building other than a hotel or motel where, for compensation, lodging with or without meals, is provided for four (4) or more persons. 
Boat basin. A place for the launching, docking or mooring of pleasure boats and fuel sales for boats. 
Brewery. A facility for the production and packaging of beer for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on or off premises, with a production of more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year and which meets all alcohol beverage control laws and regulations. 
Buffer area. A treed area remaining natural or landscaped and required to provide screening between districts of different intensities. (See buffer area in Article XXVIII, section 45-2802(e).) 
Building. Any structure for the housing, shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
Buildable width or buildable depth. The width or depth respectively of that part of the lot not included within the required front, side or rear yard. 
Business administrative offices. An administrative office of a business where management or administrative functions are performed or where one (1) or more businesses are managed off-site. 
Caliper. The diameter of a tree trunk measured six (6) inches above ground level for nursery stock, and four and one-half (4.5) feet above grade for existing trees on-site. 
Camp site. An area located in a public or private park consisting of permanent cabins, tents or other shelters used for vacationing and other recreational purposes. 
Campus ministry house. A structure located on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a college campus which may be used as the residence of a campus minister, for counseling, for religious study, for student meetings, for the administrative functions of a campus minister, and other similar activities; no person shall be permitted to reside in such structure, other than a campus minister and his immediate family, or the number of campus ministers without families permitted in the conditional use permit; nor shall the structure be deemed to be a community facility. 
Child care center. Any facility licensed and operated in accordance with the provisions of Section 63.1-195 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, for the purpose of providing care, protection, and guidance to a group of children separated from their parents or guardians during a part of the day only. A child care center includes group care provided to five (5) or more children. 
City. The Corporation of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
Clinic. An office building or group of offices wherein only persons engaged in the practice of a medical profession or occupation are located, but which does not have beds for overnight care of patients. 
Commercial parking lot. A parcel of land or portion thereof used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles as a commercial enterprise for which compensation is charged independently of any other use of the premises. 
Commercial radio or television station. A facility for the transmission of commercial programming by radio or television within the commercial band of the electromagnetic spectrum, but not including towers supporting antenna. 
Commercial vehicles, large. A self-propelled or towed vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds and having one (1) or more of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Licensed for hire; 
(2)  Lettering exceeding three (3) inches in height; 
(3)  Tire rims larger than sixteen (16) inches; 
(4)  Tandem axles; 
(5)  Dual wheels; 
(6)  Height greater than eight (8) feet; 
(7)  Length greater than twenty-four (24) feet; 
(8)  Lighting designed for emergency vehicles; 
(9)  Air brakes; 
(10)  Permanently affixed mechanical or construction equipment; 
(11)  Designed to be used for or to be used to transport commercial, farm or construction equipment. 
The gross vehicle weight that is reflected on state vehicle registration documents shall be prima facie evidence of a vehicle's gross weight. 
Commercial vehicles, small. A self-propelled or towed vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less and having one (1) or more of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Licensed for hire; 
(2)  External racks or other devices used to hang ladders, pipes or other equipment or materials; 
(3)  Lettering exceeding three (3) inches in height; 
(4)  Lighting designed for emergency vehicles; 
(5)  Logos or three-dimensional sculptures, letters or numbers representing anything other than the manufacturer or model of vehicle. 
For purposes of this definition, any wrecker or tow truck with a gross vehicle weight of sixteen thousand five hundred (16,500) pounds or less shall be considered a small commercial vehicle, provided that the wrecker or tow truck owner is on the list of approved wrecker or tow truck operators maintained for use in emergency situations by the Newport News Police Department or the Virginia State Police. 
The gross vehicle weight that is reflected on state vehicle registration documents shall be prima facie evidence of a vehicle's gross weight rating. 
Communication towers greater than fifty (50) feet in height. A freestanding structure erected on real property, such as a monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, or suitable existing structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities and/or small cell facilities, not located within the boundaries of a local, state, or federal historic district. Television antennas for home reception, satellite dishes one (1) meter or less in diameter, and amateur radio tower/antenna(s) shall not be deemed communication towers under this definition. The term communication towers greater than fifty (50) feet in height shall not include any telephone or electrical utility pole or any tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service. The term under this definition shall also not include any structure fifty (50) feet in height, or less, measured from the top of the closest adjacent curb or edge of pavement where no curb exists. 
Communication towers not greater than fifty (50) feet in height. A freestanding structure, not greater than fifty (50) feet in height, measured from the top of the closest adjacent curb or edge of pavement where no curb exists, such as a monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, or suitable existing structure or alternative structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities and/or small cell facilities, not located within the boundaries of a local, state, or federal historic district. The term communication towers not greater than fifty (50) feet in height shall not include any telephone or electrical utility pole or any tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service. Television antennas for home reception, satellite dishes one (1) meter or less in diameter, and amateur radio tower/antenna(s) shall not be deemed communication towers under this definition. 
Community facility: (i) A non-commercial facility which provides a public service or, (ii) selected semi-public uses customarily associated with residential communities, and (iii) which offers services of an educational, recreational or religious nature. (See Article V, section 45-520) 
Community recreation center. A non-commercial publicly owned indoor recreational facility, where fees are charged for uses such as courts, pools, exercise rooms and/or running tracks. 
Comprehensive plan. All plans or parts thereof officially adopted by the city council pursuant to Virginia Law for the physical development of the City of Newport News or any territory within its jurisdiction showing the long-range proposals for the general development of the city. 
Concession stand. A small commercial facility selling refreshments, gifts and souvenirs, or providing rentals at a park. 
Congregate housing for children. A residential facility under twenty-four-hour per day adult supervision used to temporarily house, for a maximum period of ninety (90) days, pre-foster care children, under the age of eighteen (18) years, prior to their placement in a foster care home. 
Contractor. The term "contractor" means any person, firm or corporation: 
(1)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for doing any work on or in any building or structure, requiring the use of paint, stone, brick, mortar, wood, cement, structural iron or steel, sheet iron, galvanized iron, metallic piping, tin, lead, or other metal or any other building material; 
(2)  Accepting or offering to accept contracts to do any paving, curbing or other work on sidewalks, streets, alleys, or highways, or public or private property, using asphalt, brick, stone, cement, concrete, wood or any composition; 
(3)  Accepting or offering to accept an order for or contract to excavate earth, rock, or other material for foundation or any other purpose or for cutting, trimming or maintaining rights-of-way; 
(4)  Accepting or offering to accept an order or contract to construct any sewer of stone, brick, terra cotta or other material; 
(5)  Accepting or offering to accept orders or contracts for doing any work on or in any building or premises involving the erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing, or maintaining electric wiring, devices or appliances permanently connected to such wiring, or the erecting, repairing or maintaining of lines for the transmission or distribution of electric light and power; or 
(6)  Engaging in the business of plumbing and/or steam fitting and/or mechanical work for which a permit is required under the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
Contractor, small. A contractor having no more than twenty (20) employees and no vehicles or equipment larger or heavier than a small commercial vehicle as herein defined. 
Convalescent home. (See nursing home) 
Convenience store. A store offering a limited selection of groceries and other items for sale normally offered by grocery stores, which may also offer delicatessen and/or fast food items, and whose business is highly dependent on quick stops by work-related and/or local neighborhood traffic. 
Custodian apartment. An apartment, no larger than seven hundred (700) square feet, for full-time employees only and incidental to the primary use. 
Day services center. A facility where the principal function is providing on-site services and assistance to the homeless population by government agencies and/or non-profit organizations. Those services shall not include overnight accommodations or food service. 
Deciduous. Pertaining to plant materials which drop their leaves annually, usually during the Fall season. 
Developed site. An area of improved property that independently meets all requirements of the site plan ordinance. 
District, zoning. A classification established by this chapter for land in the City of Newport News which regulates the use of buildings and land, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and other development characteristics. 
Dormitories. Buildings or structures which are supervised on-site and which contain rooms and may include common eating facilities for the housing of regularly enrolled students, faculty and employees of an established college, university, or research center, and their families. 
Driveway. A private entrance providing vehicular access from a street to building(s) or abutting property(s). Such driveway may provide access through a parking lot and/or a series of lots of record. 
Dwelling, attached single-family. A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units sharing at least sixteen (16) horizontal feet of a wall, ceiling or floor area between such units with each unit having its own front and rear or side access to the outside. 
Dwelling, detached single-family. A building containing one (1) dwelling unit, entirely surrounded by a yard. Manufactured homes, travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents or other forms of temporary or portable housing are not included within this definition. 
Dwelling, two-family. A building containing two (2) dwelling units, entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is or is not on a separate lot. 
Dwelling, mobile home. (See manufactured home) 
Dwelling, multiple-family. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, entirely surrounded by a yard, where each dwelling unit is served by a common outside entrance. 
Dwelling, multiple-family highrise. A building containing six (6) or more stories with residential dwelling units on the upper floors and either a mix of commercial or residential units on the main floor. 
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Electrical generating plant. A facility that generates electricity from mechanical power produced by gas, coal, nuclear fission or wind. 
Electrical substation. A facility for transforming electricity for distribution to individual customers. 
Elevated water storage tanks. Facilities for the elevated storage of water. 
Evergreen. Pertaining to plant materials that retain most of their green foliage throughout the entire year in USDA Plant Hardiness Zones Seven and Eight. 
Extended stay motel. A building or group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations for ten (10) or more persons not members of a resident family and used for temporary occupancy of transients and containing cooking facilities in more than fifty (50) percent of the individual units, and from which ingress and egress is made to rooms from individual outside entrances. 
Family. Any of the following groups of people living together in a dwelling unit: 
(1)  An individual living alone in a dwelling unit; 
(2)  Two (2) unrelated persons; 
(3)  Two (2) unrelated persons and the children of such persons; 
(4)  Three (3) unrelated persons, each unrelated to any of the others; except if the dwelling unit is a part of an attached multiple family building then the number of unrelated persons, each unrelated to any other, can be increased to four (4) persons; 
(5)  Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or approved foster care; and 
(6)  Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or approved foster care and one (1) unrelated person. 
Family home adult day care facility. A private family dwelling of a person or persons who maintain(s) the dwelling and regularly provide(s) direct care on the premises during part of a twenty-four-hour day to not more than five (5) adults who are aged, infirm, or disabled, and reside elsewhere, except the home or residence of an individual who cares for any person related to him by blood or marriage. 
Family home child care facility. A private family dwelling of a person or persons who maintain the dwelling and regularly provide direct care on the premises during part of a twenty-four-hour day to not more then four (4) children under the age of twelve (12), excluding the provider's own children or grandchildren related by blood, marriage or adoption and foster children. (See Article V) 
Farm. A tract of land used for the production of crops and may include the incidental raising of livestock. 
Floor area ratio. The combined area, exclusive of any space within the building used for parking or for recreational use as defined in this chapter, of all floors of all buildings on a premises expressed as a percentage of the total lot area of the premises, or in lieu of total lot area, the adjusted lot area as defined in this chapter. 
Food truck vendor. Any vendor who sells food and non-alcoholic beverages from a motor vehicle or a trailer licensed to be operated on the highway by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles, other than a vendor operating exclusively as an ice cream vendor as that term is defined in section 17-99 of the city code. 
Fraternity or sorority house. A building which is occupied by university or college students who are associated together in a fraternity or sorority that is officially recognized by the university or college and who receive from the fraternity/sorority lodging and/or meals on the premises. 
Freight container. A portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed for and used in the multi-modal shipment of goods, wares or merchandise; or receptacles originally designed for the transport of goods but not currently used for such purposes. 
Frontage. That portion of any real property abutting directly on a public right-of-way. 
Garage, accessory. An accessory building designed or used only for the storage of self-propelled vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
Garage, storage. Any structure, except for those described as an accessory garage, used exclusively for the storage or parking of self-propelled vehicles. 
General plan. (See comprehensive plan) 
Grade. The highest average level of finished ground surface adjacent to the exterior walls of a building. 
Gross leasable area. All floor area within a building or mall intended for lease, rent, or use by tenants and not including space in malls used exclusively for public ingress/egress. 
Group home. (a) A residential facility for nine (9) or more mentally ill, intellectually or developmentally disabled persons, for which the Virginia Department of Behavioral Health and Developmental Service, or its successor, is the licensing authority, or (b) a residential facility for five (5) or more persons, excluding nursing homes, with twenty-four-hour supervision, which provides shelter and services to individuals and families for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months to help them become self-sufficient citizens. 
Gymnasium. A building containing space and equipment for various indoor sports activities including, but not limited to, basketball, volleyball, wrestling and gymnastics and usually including spectator accommodations, shower and locker rooms and offices. 
Halfway house. A building for the purpose of providing room and board, recreation, counseling, and other rehabilitative services to individuals who are participating in work release, prerelease, or probationary programs or other similar programs from state or federal institutions and who are under the supervision of a court, state or local agency. 
Height of building. The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for low sloped roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for shed, gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
Height of communication tower/antenna. The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the communication tower/antenna. 
Home occupation. Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental to the use of the premises for dwelling purposes that constitutes entirely or partly the livelihood of a member of a family residing on the premises. (See Article V, section 45-517) 
Homeless shelter. A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for temporary residential occupancy by families or individuals not to exceed forty-five (45) days at any given time for the purpose of providing room and board and support services that would lead to self sufficiency and permanent shelter. 
Hospice. An establishment or a program that provides for the physical and emotional needs of terminally ill patients and their families. 
Hospital. An institution rendering medical, surgical, obstetrical, or short term convalescent care excluding nursing homes. 
Hotel. A building or group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations in twenty (20) or more rooms used for temporary occupancy of transients, with central administrative facilities attended twenty-four (24) hours-a-day and which provides eating and/or conference/meeting facilities. 
Housing for older persons. Housing as defined in § 36-96.7 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
Kennel. Any premises, land, or building, enclosed or unenclosed, where more than a total of four (4) domesticated animals are housed or kept. When such animals are not kept or bred for sale, animals under the age of six (6) months shall not be considered in calculating the number enumerated above. This definition shall not pertain to small animals such as fish, birds, rodents, reptiles, and other species which are traditionally housed inside a dwelling in cages, tanks, or similar enclosures; provided, however, that the maintenance of such animals poses no threat to the public health or safety. (See chapter 6 of the City Code). 
Landscaped yard or open space. That space designed to enhance the privacy and appearance of a development by providing landscaping features or screening for the benefit of the occupants or those in neighboring areas or to enhance the appearance of the community. The space may include a combination of lawns, decorative plantings, flower beds, sidewalks, walkways, outdoor sitting areas, active recreational areas, ornamen-tal objects, wooded areas, water courses or other such similar areas as are designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect. 
Large growing shrub. A woody plant material producing its branches primarily at the base and capable of maturing at heights greater than ten (10) feet. 
Large growing tree. A variety of tree, evergreen or deciduous, capable of maturing at heights greater than or equal to fifty (50) feet. 
Loading space. A space on the premises providing for the standing, loading or unloading of vehicles. 
Local utilities. Electrical power, telephone, gas, water, sewer, cable TV and storm drainage lines, stormwater management systems, air pollution monitoring stations, inline facilities such as gas regulating stations and water wells or pumping stations, sewage pumping stations, telephone exchanges, switching, and transmitting equipment underground or ground level water storage tanks, underground electrical transmission lines, communication towers not greater than fifty (50) feet in height located in the public right-of-way, wireless facilities located in the public right-of-way, and small cell facilities located in the public right-of-way. This use does not include elevated water storage tanks. 
Lot. Any piece, parcel or portion of property shown on a plat of a recorded subdivision legally admitted to record. 
Lot area, adjusted. The total lot area plus any creditable additional area as prescribed in Article XXVIII which is used for off-street parking, recreational or other open purposes. 
Lot area, open. Any portion of a lot or premises not covered by a building or structure. 
Lot area, total. The gross area of a lot or premises. 
Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. The shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot. 
Lot coverage. Any area of a lot covered by a structure, not to include surface parking. 
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage. An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. 
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines. Lines bounding a lot, as defined herein. 
Lot of record. A designated and recorded portion of a subdivision intended for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court. 
Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the front yard setback line established by this chapter and/or by a recorded subdivision plat. 
Low growing shrub. A woody plant material producing its branches primarily at the base and typically maturing at heights around three (3) feet. 
Mall. A common pedestrian area serving tenants located within an enclosed mall building. 
Mall building, enclosed. A single building or series of connected buildings having a total gross floor area in excess of four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet, enclosing a number of tenants and occupancies, such as retail stores, drinking and dining establishments, entertainment and amusement facilities, offices and other similar uses. 
Manufactured home. A structure subject to federal regulation, which is transportable in one (1) or more sections; is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet when erected on-site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. 
Manufactured home park. An area designed, constructed, equipped, operated, and maintained for the purpose of providing spaces for manufactured homes intended to be used as living facilities. 
Manufacturing/processing. The mechanical or chemical transformation of inorganic or organic substances into new products. 
Marina. A place for boat launching, docking, mooring, repair sales and service and the sale of fuel and accessory equipment for boats. 
Medical center complex. A major hospital situated on at least five (5) acres and containing a minimum of one hundred (100) patient beds with access to uses such as dormitories, group homes, adult care residences, medical offices, medical and dental laboratory, nursing home, convalescent home, hospice, pre-school/day school part of a community facility, barber/beauty shop, health club and fitness center, florist, medical supply sales, gift shop, commercial parking lot or garage and/or helistop or heliport. Retail service uses cannot stand alone; they shall be located within the main building. 
Medical profession or occupation. Any activity involving the diagnosis, cure, treatment, mitigation, or prevention of disease which affects any bodily function or structure. 
Micro-distillery, and/or micro-winery. A facility with no more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area, for the production and packaging of alcoholic beverages for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on or off premises and which meets all alcohol beverage control laws and regulations. 
Micro/craft brewery. A facility for the production and packaging of beer for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on or off premises, with a production of not more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year and which meets all alcohol beverage control laws and regulations. 
Micro-wireless facility. A small cell facility that is not larger in dimension than twenty-four (24) inches in length, fifteen (15) inches in width and twelve (12) inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than eleven (11) inches. 
Mini-warehouse. A structure containing separate storage spaces which are leased or rented on an individual basis to the general public for storage purposes only. 
Mini-warehouse - single entrance interior storage. A mini-warehouse is a structure for the interior storage of business or personal property, wherein access to storage spaces within the structure shall be permitted only through an interior hallway. Access into a mini-warehouse - single entrance interior storage shall be limited to a single entrance; however, emergency access entrances shall be permitted. 
Mixed use development. Property under single ownership and legal description that incorporates two (2) or more different uses, and may include a variety of housing types, within a single development. 
Motel. A building or group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations with twenty (20) or more rooms used for temporary occupancy of transients, not more than twenty (20) percent of which contain cooking facilities and where conference/meeting and banquet rooms are not specifically provided. 
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle as defined in this section which is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any structure designed, used, or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place, office, or commercial space shall be considered a part of a motor vehicle. 
Motor vehicle, large (large motor vehicle). A motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds. 
Motor vehicle, small (small motor vehicle). A motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less. 
Motor vehicle repair or service facility. Buildings and premises where minor and major mechanical or maintenance on any motor vehicle is undertaken, including, but not limited to, general repair garages, muffler shops, tire stores, oil change facilities, and vehicle upholstery shops. This excludes car washes and any body repair and/or painting facility. 
Neotraditional. A type of neighborhood or community design which reintroduces qualities of traditional small towns. It combines a mix of uses within the neighborhood, including retail, office, civic buildings, public squares and multi-family and single-family housing, all within walking distance of one (1) another. Design codes promote narrower streets with multiple connections to surrounding neighborhoods, uniform building setbacks and strict architectural codes to create a strong community image. 
Nightclub. An establishment, excluding motion picture theaters and adult entertainment establishments, which provides entertainment (including but not limited to live bands, comedians, solo artists, and/or a dance floor for patrons), stays open after 11:00 p.m., and has an occupancy load exceeding one hundred (100) people. 
Nonconforming lot of record. A lot, which for the specific use intended, does not comply with the present Zoning Ordinance requirements, but has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court prior to the passage of this chapter. (See Article V, section 45-507) 
Nonconforming structures. Any structure which was previously lawful but which does not comply with all regulations of the district in which it is located, either on the effective date of this chapter or as a result of any subsequent amendment thereto. 
Nonconforming use of land. Any use of a lot or acreage which was previously lawful but which does not conform to the applicable use regulations of the district in which it is located, either on the effective date of this chapter or as the result of any subsequent amendment thereto. 
Nursing home. Facility licensed by the state board of health in which the primary function is the provision, on a continuing basis, of nursing services and health-related services for the treatment and inpatient care of four (4) or more nonrelated individuals. 
Off-street parking area. Space provided for vehicular parking outside of a street right-of-way. 
Outlots. Lots that do not meet the requirements of this chapter as to minimum width and depth. 
Parking garage. A structure for parking vehicles. 
Parking lot. An on-site area at finished grade for the parking of vehicles and any associated accessways, driveways, or loading and unloading areas; but, excluding parking garage. 
Persons related. Persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or approved foster care shall be defined as a person's spouse, former spouse, parents, stepparents, children, siblings, half-siblings, grandparents and grandchildren. 
Pet care service with outside cages or runs. An enclosed facility, with outside cages or runs, with or without boarding and/or veterinary services, including but not limited to, day and night care, manicuring, bathing, clipping, styling, and/or training of pets, with or without the offering of pets and/or pet products for sale. 
Pet care service without outside cages or runs. An enclosed facility, without outside cages or runs, with or without boarding and/or veterinary services, including but not limited to, day and night care, manicuring, bathing, clipping, styling, and/or training of pets, with or without the offering of pets and/or pet products for sale. 
Plant materials. All genera of the plant kingdom such as trees, shrubs, groundcover, annuals and perennials. 
Police K9 training facility. A facility where working dogs will be trained, and may be housed, to assist police and other law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. 
Portable storage container. A portable storage container is a portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed and used for the storage or shipment of household goods, wares, building materials or merchandise. Portable storage containers are an alternative to traditional mini-storage and moving options, and are delivered via truck or trailer directly to the customer. The concept is based upon a hydraulic powered delivery system or forklift system that allows the containers to be lowered to ground level for easy access and packing. Portable storage containers shall also include roll-off containers, and shall include boxes and bin containers used for the collection and hauling of waste or debris. 
Premises. An area of single or contiguous lots under common ownership with any building or structure occupying it. 
Private club. A facility for civic, fraternal, social, cultural, religious, literary, political, recreational, or similar activities, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
Professional office. An office used for personal, professional and business services such as medical, legal, financial, real estate or insurance services where no merchandise or products are sold or offered for sale nor any service is performed or offered that requires the storage of merchandise, supplies, or machinery other than those which are customarily used on the premises for those professional services. 
Public park. A publicly owned facility that provides active and/or passive recreation for the general public. 
Public right-of-way. A right-of-way that, by virtue of its use or ownership, is under the control of the City of Newport News, the Commonwealth of Virginia or the United States of America. 
Radio, television or microwave tower. A structure supporting antenna that transmit or receive any portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. 
Recovery home. A communal residential facility for not more than six (6) persons that provides housing for recovering addicts for the purpose of the residents' joint rehabilitation from drug or alcohol addiction established in adherence to the requirements of the Federal and State Fair Housing Acts. 
Recreational open space. Open space for both passive and active recreation. Passive recreation facilities include outdoor sitting areas or roof gardens, shaded areas along walkways or portions of walkways overlooking open areas. Active recreation areas include but are not limited to pedestrian ways located and landscaped to provide for strolling activities, tennis courts, swimming and boating areas, shuffleboard courts, bridle paths, playlots, playgrounds and playfields. 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, whether or not self-propelled, used for transporting people or property in connection with recreation and designed for temporary occupancy as opposed to a manufactured home as herein defined. Such vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel trailers, utility trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motor homes, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers, amphibious houseboats, or similar recreational vehicles. 
Refuse transfer station. A facility for the separation, transfer or packing of solid waste materials from smaller collecting vehicles to larger transport vehicles. 
Sanitary landfill. A facility for collecting, handling, storage, and disposal of solid waste, where solid waste is spread in thin layers on the ground, compacted to the smallest practical volume, and covered with soil at the end of each working day. 
Scrap processing. The exclusive purchasing, collecting or salvaging of scrap materials for the specific purpose of processing said materials for the recovery industry (including but not limited to steel mills, foundries, smelters and refineries), and having and using machinery and facilities designed for such processing and making regular shipments of such processed scrap materials in the normal course of business. 
Self-service ice vending unit. A stand alone ice production machine that is no larger than fifteen (15) feet in height, ten (10) feet in width, and twenty-five (25) feet in length, and located on a site that is at least two (2) acres in size, and may operate without full time service personnel. These units are activated by the insertion of money, or another form of payment, and ice is bagged automatically or dispensed in bulk to the consumer. 
Setback line. The required minimum distance from the street right-of-way and/or property lines that establishes the land area within which buildings or structures may be erected or placed. For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise modified by other sections of this chapter, the required front, side and rear yard dimensions shall be used to establish the applicable minimum setback dimensions. (See Article XXVIII, sections 45-2802 and 45-2803) 
Sewage treatment plant. A facility receiving and treating sewage from the sanitary sewer system of the city or region. 
Shipping container. See freight container. 
Shooting range. A target range, enclosed within a building, for archery or firearms practice, training and competition. 
Shopping center. A developed site designed and developed as an entity and containing a variety of commercial uses primarily oriented to retail and service. 
Small boat repair. Building and premises where minor and major mechanical work on boats and water craft, under twenty-five (25) feet in length, is undertaken, and no motor fuels are sold as retail. 
Small cell facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet and (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet, or such higher limit as is established by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Small growing tree. A variety of tree, evergreen or deciduous, typically maturing at heights around twenty-five (25) to thirty-five (35) feet. 
Special residential facility. A residence where care for not more than eight (8) mentally ill, intellectually or developmentally disabled persons reside with one (1) or more resident counselors or other staff persons and licensed by the Virginia Department of Behavioral Health and Developmental Services, or its successor; provided that mental illness and developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in § 54.1-3401 of the Code of Virginia. 
Story. That part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling immediately above. For the purpose of this chapter, a basement is not considered to be a story. 
Story, half. A story immediately under a sloping roof which has the point of intersection of the top line of the rafters and the face of the outside walls not to exceed three (3) feet above the top floor level, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the floor area immediately below it, and which does not contain an independent apartment. 
Street. The word "street" shall include streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public highways in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
Street line. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street. (See "lot line") 
Street, private. A street located entirely on private property. 
Street, public. A street that, by virtue of its use or ownership, is under the control of the City of Newport News, the Commonwealth of Virginia or the United States of America. 
Structural alterations. A change in any of the supporting members of a building. (See alterations) 
Structure, accessory. (See accessory structure.) 
Structure. Any construction or any production or piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together. The word "structure" specifically includes signs and billboards, but not paving such as driveways, walkways, patios, etc. 
Tattooing. Placing a design(s), letter(s), scroll(s), figure(s), symbol(s) or any other mark(s) upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. Such services must be licensed by the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation. 
Tattoo establishment. Any establishment that offers or practices the placing of designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent jewelry and excluding permanent cosmetic tattooing, by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. Such establishment must be licensed by the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation. 
Tattooing, permanent cosmetic. Placing marks upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin on the face, including but not limited to eyebrows, eyeliners, lip coloring, lip liners, full lips, cheek blush, eye shadow, and on the body for breast and scar repigmentation or camouflage; also known as permanent make-up or micropigmentation. Such services must be licensed by the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation and shall be allowed as an accessory use in a tattoo establishment, barber/beauty shop, medical office or educational institution. 
Tattoo parlor. A tattoo establishment. 
Taxi stand. A designated location on a public street where taxis await customers leaving adjoining properties or establishments. 
Temporary family health care structure. A transportable residential structure, providing an environment facilitating a caregiver's provisions of care for a mentally or physically impaired person, that (i) is primarily assembled at a location other than its site of installation, (ii) is limited to one (1) occupant who shall be the mentally or physically impaired person, except that a married couple may reside therein when one such person is mentally or physically impaired and the other person requires assistance with one (1) or more activities of daily living as defined in Virginia Code § 63.2-2200, as certified in writing by a Commonwealth licensed physi cian; (iii) has no more than three hundred (300) gross square feet, and (iv) complies with applicable provisions of the Industrialized Building Safety Law (Va. Code § 36-70 et seq.) and the Uniform Building Code (Va. Code § 36-97 et seq.). For purposes of this definition "caregiver" shall mean an adult who provides care for a mentally or physically impaired person within the Commonwealth. A caregiver shall be either related by blood, marriage, or adoption to or the legally appointed guardian of the mentally or physically impaired person for whom he is caring. For purposes of this definition "mentally or physically impaired person" shall mean a person who is a resident of Virginia and who requires assistance with two (2) or more activities of daily living, as defined in Va. Code § 63.2-2200, as certified in a writing provided by a physician licensed by the Commonwealth. 
Transient. A person who resides temporarily within the city limits. 
Transitional area. (See buffer area.) 
Transmission lines. Major public or private pipelines not in public street and highway right-of-way including pumping stations and storage of water and wastewater, natural gas, propane gas, petroleum products, chemicals, slurry coal and any other gases, liquids or solids. Transmission lines shall also include overhead electrical transmission lines capable of transmitting sixty-nine (69) kilovolts or more, and electrical substations with a capacity of five thousand (5,000) kilovolt amperes or more. 
Tree. Unless the context in which the word is used indicates otherwise, a tree is any living, self-supporting woody plant that usually produces one (1) main trunk. 
Use, accessory. (See accessory use.) 
Use, principal. The fundamental purpose(s) for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
Vegetative density. The minimum number of trees and shrubs required per four hundred (400) square feet of transitional buffer area (created by a twenty-foot by twenty-foot grid, excluding approved improvements, easements, or accessways). 
Vehicle. Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a highway or street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationery rails or tracks. 
Veterinary facility. An establishment of licensed veterinary practitioners primarily engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine, dentistry or surgery for animals, with or without outside cages or runs. 
Water reservoir. An impoundment for storing water prior to treatment by a public utility. 
Water treatment plant. A facility receiving raw water, treating it and storing the treated water on-site. 
Wireless facility. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communication between user equipment and a communications network. 
Yard. An open space between a building or use and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied or unobstructed by any portion of a structure or use from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building or yard shall be applied. 
Yard, front. Open land area extending across the full width of a lot and lying between the front lot line and the principal building(s) or use(s). (See Article XXVIII, sections 45-2802 and 45-2803). 
Yard, rear. Open land area extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the principal building(s) or use(s). 
Yard, side. Open land area between the side lot line and the principal building(s) or use(s), and extended from the front yard to the rear yard. 
Yard, required. The open land area between the minimum setback lines required in a zoning district, and the lot lines. 
Zoning administrator. The Director of Codes Compliance for the City of Newport News, Virginia or such other official appointed by the director of codes compliance to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Zoning map. The official map or maps, together with all subsequent amendments which are adopted by reference as a part of this Zoning Ordinance and which delineate zoning district boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5199-98; Ord. No. 5201-98; Ord. No. 5209-98; Ord. No. 5232-98; Ord. No. 5263-99; Ord. No. 5334-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5354-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5393-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5394-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5400-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5420-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5421-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5528-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5560-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5630-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5722-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5779-02, § 1; Ord. No. 6173-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6268-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6330-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6566-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6726-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6740-10, § 1; Ord. No. 6780-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6793-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6801-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6888-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6891-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6993-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7000-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7065-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7091-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7102-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7180-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7217-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7219-15, § 1; Ord. No. 7246-16, § I; Ord. No. 7255-16, § I; Ord. No. 7334-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7365-17, § 1; Ord. No. 7465-18, § 1; Ord. No. 7533-19, § 1; Ord. No. 7542-19, § 1)  
Secs. 45-202—45-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 
 
Sec. 45-301. - Zoning districts. 
For the purposes enumerated in Article I of this chapter, the City of Newport News is hereby divided into classes of zoning districts to be known as: 
R1 Single-Family Dwelling District 
R2 Single-Family Dwelling District 
R3 Single-Family Dwelling District 
R4 Single-Family Dwelling District 
R5 Low Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District 
R6 Manufactured Home District 
R7 Medium Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District 
R8 High Density Multiple-Family Dwelling District 
R9 Mixed Use District 
P1 Park District 
O1 Office District 
O2 Office Park District 
O3 Office/Research and Development District 
C1 Retail Commercial District 
C2 General Commercial District 
C3 Regional Business District 
C4 Oyster Point Business District 
C5 Oyster Point Business/Manufacturing District 
M1 Light Industrial District 
M2 Heavy Industrial District 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-302. - District boundaries. 
The district boundaries are hereby established as shown on the zoning district map which consists of Real Estate Tax Assessment Maps 001 through 322 and is dated June 10, 1997. The zoning district map is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter and to have the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth and described herein. The zoning district map and all amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the offices of the department of codes compliance and the department of planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-303. - Interpretation of zoning district boundary lines. 
The zoning district boundary lines on the zoning district map generally are intended to follow the centerline of streets, alleys and railroad lines; lot or property lines; and natural boundaries such as the centerlines of streams or creeks as they exist at the time of the passage of the chapter. However, where dimensions are shown on the zoning district map, such dimensions shall control the interpretation of the location of the district line. 
Where a district line abuts tidal waters, the district line shall extend to the mean low water mark unless such tidal waters are otherwise placed in a zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-304. - Property added to corporate limits. 
All territory which may hereafter be added to the City of Newport News by annexation or other means shall be considered to be in the R1 zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-305—45-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SUMMARY OF USES BY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 45-401. - Coding and categorization system. 
The uses permitted in each zoning district created by this chapter are listed in the "Summary of Uses by District," which follows in section 45-402, according to the following system: 
CODE 	INTERPRETATION 
P 	The use may be permitted by right in the zoning district subject to all applicable regulations of this chapter. Uses determined by the zoning administrator to be clearly similar to those listed are also permitted in the zoning district. 
C 	The use may be permitted in the zoning district with a conditional use permit issued by the city council in accordance with Article XXVII. The conditional use permit approved by the city council may stipulate conditions and safeguards that govern the use. Uses determined by the zoning administrator to be clearly similar to those listed also may be considered for conditional use permits in the zoning districts indicated. 
BLANK 	The use is not permitted in the zoning district. 
 
The uses listed in the "Summary of Uses by District" are organized by the categories below: 
A.  Agricultural 
B.  Residential 
C.  Health Services 
D.  Utilities Warehousing 
E.  Educational Services 
F.  Community Facilities Development 
G.  Business Services 
H.  Personal Services 
I.  Recreational Uses 
J.  Retail Services 
K.  Automotive/Marine Services 
L.  Transportation 
M.  Wholesaling and 
N.  Office/Research and 
O.  Open Industrial 
P.  Limited Industrial 
Q.  Heavy Industrial 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-402. - Summary of uses by district. 
P = PERMITTED USE 
C = CONDITIONAL USE 
BLANK = NOT PERMITTED 
SUMMARY OF USES BY DISTRICT* 
ZONING DISTRICTS
	R1 SINGLE-FAMILY 	R2 SINGLE-FAMILY 	R3 SINGLE-FAMILY 	R4 SINGLE-FAMILY 	R5 LOW MULTI-FAMILY 	R6 MANFCT. HOMES 	R7 MEDIUM MULTI-FAMILY 	R8 HIGH MULTI-FAMILY 	R9 MIXED USE 	P1 PARK 	O1 OFFICE 	O2 OFFICE PARK 	O3 OFFICE/RESEARCH & DEVEL. 	C1 RETAIL COMMERCIAL 	C2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL 	C3 REGIONAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 	C4 OYSTER POINT BUSINESS 	C5 OYSTER POINT BUSI./MANUF. 	M1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL 	M2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL 	REFERENCES 
																					ART. 	SEC. 
PERMITTED USES A. AGRICULTURAL 
1. AGRICULTURE, FARM 	C 									P 												
* ARTICLES XXVIII AND XXXI SHOULD BE CONSULTED FOR ANY MODIFICATION OR ADJUSTMENTS OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS OR ANY SPECIAL OVERLAY ZONING REGULATIONS. 

PERMITTED USES B. RESIDENTIAL 
1. SINGLE-FAMILY 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 											
2. TWO-FAMILY 					P 		P 	P 								P 						
2.1. SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED 					P 		P 	P 			C 					P 						
2.2. HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS - SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED 					P 		P 	P 	P 		C 			C 		P 	C 					
3. MULTIPLE-FAMILY 					P 		P 	P 	P 		C 					P 	C 					
3.1. HOUSING FOR OLDER PERSONS - MULTIPLE FAMILY 					P 		P 	P 	P 		C 			C 		P 	C 					
4. HIGH RISE APARTMENT 									P 							P 	p 					
5. MANUFACTURED HOME & MANFCT. HOME PARK 						P 															C. CODE XIII 	
6. PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 							P 						
7. DORMITORY 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		P 	C 			P 						
8. GROUP HOME 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 		C 	P 		C 	C 	C 						
9. HALFWAY HOUSE 					C 		C 	C 	C 					C 	C 	C 						
10. HOME OCCUPATION 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 												X 	45-518 
11. BED & BREAKFAST 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 					P 	P 	P 						
12. BOARDING HOUSE 							C 	C 								C 						
13. ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 											
14. CUSTODIAN APARTMENT 														P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
15. SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL FACILITY 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 																	
16. CAMPUS MINISTRY HOUSE 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 																	
17. HOMELESS SHELTERS 							C 	C 														
18. CONGREGATE HOUSING FOR CHILDREN 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 					C 	C 							
19. TEMPORARY FAMILY HEALTH CARE STRUCTURE 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 											
20. ADAPTIVE RE-USE 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 									C 	C 							
21. RECOVERY HOME 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 		C 	P 		C 	C 	C 						
PERMITTED USES C. HEALTH 
1. HOSPICE 												P 		P 	P 							
2. MEDICAL CENTER COMPLEX 												P 		P 	P 							
3. HOSPITAL 							C 	C 	C 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 				V 	45-520 
4. MEDICAL & DENTAL LABORATORY 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
5. NURSING HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME 					C 		P 	P 	P 			P 		P 	P 	P 	C 				V 	45-520 
6. OPTICIAN 									P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					
7. OUTPATIENT CARE CLINIC 							C 	C 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					
8. PHARMACY/DRUG STORE 									P 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 					
9. PHYSICAL THERAPY 							C 	C 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					
10. PHYSICIAN, DENTIST OR OPTOMETRIST'S OFFICE 							C 	C 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					
11. VETERINARY FACILITY WITH OUTSIDE CAGES OR RUNS 											C 			C 	C 	C 						
12. VETERINARY FACILITY WITHOUT OUTSIDE CAGES AND RUNS 									P 		P 			P 	P 	P 						
13. ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY 									P 		P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	C 					
14. FAMILY HOME ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 											
15. ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY, CONGREGATE 					C 		P 	P 	P 		C 	P 		P 	P 	P 	C 					
PERMITTED USES D. UTILITIES 
1. AMATEUR RADIO TOWER/ANT. 70 FT. OR UNDER IN HEIGHT 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 													
2. AMATEUR RADIO TOWER/ANT. OVER 70 FT. IN HEIGHT 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 													
3. COMMERCIAL RADIO OR TV STATION 									C 		P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 			
4. ELECTRICAL GENERATING PLANT 																			C 	C 		
5. ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	P 	P 		
6. ELEVATED WATER STORAGE TANK 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
7. LOCAL UTILITIES 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
8. COMMUNICATION TOWER GREATER THAN 50 FEET IN HEIGHT 									C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
9. COMMUNICATION TOWER NOT GREATER THAN 50 FEET IN HEIGHT 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
10. SANITARY LANDFILL 										C 									C 	C 		
11. SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT 										C 									C 	C 		
12. SOLID WASTE TRANSFER STATION 										C 									C 	C 		
13. TRANSMISSION LINES 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 		
14. WATER RESERVOIR 		P 								P 												
15. WATER TREATMENT PLANT 										C 									C 	C 		
16. ELECTRICAL GENERATION FROM LANDFILL GASES 										C 												
PERMITTED USES E. EDUCATIONAL SERVICES 
1. CHILD CARE CENTER 					C 	C 	C 	C 	P 		C 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 		
2. COLLEGE, UNIVERSITY 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 		P 	P 			P 	P 	C 			V 	45-520 
3. FAMILY HOME CHILD CARE FACILITY 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 												V 	45-523 
4. OTHER EDUCATIONAL/GROUP INSTRUCTION 									P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 				
5. PRE-SCHOOL OR DAY SCHOOL WITH OR WITHOUT CHILD CARE CENTER, PART OF A COMMUNITY FACILITY 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 					
6. PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 					V 	45-520 
7. PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SECONDARY SCHOOL 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 					V 	45-520 
8. VOCATIONAL SCHOOL 									P 		C 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 		
9. BUSINESS SCHOOL 									P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
10. PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOL WITH LESS THAN 200 STUDENTS 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	C 	C 				
PERMITTED USES F. COMMUNITY FACILITIES 
1. CEMETERY 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 													
2. CHURCH, SYNAGOGUE/OTHER PLACES OF WORSHIP 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	V 	45-520 
2.1 OFF-SITE CHURCH PARKING LOT 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 					C 											V 	45-527 
3. COMMUNITY REC. CENTER (TENNIS, RACQUET BALL…) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	V 	45-520 
4. CORRECTION FACILITIES 										P 						P 						
5. FIRE STATION 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	V 	45-520 
6. FUNERAL HOME 														P 	P 	P 			C 			
7. LIBRARY 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				V 	45-520 
8. PRIVATE CLUB 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 			P 	P 	P 					V 	45-520 
9. NEIGHBORHOOD SWIMMING POOL 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	P 					V 	45-520 
10. POLICE STATION 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	V 	45-520 
10.1. POLICE K9 TRAINING FACILITY 										P 									P 	P 	V 	45-535 
11. POST OFFICE/PARCEL PICK UP STATION 									P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
12. PUBLIC/PRIVATE GOLF COURSE 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 		P 	P 	P 					V 	45-520 
13. PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC MUSEUM OR ART GALLERY 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		P 	C 	C 		P 	P 	P 	P 				V 	45-520 
14. PUBLIC PARK 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			V 	45-520 
PERMITTED USES G. BUSINESS SERVICES 
1. ADMIN. SUPPORT OFFICES INFORMATIONAL OFFICES 									C 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
2. BANK, LOAN OFFICE OR CREDIT UNION 									P 		C 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 		
3. BUSINESS ADMIN. OFFICES 									C 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
4. PARCEL DISTRIBUTION CENTER 												C 		C 	C 	P 		P 	P 	P 		
5. PROFESSIONAL OFFICE 									P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 			
6. OFFICE AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE WITHIN ONE BUILDING 											P 											
PERMITTED USES H. PERSONAL SERVICES 
1. ARTIST OR PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO 									P 		P 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
2. BARBER/BEAUTY SHOP 									P 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 					
3. CARPET/UPHOLSTERY CLEANING 															P 	P 	C 	P 	P 	C 		
4. COIN-OPERATED COMMERCIAL LAUNDRY 									P 					P 	P 	P 						
4.1. DAY SERVICES CENTER 											C 			C 	C 	C 	C 					
5. DIAPER SERVICE/LINEN SUPPLY 															P 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 		
6. DRY CLEANING PICKUP 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
7. DRY CLEANING PLANT 														P 	P 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 		
8. RECORDING STUDIO 									P 		C 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
9. SHOE REPAIR 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
10. TAILOR SHOP 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
11. TRAVEL AGENCY 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 					
12. TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT 															C 							
PERMITTED USES I. RECREATIONAL USES 
1. AMUSEMENT PARK OR THEME PARK 																P 			C 	C 		
2. BILLIARD PARLOR 									P 					C 	P 	P 						
3. BINGO PARLOR 														C 	P 						C 	
4. BOWLING ALLEY 									P 					C 	P 	P 						
5. AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENT 									C 					C 	P 	P 						
6. COUNTRY/YACHT CLUB 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		P 		P 		P 	C 					
7. GOLF DRIVING RANGE 										P 					P 				C 	C 		
8. HEALTH CLUB, FITNESS CENTER & GYMNASIUM 									P 			P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 			
9. MINIATURE GOLF COURSE 										C 					P 	P 						
10. PUBLIC CAMPGROUND 										C 												
11. SKATEBOARD RAMP 										P 				C 	C 	C 			C 	C 	V 	45-511 
12. SKATING RINK 									P 	P 				C 	P 	P 						
13. STADIUM, ARENA OR AMPHITHEATRE 										C 						P 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
14. THEATRE OR STAGE 									P 	P 				P 	P 	P 	C 	C 				
15. SHOOTING RANGE 																			C 			
PERMITTED USES J. RETAIL SERVICES 
1. ADULT USE 														C 	C 	C 					V 	45-2502 
																						
2. APPLIANCE SALES 									P 					P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
3. APPLIANCES SERVICES 									P 					P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
4. BAKERY (RETAIL) 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
5. BICYCLE SALES & SERVICE 									P 					P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
6. BOOK STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
7. BUILDING SUPPLY - RETAIL 														C 	C 	C 			P 	P 		
8. CAMERA STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
9. CEMETERY MONUMENT SALES 														P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
10. COMPUTER SALES & SERVICE 									P 			P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
11. CONCESSION STAND 									P 	P 				P 	P 	P 	C 	C 				
12. CONVENIENCE STORE WITHOUT GASOLINE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	C 	C 				
13. CRAFT STORE 														P 	P 	P 	P 					
14. DEPARTMENT STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
15. DUPLICATING STORE 									P 			P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
16. EXTENDED STAY MOTEL 									P 					P 	P 	P 	C 	C 				
17. FLORIST, HORTICULTURAL & NURSERY 									P 			p 		P 	P 	P 	P 					
18. FURNITURE & UPHOLSTERY STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 				V 	45-522 
19. GARDEN SUPPLY STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
20. GOLF PRO SHOP/CLUBHOUSE 									P 	C 				P 	P 	P 	P 					
21. GROCERY STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
22. HARDWARE STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
23. HOME ACCESSORY STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
24. ICE CREAM/CANDY STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
25. INTERIOR DECORATING STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
26. JEWELRY SALES, SERVICE & REPAIR 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
27. KENNEL 														C 	C 	C 						
28. LIGHT EQUIPMENT RENTAL & LEASING 														P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	C 		V 	45-522 
29. LIQUOR STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
30. MALL/MALL BUILDING (ENCLOSED) 									P 					P 	P 	P 						
31. MEDICAL SUPPLY SALES 														P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
32. MOTEL/HOTEL 									P 			C 		P 	P 	P 	C 	C 				
33. NEEDLEWORK & PIECE GOODS STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
33.1. NIGHTCLUB—TYPE 1 														P 	P 	P 	P 					
33.2. NIGHTCLUB—TYPE 2 														C 	C 	P 	P 					
34. NOVELTY & SOUVENIR STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
35. OFF-PREMISE SALE OF ALCOHOL IN AN ESTABLISHMENT OF LESS THAN 1,600 SQ.FT. 									C 					C 	C 	C 	C 					
36. PAWN SHOP 														C 	C 	C 						
37. PET CARE SERVICE WITHOUT OUTSIDE CAGES OR RUNS 									P 					P 	P 	P 						
37a. PET CARE SERVICE WITH OUTSIDE CAGES AND RUNS 														C 	C 	C 						
38. PRINTING ENGRAVING, BLUEPRINTING & COPYING 									C 				C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
39. RESTAURANT/CAFETERIA/DELICATESSEN WITH DRIVE THROUGH SERVICE NOT ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 									P 	C 		P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 		
40. RESTAURANT/CAFETERIA/DELICATESSEN WITHOUT DRIVE THROUGH SERVICE 									P 	C 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 		
40.1. RESTAURANT/CAFETERIA/DELICATESSEN WITH DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE ADJACENT TO RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 									C 	C 		C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
41. RETAIL SALES BY WHOLESALER OF SAME GOODS 									C 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		V 	45-522 
41.1. SELF-SERVICE ICE VENDING UNIT 														P 	P 				P 	P 		
42. SPORTING GOODS 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
43. STATIONERY STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
44. TENNIS PRO SHOP/CLUBHOUSE 									P 	C 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 					
45. TOY OR HOBBY STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 						
46. USED MERCHANDISE SALES 														P 	P 	P 					V 	45-522 
47. VARIETY STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 						
48. VIDEO RENTAL 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
49. WEARING APPAREL/SHOE STORE 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 					
51. BANQUET/FUNCTION HALL 											C 			C 	C 	C 			C 			
52. ANIMAL SHELTER 																			P 			
53. MICRO-DISTILLERY AND/OR MICRO-WINERY 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
53. MICRO/CRAFT BREWERY 									P 					P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			
54. FOOD TRUCK VENDORS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 									P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
PERMITTED USES K. AUTO & MARINE SERVICES 
1. AUTO PARTS STORE (NO SERVICE) 									P 					P 	P 	P 						
2. AUTOMOBILE FUEL & KEROSENE SALES (SUPPLEMENTAL) 									C 					C 	C 	C 						
3. AUTOMOBILE GASOLINE SUPPLY STATION 									C 					C 	C 	C 						
3.1. AUTOMOBILE GASOLINE SUPPLY STATION - UNMANNED 																			C 	C 		
4. AUTOMOBILE BODY & PAINT SHOP 															C 	C 			C 			
5. SMALL MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR AND SERVICE FACILITY 															C 	C 			C 			
6. AUTOMOBILE SALES/NEW CAR DEALERSHIP 														C 	C 	P 			P 	C 	V 	45-522 
7. AUTOMOBILE SALES, USED CAR DEALERSHIP 															C 	C 					V 	45-522 
8. CAR WASH 														C 	C 	C 						
9. AUTOMOBILE UPHOLSTERY 														C 	C 	P 						
10. AUTOMOBILE, LIMOUSINE, VAN, MOTORCYCLE LEASING/RENTAL 												C 		C 	C 	C 		P 	P 		V 	45-522 
11. BOAT & YACHT SALES 									C 					C 	C 	P 					V 	45-522 
12. BOAT BASIN 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 		P 		P 	P 	P 			P 	P 		
13. LARGE MOTOR VEHICLE SALES, REPAIR AND/OR SERVICE 															C 				C 			
13.1. MANUFACTURED HOME SALES, SERVICE AND/OR LEASING 															C 				C 			
14. MARINA 										C 				C 	C 	P 			P 	P 	V 	45-522 
15. SMALL BOAT REPAIR 															C 	P 						
16. TOWING SERVICE 															C 	C 			C 			
PERMITTED USES L. TRANSPORTATION 
1. AIRPORT 																			P 	P 		
2. BUS STOP, BUS SHELTER OR TAXI STAND 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
3. COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT OR GARAGE 															P 	P 	C 	C 				
4. FREIGHT TERMINAL 																C 		C 	P 	P 		
5. HELISTOP OR HELIPORT 									C 			C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 		
6. OFF-SITE PARKING LOT OR GARAGE 							C 	C 	P 		C 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	P 	P 		
7. SEAPORT 																P 			P 	P 		
8. TAXI DISPATCH OPERATIONS, MAINTENANCE OR STORAGE 															C 				P 	P 		
9. TRANSIT TERMINAL FOR BUS, RAIL BOAT, SHIP, OR OTHER MASS TRANSIT 					C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 		
PERMITTED USES M. WHOLESALE & WAREHOUSE 
1. BUILDING SUPPLIES WHOLESALE & DISTRIBUTION 															C 	P 		C 	P 	P 		
2. DISTRIBUTION CENTER FOR RETAIL GOODS, MAIL ORDER 														C 	C 	P 		P 	P 	P 		
3. DISTRIBUTION WAREHOUSE 														C 	C 	P 		P 	P 	P 		
4. DOCUMENT STORAGE WAREHOUSE 																P 		P 	P 	P 		
5. FOOD PREPARATION, STORAGE & DISTRIBUTION 															C 	P 		P 	P 	P 		
6. HEATING OIL STORAGE & DISTRIBUTION 																P 			C 	C 		
7. MINI-STORAGE WAREHOUSE 															C 	P 		C 	P 			
7.1. MINI-STORAGE WAREHOUSE - SINGLE ENTRANCE INTERIOR STORAGE 														C 	C 	P 		C 	P 			
8. MOVING & STORAGE 																P 		C 	P 			
9. PLUMBING SUPPLIES WHOLESALE & DISTRIBUTION 															C 	P 		C 	P 	P 		
10. PROPANE STORAGE & DISTRIBUTION 																		C 				
11. SEAFOOD WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTION & RECEIVING 															C 	P 		P 	P 	P 		
PERMITTED USES N. OFFICE/RESEARCH DEVELOP. 
1. COMPUTER CENTERS 												P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 			
2. LASER, MATERIAL SCIENCE, ELECTRONICS PROD. FIRMS 												P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 			
3. LIBRARIES, AUDITORIUMS, LECTURE & CONFERENCE CNTR. 												P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 			
4. NONPROFIT PROFESSIONAL OR TECH. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTE 												P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 			
5. PILOT PLANTS FOR PRODUCTION OF PROTOTYPES 													P 			P 	C 	P 	P 			
6. RESEARCH LABORATORIES, OFFICES AND FACILITIES 												P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	P 			
PERMITTED USES O. OPEN INDUSTRIAL 
1. BRICK MFG./BRICKYARD LUMBER MILL 																			C 	C 		
2. CONCRETE, BITUMINOUS MFG. & ASPHALT PLANT 																			C 	P 		
3. HEAVY EQUIPMENT STORAGE 																			C 	P 		
4. OUTSIDE COAL STORAGE 																				C 		
5. OUTSIDE COMPOST FACILITY 																				C 		
6. OUTSIDE STORAGE AS MAIN USE 																				P 		
7. SAND & GRAVEL PROCESSING OR STORAGE 																			C 	P 		
8. SMALL REPAIR, SMALL CONSTRUCTION SHOP & SMALL CONTRACTORS OFFICE 														C 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 		
9. TANK, FARM FOR STORAGE OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS 																				P 		
PERMITTED USES P. LIMITED INDUSTRIAL 
1. BOTTLING PLANT 																P 		P 	P 	P 		
2. BUYBACK COLLECTION CENTER/GLASS, PAPER & ALUMINUM 									C 						P 	C 			C 	C 		
3. INDOOR MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY 													P 			P 	C 	P 	P 	P 		
4. INDOOR COMPOST FACILITY 																				C 		
5. MACHINE SHOP 																P 		P 	P 	P 		
6. BREWERY SHOP 																				P 		
PERMITTED USES Q. HEAVY INDUSTRIAL 
1. AUTOMOBILE, AIRPLANE MANUFACTURE & ASSEMBLY 																		P 	P 	P 		
2. CANNERY, FOOD PRODUCTS PACKING & PROCESSING 																				P 		
3. CHEMICAL MANUFACTURING 																				C 		
4. DISTILLERY 																				C 		
5. GLUE, FERTILIZER MANUFACTURING 																				C 		
6. INDOOR RECYCLING CENTER 																			C 	P 		
7. IRON, STEEL, COPPER, ALUMINUM, & OTHER METALWORK PLANT 																				C 		
8. PAPER PLANT 																				C 		
9. REFINERY 																				C 		
10. SEAFOOD PACKING & PROCESSING 																				P 		
11. SHIPBUILDING, SHIPYARD MANUFACTURE OR REPAIR 																				P 		
12. SLAUGHTERHOUSE, RENDERING PLANT ABATTOIR 																				C 		
13. TANNING OR CURING OF HIDES 																				C 		
* ARTICLES XXVIII AND XXXI SHOULD BE CONSULTED FOR ANY MODIFICATION OR ADJUSTMENTS OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS OR ANY SPECIAL OVERLAY ZONING REGULATIONS. 
** SIZE LIMITED TO 20,000 SQUARE FEET IN FLOOR AREA, UNLESS USE IS CONTAINED IN A MULTI-TENANT STRUCTURE. 
 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5094-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5200-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5202-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5203-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5210-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5264-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5265-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5266-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5273-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5274-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5333-99, § 1; Ord. No. 5395-00, §§ 1—5; Ord. No. 5407-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5422-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5529-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5530-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5550-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5551-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5561-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5711-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5741-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5780-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5781-02, § 1; Ord. No. 5956-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5957-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5958-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5985-03, § 1; Ord. No. 5966-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6174-05, § 1; Ord. No. 6191-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6192-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6193-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6194-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6195-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6196-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6197-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6198-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6331-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6334-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6335-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6336-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6352-07, § 1; Ord. No. 6537-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6538-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6539-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6540-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6578-09, § 1; Ord. No. 6770-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6782-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6794-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6802-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6889-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6892-12, § 1; Ord. No. 6995-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7001-13, § 1; Ord. No. 7066-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7103-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7181-15; § 1; Ord. No. 7246-16, § II; Ord. No. 7248-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7255-16, § II; Ord. No. 7316-16, § 1; Ord. No. 7366-17, § 1; Ord. No. 7534-19, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 7543-19, § 1)  
Secs. 45-403—45-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-501. - Application. 
The regulations set forth in this article unless referenced to specific districts shall apply to every zoning district created by this chapter or any subsequent amendment hereto. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-502. - Use of land. 
No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which such use is located. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-503. - Buildings, conformity with regulations. 
No building, structure or part thereof shall be constructed, erected, raised, enlarged, reconstructed, extended or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations prescribed by this chapter for the district in which such building, structure, or part thereof is located. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-504. - Lot required. 
Every residential building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot or acreage as defined herein and in no case shall there be more than one (1) dwelling on a lot or acreage used for dwelling purposes except as otherwise provided for in multiple-family zoning districts or in an approved planned residential development. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-505. - Temporary buildings. 
No temporary building or structure shall be erected or placed on any lot in any district; provided, however: 
(1)  This provision shall not prevent the placement or erection of a temporary construction or sales office for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance of a building permit for the projects permanent structure; provided, however: 
a.  That both a building permit and a temporary certificate of use and occupancy is obtained and maintained for the erection or placement and use of the temporary structure. 
b.  That the temporary structure complies with appropriate city code provisions. 
c.  That any manufactured temporary structure used shall be properly skirted. 
d.  That the temporary structure shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days following the issuance of either a temporary or permanent certificate of use and occupancy for the permanent structure. 
e.  That the temporary certificate of use and occupancy for the temporary structure may be extended for successive ninety-day periods if, in the opinion of the city manager, good cause is shown. 
f.  The exception provided by this subsection shall permit a developer to use one (1) single-family residential lot in a subdivision or phase of a subdivision for placement of a temporary structure for use as a sales office for such subdivision; provided that such temporary structures shall not be placed or remain when permanent structures exist or are under construction on abutting lots. 
(2)  This provision shall not prevent the placement or erection of a temporary building by an organization for the purpose of selling Christmas trees upon request to the city manager's office, provided: 
a.  The organization has complied with the applicable provisions of the City Code. 
b.  The building shall not be erected or placed prior to Thanksgiving and shall be removed by December 31 of the same calendar year. 
c.  Building permits have been obtained in accordance with the City Code. 
d.  Such sales are permitted by the use regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
(3)  This provision does not affect the placement of manufactured homes in an R6 Manufactured Home District. 
(4)  This provision shall not prevent the placement or erection of a temporary building for the purpose of selling food and drink at special events, such as but not limited to, a carnival, a circus, or a special business promotion. Such building shall be erected or placed for a period of no more than thirty (30) consecutive days. The use of such temporary buildings in districts zoned residential shall be limited to the premises of a community facility permitted in that zoning district. Building permits shall not be required for the placement of mobile units for such uses. 
(5)  This provision shall not prevent the placement or erection of a temporary building for use as temporary office space, not open to the general public, during the expansion of the facilities of an existing business; provided, however: 
a.  Such business is located within a district zoned O3 Office/Research and Development; C1 Retail Commercial; C3 Regional Business District; C5 Oyster Point Business/Manufacturing; M1 Light Industrial District; or M2 Heavy Industrial District. 
b.  That a building permit has been issued for construction of the addition to the existing business. 
c.  That a building permit is obtained for erection or placement of the temporary building. 
d.  That the temporary building is located in accordance with district regulations. 
e.  That the temporary building be removed from the site within seven (7) days following the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for the new construction. 
(6)  Tents or tent-like structures (herein referred to as "such structures") shall be permitted to be erected subject to the following: 
a.  Such structures shall not be permitted for dwelling purposes, except when located within an approved camping site. 
b.  Such structures erected as an accessory structure to the existing use only in a residential zoned district shall be permitted for a period of time not to exceed three (3) days, and shall conform to the requirements for accessory buildings in the district in which erected. The zoning administrator may, upon written request, approve the use of such structures for an additional four (4) days. 
Where such structures are erected as accessory structures to existing community facilities, they shall be permitted for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days per calendar year. 
Activities associated with structures permitted in this section shall be terminated by 11:00 p.m. 
c.  Such structures erected as accessory structures in other than residential zoned districts shall be permitted for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days per calendar year, and shall conform to the requirements for accessory buildings in the district in which erected. Such structures shall not be located less than one hundred (100) feet to any residential zoning district. 
d.  Such structures erected as the main structure on a lot shall be permitted in O1, O2, O3, C1, C2, C3, C4, C5, M1 and M2 zoning districts for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days per calendar year, and shall conform to the requirements for main buildings in the district in which erected. Such structures shall not be located less than one hundred (100) feet to any residential zoning district. 
e.  Any tent or tent-like structure shall be erected in conformance with the provisions of the building and fire prevention codes. 
f.  It is not the intent of this section to prohibit or regulate the use of tents in conjunction with funeral services conducted within the boundaries of a legally existing cemetery. 
g.  Such structures erected on city-owned land and used for the sole purpose of city-sponsored special events, including, without limitation, "Riverfair," the "Fall Festival," the "Fourth of July Celebration," or similar events, shall be permitted for a period of time not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-506. - Encroachment on existing lot. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the subdivision regulations of the City of Newport News, the area of an existing lot shall not be reduced or diminished so that the yard, other open spaces or the area and dimensional regulations shall be smaller than required by the district in which the lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-507. - Nonconforming lot of record. 
No area or dimensional regulations in this chapter shall prevent the erection of a building on a lot of record, notwithstanding that such lot may have a lesser area, width or depth than is required in the district in which the lot is located; provided, however: 
(1)  That as of December 13, 1994, where two (2) or more contiguous lots not meeting applicable district requirements are held in single ownership, the lot of record or lots of record shall be interpreted to be that combination of lots which provides a minimum frontage of not less than fifty (50) feet per lot; after this date, property owners wishing to develop lots not meeting applicable district requirements shall present to the director of codes compliance a certificate delineating the ownership history, including deed book and page reference, of the lot to be developed and all adjacent parcels, covering ownership of the lot and parcels from December 13, 1994, until the date the certificate of ownership is submitted. 
(2)  That this provision shall not be construed to permit more than one (1) dwelling unit on a lot of record which does not meet the area and dimensional regulations of the district in which such lot is located. 
(3)  That development of lots of record having less that fifty (50) feet of frontage and not meeting the area, width or depth required in the district in which the lot is located shall proceed only after approval of a special exception pursuant to the provisions of Article XXXII of this chapter. 
No lot of record shall be resubdivided unless all new lots so created are in conformity with the lot requirements of the district in which such the subdivision is located. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the vacation of a lot line when the level of nonconformity of the resulting lot is not increased. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6444-08)  
Sec. 45-508. - Repair and restoration of buildings. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening, repair or restoration to a safe and lawful condition any part of a building or structure declared unsafe or unlawful by order of an authorized city official; provided, such building or structure lawfully existed prior to the issuance of the order. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-509. - Use of basements for dwellings. 
Any basement having more than one-half (½) of its height below the average level of a street grade or ground nearest the building shall not be used or designated to be used for dwelling purposes. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-510. - Occupancy of premises by caretaker. 
The occupancy of a building or premises by a caretaker or watchman for sleeping quarters shall not constitute a residential use within the meaning of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-511. - Skateboard ramps. 
Skateboard ramps are not permitted within the City of Newport News in any residential zoning district, unless located within a community facility as a use accessory to the community facility. When accessory to a community facility, the skate board ramp shall not be operated for commercial gain. 
Skateboard ramps are permitted in the P1 Park Zoning District. Skateboard ramps in other nonresidentially zoned properties shall require a conditional use permit approved by the city council. 
No skateboard ramp shall be within one hundred (100) feet of a side or rear property line of adjoining residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-512. - Ingress and egress. 
Except where access is provided by a public street or where gated access is provided for emergency vehicles only or unless specifically provided for in the district regulations, ingress and egress shall not occur across a premises unless the use served by the route of ingress and egress is permitted on the premises crossed. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6219-06)  
Sec. 45-513. - Parking and loading. 
All buildings or structures hereafter erected or enlarged shall conform to the off-street parking and loading regulations for uses in Article XXX, Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, or the specifications and requirements in the district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-514. - Manufactured homes. 
Manufactured homes, as defined herein, are not permitted within the City of Newport News except in conformity with this chapter and the regulations of the R6 Manufactured Home District. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1) 
State Law reference— Manufactured housing, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2290.  
Sec. 45-515. - Recreational vehicles, storage requirements. 
Not more than two (2) recreational vehicles per dwelling unit, including but not limited to travel trailers, pickup campers, motor homes, tent trailers, boats and boat trailers, are permitted to be stored on the same lot in a residential district. Such vehicles shall be stored in a location consistent with the requirements for accessory buildings. One (1) of the two (2) permitted vehicles may be stored between the buildings used for residential purposes and the roadway(s) on the paved portion of a driveway or parking lot, provided that such vehicle does not extend into the public right-of-way or is not located within ten (10) feet of the paved portion of the road. "Roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, exclusive of the shoulder. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-516. - Administrative review of special temporary uses; procedure; fee; permit. 
(a)  The intent and purpose of this section is to allow administrative review and provide a permitting process by the city of certain temporary land uses and/or activities of a routine and recurring nature. The director of codes compliance, or designee, shall approve such request upon a finding that the established criteria for those uses contained herein can be met. 
(b)  The procedure for administrative review shall commence upon written request by the property owner stating the time-frame, type of activity and/or use, place and specific location of each activity and/or use, accompanied by a site development plan, which shall be submitted to the director of codes compliance. The director of codes compliance, or designee, will refer the request to the site plan review committee for review at their next appropriate regular meeting; a request must be received by the site plan review committee at least seven (7) days prior to a regular meeting to be considered. After review, the committee will transmit its recommendation to the director of codes compliance, or designee. If the director of codes compliance, or designee, deems that all conditions necessary for approval shall be granted, then a letter of approval for the temporary use shall be issued. An appeal of the decision of the director of codes compliance, or designee, may be made by the property owner, provided such appeal is noted, in writing, within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision. Such appeal shall be made to the city manager, who has final authority to act on the request. 
(c)  All requests for administrative review shall be accompanied by payment of a two hundred dollar ($200.00) nonrefundable fee. 
(d)  A permit for the operation of a circus, carnival, shooting gallery, merry-go-round, ferris wheel, and other forms of public amusement may be granted in any zoning district, other than residential districts, for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days or for operation of the sale of seasonal commodities for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, excluding Christmas trees which is governed by City Code section 45-505(2); provided that the following conditions have been met or arrangements have been made to assure that such conditions will be met: 
(1)  A site plan delineating the overall layout of proposed activities on a tract of land shall be submitted to the director of codes compliance, or designee, for review by the site plan review committee. 
(2)  All requirements for the Newport News city building regulations, including but not limited to such provisions for safe and adequate electrical wiring, plumbing, sanitary facilities, water supply and fire protection shall be met. 
(3)  A transitional area one hundred (100) feet wide shall be required between amusement activities and the nearest residential zoning district boundary line. 
(4)  No amusement activity shall be in operation beyond 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  A twenty-five (25) foot wide fire lane shall be maintained around the perimeter of any amusement-related structures or structures from which seasonal commodities are sold. 
(6)  No tent or other structures shall be closer than seventy-five (75) feet to any existing building. 
(7)  No amusement activity shall be conducted on any city right-of-way. 
(8)  No amusement activity in a commercial zoning district shall be conducted on an "open lot area" of less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet and shall not exceed an "open lot area" of four hundred thousand (400,000) square feet. 
(9)  A statement shall be provided from the city traffic engineer to the effect that ample parking facilities with adequate means for ingress and egress will be provided. 
(10)  Evidence that a bond, certified check or cash security in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) has been posted with the director of codes compliance, or designee, which bond, certified check or cash security shall be forfeited to the City of Newport News if the ground so occupied is not left in a clean and sanitary condition at the termination or closing of such an enterprise. 
(e)  The zoning administrator shall certify within ten (10) days of expiration of the temporary use, to the director of codes compliance, or designee, that the applicant has withdrawn from the site and that the condition of the site and grounds is substantially the same as it was prior to the temporary use. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6893-12)  
Sec. 45-516.1. - Persons occupying a dwelling unit. 
A dwelling unit shall only be occupied by one (1) "family," which is defined as any of the following groups of people living together in the following manner: 
(1)  An individual living alone in a dwelling unit; 
(2)  Two (2) unrelated persons; 
(3)  Two (2) unrelated persons and the children of such persons; 
(4)  Three (3) unrelated persons, each unrelated to any of the others; except if the dwelling unit is a part of an attached multiple family building then the number of unrelated persons, each unrelated to any other, can be increased to four (4) persons; 
(5)  Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or approved foster care; and 
(6)  Any number of persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or approved foster care and one (1) unrelated person. 
(Ord. No. 6727-10)  
Sec. 45-517. - Home occupation. 
No home occupation shall be permitted that: 
(1)  Makes use of more than four hundred (400) square feet of floor space. 
(2)  Makes use of any accessory building. 
(3)  Changes the outside appearance of the dwelling or is visible from the street or has any other exterior indication of the home occupation. 
(4)  Displays or stores materials outside. 
(5)  Creates a nuisance varying the residential character of the premises, such as: 
a.  Generating more traffic, noise, parking demand, sewerage or water use beyond what is normal for the residential uses in that residential neighborhood. 
b.  Creating a hazard to person or property. 
c.  Creating an assembly of persons or vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-518. - Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to residential uses. 
The following shall be deemed accessory: 
(1)  Facilities for keeping small domesticated animals for household non-commercial use only. Such animals shall not be commercially raised or sold; and kennels are prohibited. 
(2)  Beehives maintained as a hobby for household use and non-commercial purposes shall be allowed provided the following criteria are met: 
a.  No beehive may be placed or allowed to remain closer than three (3) feet from an adjoining property line. 
b.  No beehive may be placed or allowed to remain closer than fifty (50) feet from any house, dwelling unit, apartment, hotel, motel, office, commercial establishment, place of worship or school with the exception of the owner's dwelling. 
c.  No beehive may be maintained unless the owner thereof provides for or has access to an accessible and adequate water supply within fifty (50) feet of each beehive. 
(3)  A swimming pool for the use of occupants of the premises or for guests for whom no admission or membership fee is charged. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6727-10)  
Sec. 45-519. - Community facilities. 
These uses may be erected or operated in the districts as set forth in Article IV., Summary of Uses by District, in cases where (a) access is provided from a public street directly to the property; (b) no use is operated for commercial gain; (c) no building or structure, nor accessory building or structure is located within one hundred (100) feet of any side or rear property line which is zoned single-family residential; and, (d) any parking lot or street serving such use is located twenty-five (25) feet or more from a side or rear property line zoned single-family residential. Community facilities included in this group are as follows: 
(1)  Public elementary or secondary school for academic instruction. 
(2)  Private or parochial school, elementary or secondary school, offering a curriculum the same as that offered in the public school system of Newport News, subject to the same regulations as found in subsection (9), herein, as to dwelling facilities. 
(3)  Community facilities that are places of assembly; provided, that no community facility that is a place of assembly shall be erected on a site of less than three (3) acres in any residential district. Community facilities that are places of assembly include, but are not limited to: stadiums; sports arenas; theatres; amphitheatres; churches, synagogues or other places of worship; museums; libraries; concert halls; elementary and secondary schools, whether public, private or parochial; and colleges and universities, provided that colleges and universities shall meet the acreage requirements of subsection (9) below. 
(4)  Preschool or day school, when necessary to either a private school as defined herein or a permanent place of worship as defined herein. 
(5)  Public park or recreational area, or non-public park or recreational area, when open for general public use and when operated as a nonprofit activity. 
(6)  Golf course and golf course club houses, including pro shops, locker rooms, practice greens or tees, but not including commercial miniature golf courses or a practice driving ranges or any golf course lighted for night play. 
(7)  Neighborhood swimming pool, together with accessory buildings operated by a nonprofit organization. 
(8)  Community or individual fallout shelter. 
(9)  College or university, but not a business or trade school; provided however, that: 
a.  The maximum number of dwelling units erected on the campus shall not exceed the number of dwelling units which otherwise would be permitted on the same site under the regulations of a planned residential development in Article XV, Planned Residential Development Regulations. For the purpose of computing the density of dormitory housing facilities, sleeping space for each six (6) persons shall be counted as one (1) dwelling unit. 
b.  The minimum site area of a college or university campus shall be thirty (30) acres. 
c.  Access to the campus shall be from a major thoroughfare. 
(10)  Community building such as a museum or library. 
(11)  Institutional uses, including accessory dormitories, nursing homes, and hospitals. 
(12)  Any use customarily incidental or accessory to the above uses. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5753-02)  
Sec. 45-520. - Pump stations or substations in residential districts. 
In single-family residential districts substations, pump stations, or like structures and buildings shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of ground coverage. Such utility shall provide adequate location, area, yard setbacks and landscaped screening to preserve the character of the neighborhood in which the utility is located. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-521. - Outside storage. 
Outside storage of goods, materials and equipment shall be permitted as a matter of right only in manufacturing zoning districts. All outside storage areas shall be screened with appropriate fencing and landscaping from adjoining public right(s)-of-way. With the approval of a special exception (see Article XXXII 45-3204(e)(9)) such storage shall be permitted in a C2 zoning district. For the purpose of this section, and except as specifically provided elsewhere in the zoning chapter, the term "outside storage" shall not include the following: 
(1)  Outside displays intended to promote sales of goods or services that can be obtained from a permanent business structure on the same property. Such displays shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the property area between the main building and property lines(s) abutting the public right(s)-of-way or five hundred (500) square feet of land area, whichever is least. Such displays shall not reduce the number of parking spaces or the access thereto to below what are required by the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Parking of vehicles and automotive related machinery that are for sale, lease, or business use which may be driven on public streets. 
(3)  Outside displays of marine or related vehicles that are for sale or lease. 
(4)  Outside displays of products associated with nurseries, vegetable stands, garden shops and other similar business activities 
(5)  Farm tractor and implement sales. 
(6)  Manufactured housing sales. 
(7)  Outside displays of storage sheds that are for sale, provided that they are not located in the required front yard setback. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-522. - Family home child care facility. 
(a)  Family home child care facility means a private family dwelling of a person or persons who maintain the dwelling and regularly provide direct care on the premises during part of a twenty-four-day to not more than four (4) children under the age of twelve (12), excluding the provider's own children or grandchildren related by blood, marriage or adoption and foster children. 
(b)  A family home child care facility in a dwelling unit shall be permitted by right in all residential zoning districts. 
(c)  No employees, whether paid or unpaid, except persons who use the dwelling as their primary residence, shall be involved in the family home child care facility. 
(d)  Upon violation of any part of this section, the zoning administrator shall take necessary action to remedy such violations as provided for in the City Code. 
(e)  The city council shall not consider applications for conditional use permits, pursuant to Article XXVII for modifications to the provisions contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7218-15)  
Sec. 45-523. - Communication towers, wireless facilities and small cell facilities. 
The purpose of this section is to describe minimum standards for the construction and siting of communication towers that are greater than fifty (50) feet in height in order to minimize adverse visual effects and traffic distraction, by careful design, siting and vegetative screening and to maximize the use of any such new or existing communication towers to avoid their proliferation. Further, this section sets forth applicable administrative processes for the permitting of communication towers that are not greater than fifty (50) feet in height, and for wireless and small cell facilities. 
(1)  Communication towers that are greater than fifty (50) feet in height are allowed by conditional use permit in accordance with article IV, section 45-402, and are subject to the following: 
a.  Conditional use permit applications shall contain or be accompanied by the following information in addition to that which is required under article XXVII, section 45-2703: 
1.  A site plan drawn to scale specifying the location of tower(s), guy anchors (if any), transmission building and other accessory uses, parking, access, landscaped areas, fences and adjacent uses. 
2.  Verifiable evidence from the applicant of the lack of space on either suitable existing towers, buildings, and other structures to locate the tower, or on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna within their search area. 
3.  Frequency of proposed antennas and capacity of proposed structure to accommodate one (1) additional user. 
4.  Information demonstrating that potential users have been contacted to discuss collocation and conveyed that current plans can/cannot be facilitated by collocation. 
5.  Location of proposed structure and an evaluation of its impact on the character of surrounding areas. 
6.  A written statement of preliminary approval or approval from the Federal Aviation Administration. 
b.  Action by city council: 
1.  City council must take final action on conditional use permit applications within one hundred fifty (150) days after a complete application has been filed with the department of planning. 
2.  When a conditional use permit application is incomplete as filed, the one hundred fifty (150) day time frame does not include the time an applicant takes to respond to a request by the department of planning for additional information to complete the application, provided the applicant is notified that its application is incomplete during the first thirty (30) days after filing. 
3.  Any person affected by any failure by city council to act on a complete application may, within thirty (30) days after such failure to act, commence an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
c.  Minimum setbacks: 
1.  The minimum side and rear yard setback from the base of the tower shall be twenty-five (25) feet in all permitted districts. 
2.  The minimum required setback from the base of a tower to any public street right-of-way shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
3.  For towers of more than two hundred (200) feet in height, for every four (4) feet in height of the tower over forty (40) feet, there shall be an additional one (1) foot in setback from all property lines. 
4.  Towers, located in public rights-of-way having a minimum width of two hundred (200) feet, are exempt from the minimum setback requirements contained in this subsection. 
d.  Screening requirements: 
1.  One (1) row of evergreen trees at least eight (8) feet in height shall be planted and maintained on ten (10) foot centers completely surrounding the tower and equipment building compound, excluding entrances. Where existing trees abut the compound but are located within the lease area, such trees shall be maintained and the evergreen trees shall be used as infill to achieve minimum spacing. 
2.  In lieu of the above requirements, in special cases, including stealth applications, the applicant may prepare an alternate landscape plan and specifications for landscape and screening, including plantings, fences, walls, buildings, topography, etc. to screen the tower. The plan may deviate from the requirements set out in c.1. above, provided that the director of planning determines that the alternative arrangement provides the same degree of screening. Stealth applications may include flag poles, light poles, simulated trees, and other similar applications where the tower is disguised to blend into its surroundings. 
3.  All required landscaping must be installed and approved by the director of planning prior to the first planting season following issuance of certificate of use and occupancy, and maintained thereafter. 
e.  Accessory facilities associated with communication towers may not include offices, vehicle storage or outdoor storage. 
f.  Obsolete, unused or abandoned towers and associated facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of obsolescence, cessation of use or abandonment. A bond may be required, of sufficient amount, to cover removal of the structure. 
g.  Advertising and/or signage on tower structures is expressly prohibited. 
h.  Towers two hundred (200) feet or less in height shall have an unpainted galvanized finish. Regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration or the Federal Communications Commission supersede this requirement, if the same are contradictory. 
i.  Towers more than two hundred (200) feet in height shall be painted in accordance with regulations by the Federal Communications Commission and/or the Federal Aviation Administration. 
j.  Towers shall be illuminated as required by the Federal Communications Commission and/or the Federal Aviation Administration. No lighting shall be incorporated if not required by the aforesaid agencies. 
k.  The owner shall have a structural inspection conducted every three (3) years by a registered professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia and a copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the department of codes compliance. 
l.  Other conditions of approval may be specified and shall be reasonably imposed to ensure compliance with the purpose and criteria of these provisions. 
m.  In any instance where the regulations and requirements of this section conflict with those of the Federal Communications Commission or the Federal Aviation Administration, the federal regulation or requirement shall govern. 
n.  In any instance where the regulations and requirements of this section conflict with those of Section 15.2-2293.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the provisions of Section 15.2-2293.1, as amended, shall govern. 
o.  The following shall be included as conditions to any conditional use permit granted under this section: 
1.  A report from a registered professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia, indicating tower height and design, foundation, structure, installation and total capacity of the structure (including number and types of users that the structures will accommodate). This data shall satisfactorily demonstrate that the proposed tower conforms to all structural requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
2.  A statement from a registered engineer that non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) emitted therefrom does not result in a ground level exposure at any point outside such facility which exceeds the lowest applicable exposure standards established by any regulatory agency of the U.S. government or the American National Standards Institute. 
(2)  Communication towers not greater than fifty (50) feet in height are not subject to a conditional use permit requirement; however, such towers are permitted with administrative approval in mixed use, park, office, office park, office/research and development, retail commercial, general commercial, regional business, Oyster Point business, Oyster Point business/manufacturing, light industrial and heavy industrial district zones, and are permitted as a local utility in a publically owned right-of-way by written agreement of the owner thereof. The administrative permitting process is as follows: 
a.  The owner shall submit an application and fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to the department of codes compliance. 
b.  Final action must be taken on the application within one hundred fifty (150) days after a complete application has been filed or within the period required by federal law. A complete application shall be deemed approved if a determination is not made on the application within the one hundred fifty (150) day time period. Such period may be extended by mutual agreement between the applicant and the department of codes compliance. 
c.  The owner shall submit a report from a registered professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia, indicating tower height and design, foundation, structure, installation and total capacity of the structure (including number and types of users that the structure will accommodate). This data shall satisfactorily demonstrate that the proposed tower conforms to all structural requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
d.  A statement from a registered engineer that non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) emitted therefrom does not result in a ground level exposure at any point outside such facility which exceeds the lower applicable exposure standards established by any regulatory agency of the U.S. government or the American National Standards Institute. 
e.  The owner shall have a structural inspection conducted every three (3) years by a registered professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia and a copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the Department of Codes Compliance. 
f.  The department of codes compliance may deny an application if the proposed location of the tower is in an area where all cable and public utility facilities are recommended to be placed underground, and if the underground requirement existed in the city's comprehensive plan at least three months prior to submission of the application, or if the proposed location of the wireless facility is within the boundaries of a local, state or federal historic district. 
g.  The department of codes compliance may deny an application if the proposed location of the wireless facility is within the boundaries of a local, state or federal historic district. 
h.  Obsolete, unused or abandoned towers and associated facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of obsolescence, cessation of use or abandonment. A bond shall be required, of sufficient amount, to cover removal of the structure. 
i.  The applicant may voluntarily submit and the department of codes compliance may accept conditions that address potential visual or aesthetic effects resulting from the placement of a tower. 
j.  Disapproval of applications submitted hereunder shall be provided to the applicant in writing. Such disapproval shall not be based upon: 
1.  The applicant's business decision with respect to its designed service, customer demand for service or its service to or from a particular site; 
2.  The applicant's specific need for the project, including the applicant's desire to provide additional wireless coverage or capacity; or 
3.  The wireless facility technology selected by the applicant for use at the project. 
k.  If the applicant is not the owner of the real property on which the tower is to be erected, then the applicant shall submit proof to the department of codes compliance that permission to use the land has been granted to the applicant. In instances where the tower is proposed in the public right-of-way, then the applicant must submit a copy of an executed franchise agreement, or other comparable document, as proof of permission to use the right-of-way in question. 
l.  The city may make reasonable requirements of the applicant regarding the presentation or appearance of a project including reasonable requirements regarding the kind of materials used and/or the arranging, screening or landscaping of the project. 
m.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from limiting the number of towers that can be installed in a specific location. 
n.  Construction of the approved project shall commence within two (2) years of final approval or the permit shall expire at such time. 
(3)  Wireless facilities mounted on existing structures (communication towers, buildings, water towers, etc.) are not subject to a conditional use permit requirement. However, such facilities are permitted with administrative approval in industrial, commercial, office and park zones, but shall not be mounted on structures used for single-family dwellings. Wireless facilities are otherwise prohibited in multi-family and single-family zones, except that they shall be permitted in such zones with administrative approval on roofs of buildings that are four (4) stories or higher. Wireless facilities are also permitted as a local utility in any publically owned right-of-way by written agreement of the owner thereof. The administrative permitting process is as follows: 
a.  The owner of the wireless facility shall submit an application and fee, in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to the department of codes compliance. 
b.  Final action must be taken on the application within ninety (90) days after a complete application has been filed or within the period required by federal law. A complete application shall be deemed approved if a determination is not made on the application within the ninety (90) day time period. Such period may be extended by mutual agreement between the applicant and the department of codes compliance. 
c.  The department of codes compliance shall deny an application if the proposed location of the wireless facility is in an area where all cable and public utility facilities are recommended to be placed underground, and if the underground requirement existed in the city's comprehensive plan at least three (3) months prior to submission of the application, or if the proposed location of the wireless facility is within the boundaries of a local, state or federal historic district. 
d.  Obsolete, unused or abandoned wireless facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of cessation of use or abandonment. A bond shall be required, of sufficient amount, to cover removal. 
e.  The applicant may voluntarily submit and the department of codes compliance may accept conditions that address potential visual or aesthetic effects resulting from the placement of a wireless facility. 
f.  Disapproval of applications submitted hereunder shall be provided to the applicant in writing. Such disapproval shall not be based upon: 
1.  The applicant's business decision with respect to its designed service, customer demand for service or its service to or from a particular site; 
2.  The applicant's specific need for the project, including the applicant's desire to provide additional wireless coverage or capacity; or 
3.  The wireless facility technology selected by the applicant for use at the project. 
g.  If the applicant is not the owner of the structure on which the wireless facility is to be mounted, then the applicant shall submit proof to the department of codes compliance that permission to mount the wireless facility has been granted by the owner of the structure. In instances where the wireless facility is proposed in the public right-of-way, then the applicant must submit an executed franchise agreement, or comparable document, as proof of permission to use the right-of-way in question. 
h.  The city may make reasonable requirements of the applicant regarding the presentation or appearance of a project including reasonable requirements regarding the kind of materials used and/or the arranging, screening or landscaping of the project. 
i.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from limiting the number of wireless facilities that can be installed in a specific location. 
j.  Construction of the approved project shall commence within two (2) years of final approval or the permit shall expire at such time. 
(4)  Small cell facilities mounted on existing structures (communication towers, buildings, water towers, etc.) are not subject to a conditional use permit requirement. However, such facilities are permitted with administrative approval in industrial, commercial, office and park zones, but shall not be mounted on structures used for single-family dwellings. Small cell facilities are otherwise prohibited in multi-family and single-family zones, except that they shall be permitted in such zones with administrative approval on roofs of buildings that are four (4) stories or higher. Small cell facilities are also permitted as a local utility in any publically owned right-of-way by written agreement of the owner thereof. The administrative permitting process is as follows: 
a.  The owner of a small cell facility/facilities must submit a permit application to the department of codes compliance which may contain up to thirty-five (35) requests on a single application. A fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged for each small cell facility, for up to five (5) small cell facilities per permit application. Thereafter, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged for each additional small cell facility on a permit application. 
b.  The department of codes compliance may disapprove of a proposed location or installation of a small cell facility only for the following reasons: 
1.  Material potential interference with other pre-existing communications facilities or with future communications facilities that have already been designed and planned for a specific location or that have been reserved for future public safety communications facilities; 
2.  The public safety or other critical public service needs; or 
3.  Only in the case of an installation on or in publicly owned or publicly controlled property, excluding privately owned structures where the applicant has an agreement for attachment to the structure, aesthetic impact or the absence of all required approvals from all departments, authorities and agencies with jurisdiction over such property. 
4.  Conflict with a local historic district ordinance adopted pursuant to § 15.2-2306 [of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended]. 
c.  If the applicant is not the owner of the structure on which the small cell facility is to be mounted, then the applicant shall submit proof to the department of codes compliance that permission to mount the small cell facility has been granted by the owner of the structure. In instances where the small cell facility is proposed in the public right-of-way, the applicant must submit a copy of an executed franchise agreement, or other comparable document, as proof of permission to use the right-of-way in question. 
d.  The applicant may voluntarily submit, and the department of codes compliance may accept conditions that otherwise address potential visual or aesthetic effects resulting from the placement of small cell facilities. 
e.  Obsolete, unused or abandoned small cell facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of obsolescence, cessation of use or abandonment. A bond shall be required, of sufficient amount, to cover removal. 
f.  The installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro-wireless facilities that are suspended on cables or lines that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety codes shall be exempt from city permitting requirements and fees. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5175-98; Ord. No. 5701-01; Ord. No. 6453-08; Ord. No. 6672-10; Ord. No. 7220-15; Ord. No. 7475-18; Ord. No. 7535-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7535-19, adopted Feb. 26, 2019, amended the title of § 45-523 to read as herein set out. The former § 45-523 pertained to communication tower/antenna.  
Sec. 45-523.1. - Utilities. 
No utility shall erect a structure, including appurtenances, in the public right-of-way higher than fifty (50) feet (measured from the top of the closest adjacent curb or edge of pavement where no curb exists) without the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 7334-16, § 2)  
Sec. 45-524. - Adult uses. 
(a)  Within the city, it is acknowledged that there are some uses, often referred to as adult uses, which because of their nature can have a negative impact on nearby property, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity to a residential neighborhood, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing the concentration or location of these uses in a manner that would create such adverse effects. The definition of adult uses is found in section 45-201 of this chapter. 
(b)  No adult use shall be permitted except in, C1, C2, and C3 districts. A conditional use permit, as provided for in Article XXVII of this chapter, is necessary for the establishment of an adult use. A conditional use permit may be issued by the city council after recommendation by the planning commission and finding that the location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed adult use will be compatible with and will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to neighboring uses. 
(c)  No unit containing an adult use in the C1, C2 or C3 districts shall be located nearer than five hundred (500) feet to: 
(1)  Any school, church, park, playground or a library property; 
(2)  Any other adult use; 
(3)  Any residentially zoned property which fronts on the same street or which contains any school, church, park, playground or library; otherwise, the minimum distance from such unit to a residential zone shall be two hundred (200) feet. 
For the purposes of this subsection, distances shall be measured on a straight line (1) from the unit containing the adult use to the nearest point of the property named in (c)(1) or (c)(3) above, or (2) between the unit containing the adult use and the unit containing any other adult use. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5563-01; Ord. No. 7365-17, § 3)  
Sec. 45-525. - Use regulations. 
Every land use authorized by the Code shall be put into action, exercised, utilized, or pursued so as to control objectionable or obnoxious influences, including but not limited to, smoke, noise, soot, airborne particulate matter, vibration or odor, and by so doing minimize the effect of such objectionable or obnoxious influence on any other land use. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-526. - Congregate housing for children. 
Congregate housing for children is a residential facility for children within the foster care system. When located in single-family residential zoning districts the minimum lot size shall be not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. This use may be operated in the districts set forth in Article IV, Summary of Uses by District, provided the following criteria are met: 
(1)  Private sleeping quarters shall be provided for adult supervisors. 
(2)  No more than four (4) children shall share a bedroom or sleeping area. 
(3)  Room size shall be not less than eighty (80) square feet for one (1) child, one hundred twenty (120) square feet for two (2) children, one hundred eighty (180) square feet for three (3) children and two hundred forty (240) square feet for four (4) children. 
(4)  Facilities must provide, at a minimum, a one thousand (1,000) square foot outdoor play area and play equipment which is age appropriate. 
(5)  Any facility housing twelve (12) or more residents shall provide an indoor recreational room separate from the living room/den area. 
(6)  The living area, at a minimum, shall include a living room or den, dining room and kitchen. 
(7)  At a minimum, one (1) bathroom shall be provided for the children and one (1) bathroom for the adult supervisors. 
(8)  Each residential facility shall provide written criteria for admission. The criteria for admission shall be accessible to zoning code officials, as well as, prospective residents, legal guardians and placing agencies. Such criteria shall include: 
a.  A description of the population served; 
b.  A description of the types of services offered; and 
c.  Intake and admissions procedures. 
(Ord. No. 5423-00)  
Sec. 45-527. - Off-site church parking lots. 
The purpose of this section is to specify criteria for the location of an off-site church parking lot which shall permit a certain number of required parking spaces to be located off-site of a primary church premises. The word "church" shall be deemed to include synagogues, temples and any other facility the primary purpose of which is religious worship. An off-site church parking lot may be allowed by conditional use permit in the districts set forth in Article IV, Summary of Uses by District, provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  No off-site parking shall be permitted for any residential facility owned and operated by the church. 
(2)  The off-site church parking lot is located on real property that is titled under the same ownership as that of the church, or that is leased to the church, and that is located with a public and/or private walking path available for public use, and that is located no greater than two hundred (200) feet from the church. 
(3)  The off-site church parking lot shall meet the requirements of the site regulations, Chapter 33.02 of the City Code, Section 33.02-52. 
(4)  The off-site church parking lot shall be screened when abutting any residential use in accordance with the provisions in Article XXX, section 45-3002. 
(Ord. No. 5549-00)  
Sec. 45-528. - Freight containers (shipping containers). 
The same regulations that apply to freight containers shall also apply to shipping containers. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate portable, weather-resistant receptacles designed for and used in the multi-modal shipment and temporary storage of goods, wares or merchandise. 
(b)  Storage of freight containers. The use of property for the placement, use and storage of freight containers shall be authorized only as follows: 
(1)  Freight containers may only be stored in the port area, which, for purposes of this section, shall be only those areas zoned M2 heavy industrial located south of 73rd Street, and west of Huntington Avenue from 73rd Street to 50th Street, thence west of Washington Avenue from 50th Street to 35th Street, thence west of West Avenue from 35th Street to 23rd Street, thence south of 23rd Street between I-664 and the James River. 
(2)  Freight containers used for the storage of goods or materials, permitted in the M1 and M2 zoning districts, are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The freight containers may be used in the active transport of goods, wares or merchandise or as an accessory use in support of a lawful principal use of property. 
b.  The freight containers may only be stored in areas designated for such storage, such as an existing storage, loading or in other designated areas. Freight containers shall not be visible from public rights-of-way. 
c.  Except in the port area described in (b)(1) above, freight containers shall not be stacked. 
(c)  Freight containers as an accessory use. Freight containers that have transported goods to a site may be used for the temporary storage of such transported goods as an accessory use to a principal use only in the O1, O2, O3, C1, C2, and C5 zones subject to the following restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  The use of freight containers for temporary storage shall not exceed six (6) months. 
(2)  Freight containers shall not be stacked. 
(3)  Freight containers shall not be converted into permanent structures nor used for permanent storage. 
(4)  A permit from the department of codes compliance shall be required to allow freight containers on a site under this subsection, as follows: 
a.  The owner and/or his representative, and the occupant of the lot or parcel on which the freight container will be used, shall apply for the permit and pay an annual permit fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per site housing freight containers. 
b.  Applicants shall submit to the department of codes compliance a drawing of the property, to scale, or a site plan that identifies the location of the freight container/containers on the property. 
c.  The exterior of each freight container shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be structurally sound. 
(5)  The area for placement of freight containers shall be located behind the main building in a paved area or on a concrete pad screened from view from the public and private rights-of-way by existing buildings, landscaping, opaque fencing or by other materials such as berms. The paved area or concrete pad on which freight containers sit shall comply with the specifications of the Design Criteria Manual. 
(6)  All freight containers shall comply with setbacks for accessory buildings and with all required transitional buffer areas as identified in the City Code. 
(7)  No freight container shall be used for storage of solid waste, hazardous materials as defined in subsection (e)(5), explosives, weapons, materials which, when combined with another substance in the container may become hazardous or any other unlawful substances. 
(8)  No freight container shall be placed on or otherwise block or restrict access to fire hydrants, fire lanes or required parking spaces. 
(9)  Graffiti shall be removed immediately from all freight containers. 
(10)  Freight containers must be used in connection with a legal use on the site. 
(d)  Freight containers as an accessory use on P1 Park zoned property. Freight containers may be used for the storage of goods, as an accessory use to a principal use, subject to the following restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  The P1 zoned site shall contain more than 15 acres. 
(2)  No more than one freight container can be used for storage on the property. 
(3)  Conditions (4) through (10) of subsection (c) of this Section of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 
(e)  Freight containers are prohibited in residential zones. Except as provided in subsection (f) below, freight containers shall not be placed, stored or used for any purpose on property zoned or used principally for residential purposes. No freight container shall be used as a residence or to support a residential use or home occupation, and no freight container shall be converted into nor used as a permanent structure. 
(f)  Freight containers used for storage during construction. Freight containers may be used in all zoning districts for the temporary storage of construction-related materials in a temporary construction yard or building site for which a construction permit has been issued by the City of Newport News. The application for such construction permit shall contain express reference to the proposed use of the freight container for storage purposes. The freight containers are subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Freight containers shall not be stacked. 
(2)  Freight containers shall be placed in locations that minimize their visibility from the public street or right-of-way and adjacent residential properties. 
(3)  Freight containers shall not be placed in the public street or right-of-way or block public access or fire hydrants. 
(4)  Freight containers must remain locked when construction activities are not underway. 
(5)  The storage of hazardous materials is prohibited. A hazardous material is defined as substances or materials which may pose unreasonable risks to health, safety, property, or the environment when used, transported, stored or disposed of, which may include materials which are in solid, liquid, or gaseous form. Hazardous materials include: 
a.  Toxic substances, flammable and ignitable materials, corrosive materials, or radioactive materials; 
b.  Those substances or materials in the form or quantity which may pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety or property when transported, and which the Secretary of Transportation of the United States has so designated by regulation or order; 
c.  Hazardous substances as defined or designated by law or regulation of the Commonwealth or law or regulation of the United States government; 
d.  Hazardous waste as defined or designated by law or regulation of the Commonwealth. 
(6)  Freight containers shall be sealed against leakage and maintained in structurally sound condition. 
(7)  Freight containers shall only be allowed for temporary storage during construction. 
(8)  Freight containers shall be removed upon completion of construction and prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 6634-09)  
Sec. 45-529. - Portable storage containers. 
(a)  [Generally.] Except for lots or parcels of land whose principal use is zoned for and used by a business that leases and stores portable storage containers as permitted by subsection (j) below, the use of property for the placement, use and storage of portable storage containers shall be permitted only on a temporary basis and as follows: 
(1)  Portable storage containers shall be permitted on lots or parcels of land in all zoning districts on a temporary basis provided that they are used in support of a legal principal use of the property. 
(2)  Portable storage containers shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Portable storage containers shall be no larger than eight (8) feet in width, by eight (8) feet, six (6) inches in height, by sixteen (16) feet in length. 
b.  Portable storage containers shall not be stacked on lots or parcels of land other than those zoned for and used by a business that leases and stores portable storage containers. 
c.  Portable storage containers shall be allowed for up to sixteen (16) days without a permit. Businesses that lease and store portable storage containers shall furnish the zoning administrator with information identified on a form prepared by and obtained from the zoning administrator at the time that the portable storage container is placed on real property in the city. Portable storage containers stored on property for longer than sixteen (16) days shall not be permitted until the owner and/or occupant of the property has obtained a permit for same issued by the zoning administrator. 
d.  A portable storage container used in a commercial, office and industrial zoning district shall comply with setbacks applicable to accessory structures in the zoning district in which the container is located and a fee for the placement of same must be paid as required in this section. A portable storage container used on residential property shall be subject to the setback requirements identified in subsection (b)(3) below. 
e.  Portable storage containers shall be permitted for the storage of construction-related materials on a lot or parcel for which a construction permit has been issued. 
f.  Portable storage containers shall not be used for the storage or transport of solid waste, hazardous materials, explosives and unlawful substances and materials. 
g.  Portable storage containers shall not be placed in public streets or rights-of-way or block public access to such or to fire hydrants, water meters, or storm water facilities. 
h.  A placard indicating the date of delivery of each portable storage container shall be affixed to the portable storage unit and be clearly visible. 
i.  Portable storage containers shall not be permitted on any lot or parcel of land for more than two (2) separate periods during any calendar year. 
(b)  Use of portable storage containers on lots or parcels of land zoned for or used as single-family or two-family residences. In addition to the regulations contained in subsection (a), the use of a portable storage container on property zoned or used for single-family or two-family residential purposes shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of land provided that: 
(1)  No more than one (1) portable storage container shall be located on a lot or parcel of land, unless it is a two-family residence where both units are being occupied at the same time. 
(2)  No other type of portable storage container or shipping container shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land. 
(3)  A portable storage container placed in the front yard of a lot or parcel of land shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the curb. If no curb exists, the portable storage container shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the pavement. In all cases, however, a portable storage container shall be set back to at least the front property line. A portable storage container may be placed in a side or rear yard provided that it does not encroach on adjacent property. 
(c)  Use of portable storage containers on lots or parcels of land zoned for or used as multi-family residences. In addition to the regulations contained in subsection (a), the use of portable storage containers on property zoned for or used for multi-family residential purposes shall be permitted only upon an on-site parking space or within the dwelling unit's front yard, provided that placement of portable storage containers shall be governed in the same manner as the front yard placement provisions set forth in subsection (b)(3) above. 
(d)  Use of portable storage containers on lots or parcels of land zoned or used for office purposes, including C4 Oyster Point Business District uses. In addition to the regulations contained in subsection (a), the use of portable storage containers on property zoned or used for office purposes, including C4 Oyster Point Business District uses, shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of land provided that the portable storage container shall be placed upon an on-site parking space. 
(e)  Use of portable storage containers on lots or parcels of land zoned or used for commercial purposes. In addition to the regulations contained in subsection (a), the use of portable storage containers on property zoned or used for commercial purposes shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of land provided that the portable storage container shall be placed upon an on-site parking space. 
(f)  Use of portable storage containers on lots or parcels of land zoned or used for mixed use purposes. In addition to the regulations contained in subsection (a), the use of portable storage containers on property zoned or used for R9 Mixed Use Development uses, Neotraditional Overlay District uses, Lower Jefferson Avenue Urban Corridor Overlay District uses, C3 Regional Business District uses, or Oyster Point Urban Core District uses shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of land provided that the portable storage container shall be placed upon an on-site parking space. 
(g)  Use of portable storage containers on lots or parcels of land zoned or used for industrial purposes, including C5 Oyster Point Business/Manufacturing District. In addition to the regulations contained in subsection (a), the use of portable storage containers on property zoned or used for industrial purposes, including C5 Oyster Point Business/Manufacturing District, shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of land provided that the portable storage container shall be placed within an outside storage area as identified on an approved site plan. 
(h)  Extension period of time limit. Should the owner and/or occupant of the lot or parcel of land desire to keep the portable storage container on site for more than a sixteen (16) consecutive calendar day period, for good cause shown, the owner and/or occupant may apply to the zoning administrator for approval of a permit for up to seventy-four (74) additional consecutive calendar days beyond the permitted sixteen (16) consecutive calendar days; it is the intent of this provision that portable storage containers may be kept on sites for no more than ninety (90) consecutive calendar days during the extension period. Good cause may include, but is not limited to, the fact that the structure on the lot or parcel site is undergoing renovation, repair or reconstruction during the requested time extension. If the zoning administrator determines that good cause exists for the requested extension, a permit fee as established herein must be paid prior to the issuance of the permit. If required, a construction permit must have been issued for the renovation, repair or reconstruction, and remain valid during the extension period. No extension may be granted until the permit fee has been paid. 
(i)  Portable storage container permit fees. The permit fee for placement of any portable storage container on a lot or parcel of land in the city for more than sixteen (16) consecutive calendar days shall be as follows: 
(1)  A portable storage container fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) shall be paid by the owner and/or occupant of the lot or parcel of land to the department of codes compliance prior to the sixteenth (16th) consecutive calendar day for the placement of a portable storage container for a period of time that exceeds sixteen (16) consecutive calendar days. 
(2)  If the owner and/or occupant of the lot or parcel of land has not paid the portable storage container fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) as required in subsection (1) herein, the cost of the permit fee which must be paid by the owner and/or occupant of the lot or parcel of land shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) for the placement of a portable storage container for a period of time that exceeds sixteen (16) consecutive calendar days. 
(3)  Each portable storage container permit shall expire at the end of an approved extension or the expiration of the construction permit but, in no event, shall the permit be valid more than ninety (90) days after placement of the portable storage container on a lot or parcel of land. 
(j)  Use of portable storage containers as a principal use. The business of leasing and storing portable storage containers as defined by this ordinance may be conducted as a principal use in the industrial zoning districts, including C5 Oyster Point Business/Manufacturing District, provided that the said business complies with the requirements of sections 45-402 and 45-521 of the zoning ordinance and the criteria of the applicable zoning district. 
(k)  If the sixteenth (16th) day during which a portable storage container is permitted to remain on a lot or parcel of land occurs on a weekend or holiday, the owner and/or occupant of said lot or parcel of land shall have until the next working day of the city to make the application required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 6269-06, § 1)  
Sec. 45-530. - Self-service ice vending units. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the following sections is to promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of residents by governing the size, location, physical dimensions, setbacks and other standards of self-service ice vending units in each district where such use is permitted. No self-service ice vending units shall be located or used in the City of Newport News except in accordance with the provisions contained herein. 
(b)  Zoning districts. Self service ice vending units are permitted in C1, C2, M1 and M2 zoning districts on properties two (2) acres or greater in size. 
(c)  Fee. A review fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be assessed for each ice vending unit. The fee shall be paid to the department of codes compliance. 
(d)  Standards. Where permitted, self-service ice vending units shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Only one (1) self-service ice vending unit shall be permitted per site. 
(2)  A self-service ice vending unit or other similar use shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet to any single-family residential district. 
(3)  No self-service ice vending unit or other similar use shall encroach into the minimum required setback; however, no self-service ice vending unit shall be placed closer than fifty (50) feet to any right of way line. 
(4)  The foundation of each unit shall be screened by skirting. 
(5)  A self-service vending unit shall be installed on an impervious surface, and shall not be installed on any green area. 
(6)  Roof-mounted or other equipment on top of the unit shall be screened by a parapet. 
(7)  Within thirty (30) calendar days of the closure or ceasing of operation of any self-service ice vending unit, the owner of the said unit and/or the owner of the land, shall remove all equipment and incidentals from the premises. 
(8)  Applicants shall acquire site plan approval, if necessary, from the department of engineering and approval from the peninsula health district prior to the issuance of a building permit. The self-service ice vending unit shall comply with all Uniform Statewide Building Code requirements. 
(9)  Each self-service ice vending unit shall be pre-wired to connect to a generator for the purpose of providing power to the unit in the event of electrical power failure. Each self-service ice vending unit shall be marked with the type of generator that it requires. 
(e)  Signs. 
(1)  Signage shall be no more than thirty-two (32) square feet in aggregate on no more than two (2) sides of the ice vending machine. 
(2)  Freestanding, temporary and portable signs shall not be permitted. 
(f)  Parking. No off-street additional parking shall be required. In no case shall the addition of a self-service ice vending unit create nonconformity in the parking requirements of the existing primary uses. 
(g)  Access. Ingress and egress to and from self-service ice vending units shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. 6781-11)  
Sec. 45-531. - Temporary family health care structures. 
Any person seeking to install a temporary family health care structure, as defined in article II of this chapter, shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Obtain a permit from the department of codes compliance, for which a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged and paid in full prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(b)  A permit for a temporary family health care structure shall not be issued unless compliance with the following is demonstrated: 
(1)  That the structure in which temporary care will be provided is primarily assembled at a location other than the site of installation. 
(2)  That the structure is limited to one (1) occupant who shall be the mentally or physically impaired person, except that a married couple may reside therein when one (1) such person is mentally or physically impaired and the other person requires assistance with one (1) or more activities of daily living as defined in Virginia Code § 63.2-2200, as certified in writing by a Commonwealth licensed physician. 
(3)  That the structure has no more than three hundred (300) gross square feet. 
(4)  That the structure meets all requirements applicable to accessory structures. 
(5)  That the structure complies with applicable provisions of the Industrialized Building Safety Law (Va. Code § 36-70 et seq.) and the Uniform Statewide Building Code (§ 36-97 et seq.). 
(6)  That the structure is not placed on a permanent foundation. 
(7)  That the structure is connected to water, sewer, and electric utilities that are serving the primary residence on the property. 
(8)  That the structure is in compliance with all applicable Virginia Department of Health requirements. 
(c)  The applicant and the landowner, if different from the applicant, of the temporary health care structure shall provide a written report showing compliance with this section, annually, to the zoning administrator. 
(d)  No signage, advertising, or otherwise promoting the existence of the structure shall be permitted either on the exterior of the temporary health care structure or elsewhere. 
(e)  Only one (1) temporary family health care structure shall be permitted on a lot or parcel of land. 
(f)  Any temporary family healthcare structure installed pursuant to this section shall be removed within sixty (60) days from the date the mentally or physically impaired person is no longer receiving or is no longer in need of the assistance provided for in this section. 
(g)  The zoning administrator may revoke the permit granted pursuant to this section if the permit holder violates any provision of this section. 
(Ord. No. 6795-11, § 1; Ord. No. 6994-13)  
Sec. 45-532. - Recovery home. 
A recovery home is a communal residential facility for not more than six (6) persons that provides housing for recovering addicts for the purpose of the residents' joint rehabilitation from drug or alcohol addiction established in compliance with the Federal and State Fair Housing Acts. This use may be operated in the districts set forth in Article IV, Summary of Uses by District, provided the following criteria are met: 
(a)  When located in single-family residential structures: 
(1)  The minimum lot size shall be not less than six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet; and 
(2)  Off-street parking for at least two (2) vehicles shall be provided. 
(b)  The living area, at a minimum, shall include a living room or den, dining room and kitchen. 
(c)  In addition to the living area required in item (b), homes housing more than three (3) persons, shall maintain a minimum of three bedrooms with no more than two person occupying one bedroom. 
(d)  The following information shall be submitted with an application for a conditional use permit or certificate of use and occupancy: 
(1)  A written description of the program; 
(2)  A copy of the resident application and rules; and 
(3)  A floor plan indicating size and location of living areas, bathrooms and bedrooms. 
(e)  Prior to occupancy, a property maintenance inspection shall be conducted by the Department of Codes Compliance in accordance with the International Property Maintenance Code and all local ordinances, as revised. All violations, if any, shall be corrected prior to occupancy. 
(f)  Drug and/or alcohol use in or on the property of the recovery home shall be strictly prohibited. 
(g)  Occupancy shall be limited to adults, eighteen (18) years and older. 
(h)  No recovery home or structure containing a recovery home shall be located closer than five thousand (5,000) feet to any other recovery home. Distances shall be measured on a straight line from property line of the proposed recovery home to the nearest point, in any direction, of the property line containing the closest recovery home. 
(i)  Upon request, the owner and/or facilitator of the recovery home program shall provide to the Department of Codes Compliance an annual resident census to include a certification that all residents are recovering from a drug or alcohol addiction. 
(j)  The Zoning Administrator may, at any time, request an audit of resident records to verify that the use and operation of the recovery home is in conformance with these regulations. The owner and/or facilitator of the recovery home shall comply with such request. 
(Ord. No. 7104-14)  
Sec. 45-533. - Micro/craft brewery. 
Where permitted in Section 45-402, micro/craft breweries shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
(a)  No outdoor storage shall be permitted; 
(b)  Outdoor events shall not extend beyond 12:00 a.m.; and 
(c)  Outdoor activities and service bays on properties that abut single-family residential uses or zoning districts shall be screened from such uses or zoning districts with privacy fencing or landscape screen approved by the director of planning. 
(Ord. No. 7182-15)  
Sec. 45-534. - Day services center. 
(a)  The use shall be operated by a government agency and/or a non-profit organization. 
(b)  The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(c)  The owner/operator shall submit to the department of codes compliance a management plan for the facility to address services to be offered, staffing, client capacity, parking, security/loitering management, maintenance and litter control prior to occupancy. 
(d)  The facility shall be located within 0.25 mile of a bus stop/transportation facility. 
(e)  The facility shall be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from schools and parks and shall be located no closer than five thousand (5,000) feet to any other day services center. For the purposes of this subsection, distances shall be measured on a straight line (1) from the structure containing the day services center to the nearest point of the property containing a school or park and (2) measured on a straight line between the structure containing the day services center and the structure containing any other day service center. 
(f)  One (1) parking space per employee plus one (1) off-street loading/unloading space, but not less than one (1) space for every five hundred (500) square feet of floor area, shall be provided.  
Sec. 45-535. - Police K9 training facility. 
The purpose of this section is to set out minimum standards for a police K9 training facility in order to minimize adverse effects on adjacent residential properties. 
(a)  Any facility located on property zoned P1 Park district shall provide a minimum 30-foot transitional buffer along all property lines abutting a residential zoning district. Such transitional buffer shall be planted in accordance with the requirements found in section 45-2802(e). 
(b)  Any structures, including but not limited to, kennels, runs and other training facilities, located on property zoned P1 Park district shall provide a minimum 30-foot setback from property lines abutting a residential zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 7255-16, § III)  
Sec. 45-536. - Nightclubs. 
The purpose of this section is to set out minimum regulations for the review and approval of nightclubs to mitigate any negative effects upon adjacent properties. The definition of a nightclub is found in section 45-201. 
(a)  All nightclubs must provide a management plan as part of an application for certificate of use and occupancy for those permitted by right in this Section, and as part of an application for a conditional use permit as stipulated below in subsection (c). The minimum required elements of a management plan are as follows: 
(1)  Operational characteristics and features of the nightclub, including the following: 
a.  Staffing levels; 
b.  Hours of operation, and days of the week on which the establishment will be operated as a nightclub; 
c.  Type of Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control license and related restrictions; 
d.  Floor plan showing the general arrangement and seating capacity of tables and bar facilities, dance floor and standing room areas and capacity, which floor plan shall be posted on the premises in a prominent location viewable by the patrons; 
e.  Total occupant load; and 
f.  General type, frequency and hours of entertainment to be provided; 
(2)  Provisions for off-street parking; and 
(3)  Provisions for security and crowd management, including the following: 
a.  Procedures, features, arrangements and staffing levels for security and crowd management for both the interior and exterior of the premise; and 
b.  A plan and procedures for mitigating potential adverse impacts on nearby dwelling and business uses. 
(b)  A nightclub, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted in the C3 and C4 districts as a matter of right. 
(c)  A nightclub, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted in the C1 and C2 districts, and shall be called a type 1 nightclub, when the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The nightclub is located more than five hundred (500) feet away from: 
a.  Any school, church, park, playground or a library property; 
b.  Any other nightclub; 
c.  Any residentially zoned property which fronts on the same street or which contains any school, church, park, playground or library; or 
d.  Located more than two hundred (200) feet away from a residential zone when not fronting on the same street. 
(d)  A nightclub, as defined in this chapter, may be by conditional use permit, as provided for in Article XXVII of this chapter, and shall be called a type 2 nightclub when the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The nightclub is located five hundred (500) feet or closer to: 
a.  Any school, church, park, playground or a library property; 
b.  Any other nightclub; 
c.  Any residentially zoned property which fronts on the same street or which contains any school, church, park, playground or library; and 
d.  Any nightclub that is closer than two hundred (200) feet to a residential zone when not fronting on the same street. 
(2)  For the purposes of this subsection, distances shall be measured on a straight line (i) from the unit containing the nightclub to the nearest point of the property named above in (c)(1), or (ii) between the unit containing the nightclub and the unit containing any other nightclub. 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection, unit means a self-contained section within a larger structure or a freestanding structure containing a single use. 
(4)  A conditional use permit may be issued by the city council after recommendation by the planning commission and finding that the location, size, design and operating characteristics of the proposed nightclub will be compatible with and will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to neighboring uses. 
(Ord. No. 7365-17, § 4)  
Sec. 45-537. - Food truck vendors on private property. 
The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for food truck vendors on private property, when not in conjunction with a special event as permitted by the city. 
(1)  All food truck vendors shall obtain a food truck vendor permit from the department of codes compliance. A food truck vendor permit application shall include the following: 
a.  Name, home and business addresses and phone number of the applicant. 
b.  A description of the type of food and beverage to be sold. 
c.  A valid health permit from the Virginia Department of Health. 
d.  A valid fire inspection report from the fire marshal. 
e.  An annual permit fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be paid. The permit may not be leased, sold or otherwise transferred. 
(2)  Food truck vendors shall obtain written permission from the owner of the property on which they operate and shall keep a copy of such written permission on hand in the food truck. 
(3)  Food truck vendors shall post a copy of a valid health permit from the Virginia Department of Health stating that the mobile food operation meets all applicable standards. Such license shall be posted in the vehicle at all times when in operation in the city. 
(4)  Food truck vendors shall have a current City of Newport News business license and decal issued by the commissioner of the revenue. The business license must be available at all times for inspection and the decal shall be affixed and displayed on the left-hand side of the vehicle, on the outside, so that it may be readily seen at all times by anyone authorized to inspect. 
(5)  Food truck vendors shall be properly licensed and tagged, as required by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles, and they shall have appropriate general liability insurance coverage. 
(6)  Food truck vendors shall leave the site when the on-premises establishment closes for the day. Prior to leaving, the vendor must pick up, remove and dispose of all trash or refuse attributable to the vending. 
(7)  Food truck vendors shall not vend on unimproved (with no structure) or vacant properties. 
(8)  Food truck vendors shall not vend on properties operated solely as parking lots. 
(9)  Food truck vendors shall not be deemed ancillary to a principle use. 
(10)  Food truck vendors may only park in a designated parking area on a paved surface. Food truck vendors shall not park in or block drive aisles, sidewalks, access to loading/unloading areas or emergency access and fire lanes. 
(11)  No by-product of food truck vending operations, including but not limited to trash, grease, grey water, or excess food, shall be disposed of in or on any City of Newport News property, including, but not limited to, trash cans, curbs, gutters, manholes, storm drains or sewer grates. Food truck vendors shall properly dispose of fats, oils and grease (FOG) as required in chapter 33, Sewers and Sewage Disposal, article IV, Sewer Use Standards, division 2, Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG). 
(12)  The volume of any background music played from the food truck shall be limited so as not to be plainly audible beyond the property boundaries of the site where the food truck is located or at a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the food truck, whichever is less. 
(13)  Any lighting used to illuminate the vehicle or customer area shall be dark skies compliant and shall not produce light spill onto adjacent property or public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 7544-19)  
Secs. 45-538—45-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - R1 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-601. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for those areas in which single-family detached homes have been erected on lots in excess of previously applicable minimum lot requirements. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-602. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal use. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Maximum density. Two and two tenths (2.2) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-603. - Lot area and dimensional regulations. 
The following requirements are established in the R1 Single-Family Dwelling Zoning District: 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
a.  Interior lot: Ninety (90) feet. 
b.  Corner lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot frontage: 
a.  On straight or curvilinear street: Ninety (90) feet. 
b.  On a cul-de-sac: Forty-five (45) feet. 
(b)  Requirements for main building: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Ten (10) percent of lot width; but no more than twelve (12) feet shall be required. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty-five (35) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures. 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Prohibited in front yard (See Article XXVIII). 
b.  Rear yard: Five (5) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Three (3) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty-five (35) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Height of main building, not to exceed one and one-half (1½) stories. 
(3)  Maximum floor area: Ground floor area of main building. 
(4)  For special exception to height and floor area requirements, see Article XXXII, section 45-3204.E.1. 
(5)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5095-98; Ord. No. 5357-99; Ord. No. 6741-10)  
Sec. 45-604. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-605. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-606—45-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - R2 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-701. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for those areas in which low density residential development may take place under the protection of low density residential zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-702. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Maximum density: Three and six tenths (3.6) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-703. - Lot area and dimensional regulations. 
The following requirements are established in the R2 Single-Family Dwelling Zoning District: 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 
a.  For dwellings: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
a.  Interior lot: Ninety (90) feet. 
b.  Corner lot: One hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot frontage: 
a.  On straight or curvilinear street: Ninety (90) feet. 
b.  On a cul-de-sac: Forty-five (45) feet. 
(b)  Requirements for main building: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Ten (10) percent of lot width; but, no more than twelve (12) feet shall be required. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty-five (35) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures. 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Prohibited in front yard (See Article XXVIII). 
b.  Rear yard: Five (5) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Three (3) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty-five (35) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Height of main building, not to exceed one and one-half (1½) stories. 
(3)  Maximum floor area: Ground floor area of main building 
(4)  For special exception to height and floor area requirements, see Article XXXII, section 45-3204.E.1. 
(5)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5095-98; Ord. No. 5358-99; Ord. No. 6741-10)  
Sec. 45-704. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-705. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-706—45-800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - R3 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-801. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for those areas in which single-family detached homes have been erected in conformity with previously applicable minimum lot requirements and to provide for additional areas in which such developments may be continued. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-802. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Maximum density: Four and eight tenths (4.8) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-803. - Lot area and dimensional regulations. 
The following requirements are established in the R3 Single-Family Dwelling Zoning District: 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
a.  Interior lot: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
b.  Corner lot: Ninety (90) feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot frontage: 
a.  On straight or curvilinear street: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
b.  On a cul-de-sac: Thirty-seven and one-half (37½) feet. 
(b)  Requirements for main building: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Ten (10) percent of lot width; but, no more than ten (10) feet shall be required. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Prohibited in front yard (See Article XXVIII). 
b.  Rear yard: Five (5) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Three (3) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Height of main building, not to exceed one and one-half (1½) stories. 
(3)  Maximum floor area: Ground floor area of main building. 
(4)  For special exception to height and floor area requirements, see Article XXXII, section 45-3204.E.1. 
(5)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5095-98; Ord. No. 5359-99; Ord. No. 6741-10)  
Sec. 45-804. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-805. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-806—45-900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - R4 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-901. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for those areas with existing small lot single-family developments and to provide small lot single-family residential developments as part of the present and future dwelling facilities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-902. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Maximum density. Six and six tenths (6.6) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-903. - Lot area and dimensional regulations. 
The following requirements are established in the R4 Single-Family Dwelling Zoning District: 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
a.  Interior lot: Sixty (60) feet. 
b.  Corner lot: Eighty (80) feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot frontage: 
a.  On straight or curvilinear street: Sixty (60) feet. 
b.  On a cul-de-sac: Thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  Requirements for main building: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Ten (10) percent of lot width; but, no more than ten (10) feet shall be required. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures. 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Prohibited in front yard (See Article XXVIII). 
b.  Rear yard: Five (5) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Three (3) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Height of main building, not to exceed one and one-half (1½) stories. 
(3)  Maximum floor area: Ground floor area of main building. 
(4)  For special exception to height and floor area requirements, see Article XXXII, section 45-3204.E.1. 
(5)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5095-98; Ord. No. 5360-99; Ord. No. 6741-10)  
Sec. 45-904. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-905. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-906—45-1000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - R5 LOW DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1001. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for areas developed with a mixture of attached single-family residential dwellings and to provide adequate and sufficient open space and on-site recreation for residents of such developments. For the purpose of this chapter, dwellings such as semi-detached, townhouse, garden apartments, two-family and zero lot line shall be deemed single-family attached dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1002. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Maximum density. Eleven (11) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1003. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
The following requirements are established in the R5 Low Density Multiple-Family Dwelling Zoning District: 
(1)  Minimum requirements: 
a.  For single-family dwellings: 
1.  Requirements for single-family units: 
i.  Minimum lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
ii.  Minimum lot width: 
A.  Interior lot: Fifty (50) feet. 
B.  Corner lot: Seventy (70) feet. 
iii.  Minimum lot frontage: 
A.  On straight or curvilinear street: Fifty (50) feet. 
B.  On cul-de-sac: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
2.  Requirements for main building: 
i.  Minimum setback requirements: 
A.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
B.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
C.  Side yard: 
(a)  Interior lot: Ten (10) percent of lot width; but, no more than ten (10) feet shall be required. 
(b)  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
ii.  Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  For two-family dwellings: 
1.  Minimum interior site area: Four thousand (4,000) square feet per unit. 
2.  Minimum site width: 
i.  Interior site: Seventy (70) feet per main building. 
ii.  Corner site: Ninety (90) feet for main building on corner. 
3.  Minimum site frontage: 
i.  On straight or curvilinear street: Seventy (70) feet per main building. 
ii.  On a cul-de-sac: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
4.  Minimum site depth: 
i.  On straight or curvilinear street: One hundred ten (110) feet. 
ii.  On a cul-de-sac: One hundred (100) feet. 
5.  Minimum building separation: Fourteen (14) feet. 
6.  A privacy yard, having a minimum area of two hundred (200) square feet shall be provided each dwelling unit. 
7.  Minimum building width: Sixteen (16) feet. 
c.  For multiple attached single-family dwellings excluding two-family dwellings: 
1.  Minimum site area: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum site width: 
i.  Interior: One hundred (100) feet. 
ii.  Corner: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
3.  Minimum site frontage: One hundred (100) feet. 
4.  Minimum site depth: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
5.  Minimum lot area: Fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet per unit. 
6.  Minimum separation from the front of main buildings: Fifty (50) feet. 
7.  Minimum separation from the rear of main buildings: Forty (40) feet. 
8.  Minimum separation from the side of main buildings: Twenty (20) feet. 
d.  Minimum open space: 
1.  Open lot area: Two thousand (2,000) square feet per unit. 
2.  Recreational/landscaped area: One hundred (100) percent of total dwelling unit floor area. 
3.  Recreational open space: Twenty (20) percent of the recreational/landscaped area. 
4.  Minimum size of active recreational open space area: 
i.  One (1) to two hundred (200) units: Twenty-five-foot diameter. 
ii.  Two hundred (200) plus units: Fifty-foot diameter. 
5.  All recreational/landscaped areas, recreational open space areas, and active recreational open space areas shall be shown on the site plan. 
(2)  Requirements for main buildings: 
a.  Minimum setback yard requirements: 
1.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
2.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
3.  Side yard: 
i.  Interior lot: 
A.  Ten (10) feet for two-family dwellings, no side yard is required at the interior lot lines where units are attached. 
B.  Twenty (20) feet for multiple-family dwellings. 
ii.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
b.  Maximum height: 
1.  Single-family and two-family dwellings: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings: Thirty-five (35) feet; however, buildings may be higher than thirty-five (35) feet provided the building is set back from the required side and rear yard one (1) foot for each foot of height above thirty-five (35) feet. 
c.  Minimum buffer area: Twenty (20) feet in width when abutting any single-family district. 
(3)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
a.  Minimum setback requirements: 
1.  Front yard: 
i.  Two-family dwellings: Prohibited in front yard (See Article XXVIII). 
ii.  Multiple-family dwellings: Thirty (30) feet. 
2.  Rear yard: Ten (10) feet. 
3.  Side yard: Same as main building. 
b.  Maximum height: Height of main building. 
c.  Maximum floor area: 
1.  Two-family dwellings: Ground floor area of the dwelling unit when on the same individual lot or site. 
2.  Multiple-family: None. 
d.  For special exception to height and floor area requirement, see Article XXXII. 
e.  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII, section 45-2806. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5875-02; Ord. No. 6741-10)  
Sec. 45-1004. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1005. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1006. - Landscaping. 
A planting plan shall be filed with the site plan, required by the Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required open space areas, buffer areas, trees and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-1007—45-1100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - R6 MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1101. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for planned manufactured home parks of high quality and appearance as part of the housing facilities for Newport News. Manufactured home parks shall be planned and approved and constructed as a planned residential development in accordance with the requirements of Article XV and in conformity with other ordinances of the city regulating manufactured homes, house trailers, mobile homes or other similar housing facilities (Also see City Code). 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1102. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Maximum densityc Eleven (11) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1103. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements: 
(1)  Minimum area: Ten (10) acres. 
(2)  Minimum area per manufactured home unit: Four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
(3)  Minimum required open space: 
a.  Amount required: One thousand (1,000) square feet per unit, exclusive of the required open space around each manufactured home. 
b.  Minimum size: One-quarter (¼) acre. 
c.  Access: Open space shall be arranged to provide maximum accessibility from each manufactured home unit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements for manufactured units: 
(1)  Minimum space separation between units: 
a.  Side-to-side: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  End-to-end: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side-to-end: Twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Special setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet from public street right-of-way. 
b.  Side yard: Fifty (50) feet along property line. 
c.  Rear yard: Fifty (50) feet along property line. 
d.  Setback from private streets (curb): Fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)  Maximum height: Twenty-five (25) feet except as noted in Article XXVIII. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum space separation: Ten (10) feet from any manufactured home or accessory structure. 
(2)  Special setback requirements: 
a.  Side yard: Fifty (50) feet along property line. 
b.  Rear yard: Fifty (50) feet along property line. 
(3)  Maximum height: Twenty-five (25) feet except as noted in Article XXVIII. 
(4)  For special exception to height and floor area requirement, see Article XXXII. 
(5)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII, section 45-2806. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1104. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1105. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1106. - Landscaping. 
A planting plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required open space areas, buffer areas, trees and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1107. - Planned residential development required. 
All manufactured home parks shall be constructed, altered, or changed in accordance with an approved plan of development as a planned residential development pursuant to the applicable requirements of Article XV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-1108—45-1200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - R7 MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1201. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for those areas developed with multiple-family dwellings of moderate density while providing adequate and sufficient open space and on-site recreation for residents of such developments. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1202. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Maximum density. Twenty-four (24) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1203. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements: 
(1)  For two-family dwellings: 
a.  Minimum interior site area: Four thousand (4,000) square feet per unit. 
b.  Minimum site width: 
1.  Interior site: Seventy (70) feet per main building. 
2.  Corner site: Ninety (90) feet for main building on corner. 
c.  Minimum site frontage: 
1.  On straight or curvilinear street: Seventy (70) feet per main building. 
2.  On cul-de-sac street: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
d.  Minimum site depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
1.  On straight a curvilinear street: One hundred ten (110) feet. 
2.  On a cul-de-sac: One hundred (100) feet. 
e.  Minimum building separation: Fourteen (14) feet. 
f.  A privacy yard, having a minimum area of two hundred (200) square feet, shall be provided each dwelling unit. 
g.  Minimum building width: Sixteen (16) feet. 
(2)  For multiple attached single-family dwellings excluding two-family dwellings: 
a.  Minimum site area: Twelve thousand (12,000) square [feet]. 
b.  Minimum site width: 
1.  Interior: One hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Corner: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
c.  Minimum site frontage: One hundred (100) feet. 
d.  Minimum site depth: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
e.  Minimum lot area: One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit. 
f.  Minimum building separation: Twenty (20) feet. 
g.  Minimum separation from the front of main buildings: Fifty (50) feet. 
h.  Minimum separation from the rear of main building: Forty (40) feet. 
i.  Minimum separation from the side of main buildings: Twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Minimum open space: 
a.  Open lot area: One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit. 
b.  Recreational/landscaped area: Eighty (80) percent of total dwelling unit floor area. 
c.  Recreational open space: Twenty (20) percent of the recreational/landscaped area. 
d.  Minimum size of active recreational open space areas: 
1.  One to two hundred (200) units: Twenty-five-foot diameter. 
2.  Two hundred (200) plus units: Fifty-foot diameter. 
e.  All recreational/landscaped areas, recreational open space areas, and active recreational areas shall be shown on the site plan. 
(b)  Requirements for main buildings: 
(1)  Minimum setback yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: 
(i)  Ten (10) feet for two-family dwellings. No side yard is required at the interior lot lines where units are attached 
(ii)  Twenty (20) feet for multiple-family dwellings 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: 
a.  Two-family dwellings: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  Multiple-family dwellings: Forty-five (45) feet; however, buildings may be higher than forty-five (45) feet provided the building is set back from the required side and rear yard one (1) foot for each foot of height above forty-five (45) feet. 
(3)  Minimum buffer area: Twenty (20) feet in width when abutting any single-family zoning district. 
(4)  Maximum floor area: Fifty (50) percent of lot area. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: 
1.  Two-family dwellings: Prohibited in front yard (See Article XXVIII). 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Ten (10) feet. 
c.  Side yard: Same as main building. 
(2)  Maximum height: Height of main buildings. 
(3)  Maximum floor area: 
a.  Two-family dwellings: Ground floor of the dwelling unit when on the same individual lot or site. 
b.  Multiple-family dwellings: None. 
(4)  For special exception to height and floor area requirement. See Article XXXII. 
(5)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII, section 45-2806. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1204. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1205. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1206. - Landscaping. 
A planting plan shall be filed with the site plan, required by the Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required open space areas, buffer areas, trees and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-1207—45-1300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - R8 HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1301. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for high density multiple-family dwellings, while providing adequate and sufficient open space and on-site recreation for residents of such developments. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1302. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Maximum density. Thirty-four (34) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1303. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements: 
(1)  For two-family dwellings: 
a.  Minimum interior site area: Four thousand (4,000) square feet per unit. 
b.  Minimum site width: 
1.  Interior site: Seventy (70) feet per main building. 
2.  Corner site: Ninety (90) feet for main building on corner. 
c.  Minimum frontage: 
1.  On straight or curvilinear street: Seventy (70) feet per main building. 
2.  On cul-de-sac: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
d.  Minimum site depth: 
1.  On straight a curvilinear street: One hundred ten (110) feet. 
2.  On a cul-de-sac: One hundred (100) feet. 
e.  Minimum building separation: Fourteen (14) feet. 
f.  A privacy yard, having a minimum area of two hundred (200) square feet, shall be provided each dwelling unit. 
g.  Minimum building width: Sixteen (16) feet. 
(2)  For multiple attached single-family dwellings excluding two-family dwellings: 
a.  Minimum site area: Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
b.  Minimum site width: 
1.  Interior: One hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Corner: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
c.  Minimum site frontage: One hundred (100) feet. 
d.  Minimum site depth: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
e.  Minimum lot area: One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit. 
f.  Minimum separation from the front of main buildings: Fifty (50) feet. 
g.  Minimum separation from the rear of main buildings: Forty (40) feet. 
h.  Minimum separation from the side of main buildings: Twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Minimum open space: 
a.  Open lot area: One thousand (1,000) square feet per unit 
b.  Recreational/landscaped area: Sixty (60) percent of total dwelling unit floor area. 
c.  Recreational open space: Twenty (20) percent of the recreational/landscaped area. 
d.  Minimum size of active recreational open space areas: 
1.  One to two hundred (200) units: Twenty-five-foot diameter. 
2.  Two hundred one (201) plus units: Fifty-foot diameter. 
e.  All recreational/landscaped areas, recreational open space areas, and active recreational open space areas shall be shown on the site plan. 
(b)  Requirements for main buildings: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: 
(i)  Ten (10) feet for two-family dwellings, no side yard is required at the interior lot lines where units are attached. 
(ii)  Twenty (20) feet for multiple-family dwellings 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: 
a.  Two-family dwellings: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  Multiple-family dwellings: Fifty-five (55) feet; however, buildings may be higher than fifty-five (55) feet provided the building is set back from the required side and rear yard one (1) foot for each foot of height above fifty-five (55) feet. 
(3)  Minimum buffer area: Twenty (20) feet in width when abutting any single-family zoning district. 
(4)  Maximum floor area: Sixty (60) percent of lot area. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures. 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: 
1.  Two-family dwellings: prohibited in front yard (See Article XXVIII). 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yards: Same as main building. 
(2)  Maximum height: Height of main building. 
(3)  Maximum floor area: 
a.  Two-family dwellings: Ground floor area of the dwelling unit when on the same individual lot or site. 
b.  Multiple-family dwelling: None. 
(4)  For special exception to height and floor area requirement, see Article XXXII. 
(5)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII, section 45-2806. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1304. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1305. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1306. - Landscaping. 
A planting plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required open space area, buffer areas, trees and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-1307—45-1400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - R9 MIXED USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1401. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations to provide for the development of high density residential, lodging, office and retail uses within projects having mixed uses in the same building or developed site. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1402. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Maximum density. Eighty (80) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1403. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements: 
(1)  For multiple-family dwelling, commercial, office: 
a.  Minimum development area: Forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
b.  Minimum width: 
1.  Interior: Two hundred (200) feet. 
2.  Corner: Two hundred (200) feet. 
c.  Minimum frontage: Two hundred (200) feet. 
d.  Minimum depth: Two hundred (200) feet. 
(2)  Minimum open space: 
a.  Open lot area: Five hundred (500) square feet per unit. 
b.  Recreational/landscaped area: Thirty (30) percent of the total dwelling unit floor area. 
c.  Recreational open space: Thirty (30) percent of the recreational/landscaped area. 
d.  Minimum size of active recreational open space areas: 
1.  Zero to two hundred (200) units: Twenty-five-foot diameter. 
2.  Two hundred one (201) plus units: Fifty-foot diameter. 
e.  All open lot areas, recreational/landscaped areas, recreational open space, and active recreational open space areas shall be shown on a landscape plan filed with the site plan. 
(b)  Requirements for main buildings: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: 
(i)  Ten (10) feet for attached single-family dwellings, no side yard is required at the lot line separating attached units in the same building. 
(ii)  Multiple-family, commercial, office: Twenty (20) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: 
a.  All uses: One hundred ten (110) feet. 
b.  Buildings may be higher than one hundred ten (110) feet, provided the building is set back from the required side and rear yard one (1) foot for each foot of height above one hundred ten (110) feet. 
(3)  Minimum buffer area: 
a.  When abutting any single-family district: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  When abutting any multiple-family district: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Maximum floor area ratio: Maximum floor area depends on the mix of uses indicated by the following Table 14-1. 
Table 14-1 

Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
Use Categories 	No Mix 	Mix of 2 Categories 	Mix of 3 Categories 
Residential 	.5 	1.0 	1.5 
Hotel/Motel 	.5 	1.0 	1.5 
Office 	.5 	1.0 	1.5 
Retail and Personal 	.5 	1.0 	1.5 
Total Development Max. FAR 	.5 	1.0 	1.5 
 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage: Eighty (80) percent of lot area. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: Same as main building. 
(2)  Maximum height: Height of main building. 
(3)  For special exception to height requirement, see Article XXXII. 
(4)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1404. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1405. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1406. - Landscaping. 
A planting plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required open space areas, buffer areas, trees, and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1407. - Traffic impact. 
A traffic impact study shall be filed with the site plan for any development in this district if all uses in the development collectively generate more than five thousand (5,000) trips per day, based on the most current ITE Trip Generation Manual. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-1408—45-1500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1501. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to promote efficient and well planned land use by clustering residential development to conserve open space. 
To accomplish this purpose and intent, this article provides for the establishment of planned residential developments (PRD's) laid out and developed according to plans approved in conformance with regulations set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1502. - Proposed development plan. 
(a)  Submission of plan. On and after March 22, 2011, the owner of any tract of land or combination of tracts of land qualifying under this article may submit to the director of planning a proposed master plan for a PRD for the following types of developments: 
(1)  A PRD containing a combination of detached single-family, attached single-family or multiple-family dwellings located on a tract containing ten (10) or more acres in any single-family residential district. 
(2)  A PRD located in any multiple-family dwelling district. 
(b)  Review of preliminary studies. Prior to the formal submission of a proposed master plan for the PRD, the developer shall meet with the director of planning or his authorized representative to review the concept of the development. The proposed master plan shall be submitted only after the completion of a concept review by the director of planning. 
(c)  Contents of PRD application. An application for a planned residential development shall provide: 
(1)  Ten (10) copies and an 8½" × 11" reproducible copy of a master plan showing the proposed use of each lot or tract within the development, housing types provided, the layout of all streets, community facilities, and all recreation areas, topography, and the name, professional title, and address of the land planner, architect, or engineer who prepared the plan. 
(2)  Studies to show the basic engineering features and requirements and traffic impact. 
(3)  Data to evaluate the total development including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The amount of land proposed to be used for public or semi-public uses, such as churches, schools, etc. 
b.  The amount of land proposed to be set aside for recreational use. 
c.  The amount of land proposed to be set aside for streets. 
d.  The amount of any submerged land within the project boundary. 
e.  The net density of the proposed project. Net density shall be computed by dividing the total number of proposed dwelling units within the development by the net development area. Net development area shall be the sum of the following area lying totally within the proposed development: 
1.  All land to be used exclusively for residential purposes including associated off-street parking. 
2.  Land to be set aside permanently for recreational uses or open space, provided that such land is not a part of any existing publicly-owned tract. 
3.  Not more than fifty (50) percent of the area of any underground utilities easements having a width of at least one hundred (100) feet which is permanently established, equipped and maintained as open recreational space and open for use to all residents within the project area. This credit shall not include easements containing overhead utilities or improved drainage ways. 
4.  Any lake area which is to be open for use to all residents within the development and which lies totally within the development, provided that not more than ten (10) percent of the net development area may be comprised of eligible lake area. 
5.  Any marsh or wetland provided that: 
(i)  The inclusion of such marsh or wetland shall be in the interest of conservation and the area thus protected shall have substantial ecological value in their natural state. 
(ii)  The entire marsh or wetlands area lying within a project boundaries shall be protected with appropriate covenants or easements designed to insure perpetual protection from damage to their natural state. 
(iii)  Adequate provisions are made to protect such marsh or wetlands from siltation, encroachment or other damages to their natural state during and after construction of the project. 
(iv)  Not more than ten (10) percent of the net development area will be comprised of marsh or wetlands. 
6.  A non-reimbursable application fee of eight hundred dollars ($800.00) shall accompany the application. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6769-11, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1503. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  General. Except as provided in this article, in a PRD any land or building may be used only for such uses as are permitted by this chapter in the district in which the PRD is located. 
(b)  PRD in single-family residential districts. Within any PRD in a R1, R2, R3 or R4 zoning district, attached single-family or multiple-family dwellings are permitted, provided: 
(1)  The attached single-family or multiple-family dwellings do not exceed the following percentages of the total number of units permitted within the project: 
R1 District ..... 30% 
R2 District ..... 30% 
R3 District ..... 40% 
R4 District ..... 50% 
(2)  The total number of permitted dwelling units shall be computed by multiplying the net development area by the maximum density permitted in the underlying zoning district. 
(3)  Adequate, usable, and accessible open space is provided within each section of the PRD. 
(4)  Attached single-family and multiple-family dwellings are at least fifty (50) feet from any detached single-family dwelling lots within the development and at least one hundred (100) feet from any abutting land which is zoned single-family. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1504. - Density of PRD in multiple-family residential districts. 
The net density of a PRD in a multiple-family residential district shall not exceed the density permitted by the multiple-family zoning district in which the PRD is located. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1505. - Lot area and dimensional regulations in residential districts. 
Within any PRD approved under this article, the requirements set forth below shall apply in lieu of lot area and dimensional regulations set forth in the district in which the development is located: 
(1)  Lot area requirements. 
a.  Single-family detached: No minimum lot area. 
b.  Single-family attached: No minimum lot area. 
c.  Open space: All lot area reductions shall be used as open space in accordance with Article XXVIII. 
(2)  Setbacks. 
a.  Front yards: The minimum front yard setback for a building or structure may be reduced in a PRD provided that building setback lines are shown on an approved and recorded subdivision plat. 
b.  Rear and side yards: The minimum rear and side yard regulations of various zoning districts may be reduced provided: 
1.  That the minimum distance between any two (2) main buildings within the PRD shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
2.  That the minimum distance between any two (2) single-family detached buildings along the side yard shall not be less than twelve (12) feet, and not be less than twenty (20) feet along the rear yard. 
c.  Perimeter yards: Where the property lines of a PRD abut land not included in the development, a fifty-foot setback shall be provided to include a twenty-five-foot wide landscaped buffer containing a minimum of two (2) trees for every four hundred (400) square feet. 
(3)  Height regulations. The maximum height regulations for buildings and structures located in a PRD shall be the same as the maximum height regulations for the district in which the PRD is located. 
(4)  Minimum lot frontage and width. 
a.  Single-family detached: No minimum lot frontage or lot width. 
b.  Single-family attached: No minimum lot frontage or lot width. 
(5)  Off-street parking and loading. The minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading set forth in Article XXX, section 45-3004 for specific uses shall be provided for all uses permitted within a PRD. 
The planning commission may waive one (1) or more of the above requirements in the event that there was an approved plan of development or site plan for the development that was approved on or before the effective date of this chapter (August 1, 1997) and provided further that the infrastructure improvements, as shown on the approved plan of development or site plan, have been substantially completed. The planning commission shall condition its approval with a requirement that the developer's declarations of covenants, conditions and deed restrictions be recorded prior to the issuance of building permits. Where applicable, such documents and the contract of sale for each lot, shall disclose that the streets in the development will be private and shall be maintained, and replaced if necessary, by the lot purchaser, their respective heirs, successors and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5251-99)  
Sec. 45-1506. - Open space requirements. 
(a)  Amount of open space required. Within every PRD approved under this article, there shall be planned and set aside permanently as part of the total development an amount of open space to be reserved and maintained exclusively for recreational purposes. The amount of such open space shall not be less than the aggregate accumulation of lot size reductions below the required minimum lot areas for the entire development, and shall be in addition to the open space requirement of the underlying zoning district(s). Before accepting the open space as meeting the requirements of this provision, the director of planning and the city planning commission, must find the land thus designated to be: 
(1)  Sufficient in size, suitably located, adequately accessible and served with adequate facilities necessary to serve the recreational purpose intended and required by the future residents of the development. 
(2)  That every PRD contain at least one (1) usable central area to be no less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and designed to be available for informal recreation. Informal recreation shall be an open area capable of being used for outside games or activities. 
(3)  That evidence is given that satisfactory arrangements will be made for the perpetual maintenance of such designated parcels to relieve the city of the future maintenance. 
(b)  Arrangement of open space. All required open space within a planned residential development shall be arranged to be usable for recreational purposes. The open space shall be arranged to provide maximum access and benefit to the residential lots and dwelling units in each section of the PRD. Every separate tract of open space shall have adequate access to streets in the development. Access to open space shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6769-11, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1507. - Review and approval of planned residential development. 
(a)  Review by the director of planning. No PRD shall be scheduled for public hearing unless the master plan of development has been referred to the director of planning who shall determine: 
(1)  If the design concept of the plan is in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  If the proposed master plan of the development is consistent with applicable elements of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(3)  If the development is based on logical and sound principles of residential community planning. 
(4)  Compliance with other submittal requirements such as traffic impact studies, and plans, environmental analyses and fiscal impact analyses to adequately evaluate the project. 
(b)  Review by other departments. The proposed plan of development shall be reviewed by the directors of the department of engineering, the department of public works, and the waterworks department, who shall report their findings to the director of planning. 
(c)  Report by director of planning. The director of planning shall prepare a report to the city planning commission with recommendations for approval, or disapproval, or modification of the proposed PRD. The report shall include the analyses upon which his recommendations are based, and the review comments of the other reviewing departments. 
(d)  Recommendation by the city planning commission. The city planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the PRD and shall prepare a report indicating its recommendation as to whether the PRD application should be granted and as to conditions and safeguards, if any, that should be required based upon findings as to conformity with the general standards set forth in this article. Adequate public notice and notification of adjacent property owners shall be achieved in accord with the requirements of Article XXXIV. 
Following the public hearing, the planning commission may recommend approval, disapproval, or modification of the request for a PRD and the master plan to city council. 
(e)  Action by city council. After receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, and following public notice as provided by law of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the city council shall hold a public hearing on each application for a PRD. Following such hearing, the city council shall grant or deny the application for the PRD with conditions and safeguards as recommended by the planning commission or with other appropriate modification(s) of such conditions and safeguards as the city council may deem necessary. 
(f)  PRD agreement required. Upon approval of the PRD and master plan by city council, an agreement shall be executed between the developer and the City of Newport News which shall be binding upon the developer, his successors, assigns or heirs to the effect that the approved master plan shall govern the development of the total PRD. No preliminary development plan, final plat or site plan may be approved except in conformity with the approved master plan for the PRD. Minor adjustments of the plan are permitted in the event conditions arise which in the opinion of the director of planning merit such adjustment. However, all significant changes to the PRD shall be referred back to the city planning commission, and the planning commission shall make recommendations on such changes to city council. Each public body shall hold a public hearing on the significant changes proposed, following public notice as provided by law of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Significant changes shall include increases in density, reductions in open space and changes in land use. If the agreement is not executed by all parties within ninety (90) days of the date of the city council meeting at which the PRD and master plan were voted on, the approval shall be void and any ordinance adopted at said meeting shall also be void. 
(g)  Home ownership association documents required. Within any PRD approved under this article, no lot or parcel shall be approved, sold or used within the development unless and until appropriate documents which are in a form approved by the city attorney shall have been executed. Such documents shall clearly: 
(1)  Set forth the nature of the permanent organization under which common ownership is to be established, including its purpose, how it shall be governed and administered; the financial provisions made for permanent care and maintenance of the common property, including necessary bonds when required by the city; and the method of assessing individual property owners for their share of the cost of administering and maintaining such common property including infrastructure, private roadways, parking areas, sidewalks, recreational facilities, open space, marsh and wetland areas. 
(2)  Set forth the extent of common interest held by the owner of each individual parcel in the tract held in common with others. 
(3)  Set forth appropriate maintenance easements for all buildings or structures having zero (0) lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6769-11, § 1; Ord. No. 7204-15)  
Secs. 45-1508—45-1600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - P1 PARK DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1601. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for property that provides recreational services to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1602. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1603. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum requirements: 
(1)  Minimum area: None. 
(2)  Minimum width: None. 
(3)  Minimum frontage: None. 
(4)  Minimum depth: None. 
(b)  Requirements for main building: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet or one hundred (100) feet when abutting a single-family residential zoning district. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Twenty (20) feet or one hundred (100) feet when abutting a single-family residential zoning district. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet plus one (1) foot of additional height for each one (1) foot of setback greater than the minimum setback required by this district. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Same as for main building. 
b.  Rear yard: Same as for main building. 
c.  Side yard: Same as for main building. 
(2)  Maximum height: Same as for main building. 
(3)  Maximum floor area: No restriction. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1604. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1605. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1606. - Landscaping. 
A planting plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required open space areas, buffer areas, trees and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-1607—45-1700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - O1 OFFICE DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1701. - General. 
The purpose of this article is to establish small scale office settings. Uses appropriate to this district generally include business and professional offices serving localized areas which do not generate high volumes of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1702. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Uses permitted in an O1 Office District are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Generally, accessory uses and structures accessory to principal uses allowed in the district are permitted. However, certain accessory areas may have special requirements or need a special exception because of their impact. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1703. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: None. 
(b)  Requirements for main buildings: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twelve (12) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Five (5) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Twenty-five (25) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Forty (40) feet. 
(3)  Minimum buffer area: 
a.  When abutting any single-family dwelling district: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  When abutting any multiple-family dwelling district: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Maximum floor area: Seventy-five (75) percent of lot area (Article XXVIII). 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage: Eighty (80) percent of lot area. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum yard setbacks: Same as for main building. 
(2)  Maximum height: Same as for main building. 
(3)  See also Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1704. - Single-family area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Maximum density: Six and six-tenths (6.6) dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 
a.  Interior lot: Sixty (60) feet. 
b.  Corner lot: Eighty (80) feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot frontage: 
a.  On straight or curvilinear street: Sixty (60) feet. 
b.  On a cul-de-sac: Thirty (30) feet. 
(c)  Requirements for main building: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Ten (10) percent of lot width; but, no more than ten (10) feet shall be required. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(d)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures. 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Prohibited in front yard (See Article XXVIII). 
b.  Rear yard: Twelve (12) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Six (6) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Height of main building, not to exceed one and one-half (1½) stories. 
(3)  Maximum floor area: Ground floor area of main building. 
(4)  For special exception to height and floor area requirements, see Article XXXII, section 45-3204.E.1. 
(5)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6741-10)  
Sec. 45-1705. - Medium density multiple-family area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Maximum density: Twenty-four (24) dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  Minimum requirements: 
(1)  For multiple attached single-family dwellings excluding two-family dwellings: 
a.  Minimum site area: Twelve thousand (12,000) square [feet]. 
b.  Minimum site width: 
1.  Interior: One hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Corner: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
c.  Minimum site frontage: One hundred (100) feet. 
d.  Minimum site depth: One hundred twenty (120) feet. 
e.  Minimum lot area: One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit. 
f.  Minimum building separation: Twenty (20) feet. 
g.  Minimum separation from the front of main buildings: Fifty (50) feet. 
h.  Minimum separation from the rear of main building: Forty (40) feet. 
i.  Minimum separation from the side of main buildings: Twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Minimum open space: 
a.  Open lot area: One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit. 
b.  Recreational/landscaped area: Eighty (80) percent of total dwelling unit floor area. 
c.  Recreational open space: Twenty (20) percent of the recreational/landscaped area. 
d.  Minimum size of active recreational open space areas: 
1.  One to two hundred (200) units: Twenty-five-foot diameter 
2.  Two hundred one (201) plus units: Fifty-foot diameter. 
e.  All recreational/landscaped areas, recreational open space areas, and active recreational areas shall be shown on the site plan. 
(c)  Requirements for main buildings: 
(1)  Minimum setback yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Twenty (20) feet for multiple-family dwellings. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: Multiple-family dwellings: forty-five (45) feet; however, buildings may be higher than forty-five (45) feet provided the building is set back from the required side and rear yard one (1) foot for each foot of height above forty-five (45) feet. 
(3)  Minimum buffer area: Twenty (20) feet in width when abutting any single-family zoning district. 
(4)  Maximum floor area: Fifty (50) percent of lot area 
(d)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Ten (10) feet. 
c.  Side yard: Same as main building. 
(2)  Maximum height: Height of main buildings. 
(3)  Maximum floor area: None. 
(4)  For special exception to height and floor area requirement, see Article XXXII. 
(5)  For modifications and adjustments to regulations, see Article XXVIII, section 45-2806. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1706. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1707. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1708. - Landscaping. 
A landscaping plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the Site Plan Ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required green areas, buffer areas, trees, parking spaces and aisles, and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-1709—45-1800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - O2 OFFICE PARK DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1801. - General. 
The purpose of this article is to establish well organized, landscaped environments for office buildings in park-like settings. To insure quality development, a master development plan for the office park that has been recommended by the city planning commission and approved by the city council is required for each area zoned O2. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1802. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Uses permitted in a O2 Office Park district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Generally, accessory uses and structures accessory to principal uses allowed in the district are permitted. However, certain accessory areas may have special requirements or need a special exception because of their impact. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1803. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum area requirements: 
(1)  Minimum area: The minimum area for the creation of an office park district shall be fifteen (15) acres. Within each area designated O2 office park there shall be prepared a master development plan for the district that has been recommended by the city planning commission and adopted by the city council. 
(2)  Minimum lot size: The minimum lot size within an office park district shall be one (1) acre. 
(b)  Minimum yard setbacks for main buildings: 
(1)  From collector street: Fifty (50) feet or two (2) times building height, whichever is greater, not to exceed one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  From arterial street: Eighty (80) feet or two (2) times building height, whichever is greater, not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(3)  Minimum side yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Minimum rear yard: Forty (40) feet. 
(c)  Maximum height: Eighty (80) feet; provided, one (1) foot of additional height is permitted above eighty (80) feet for each additional one (1) foot of setback from all required minimum setbacks. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: Thirty (30) percent of lot area. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1804. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XXX, section 45-3004 and the landscaping requirements of this district, section 45-1806. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1805. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1806. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Landscaping: 
(1)  Landscaped perimeter yards shall contain no structures, road (except driveways points), parking, storage areas, accessory buildings or no mechanical equipment, but may contain walkways, trails, art, and man-made landscape features. Landscaped yards shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Front yard: Forty (40) feet minimum. 
b.  Side yard: Twenty (20) feet minimum. 
c.  Rear yard: Forty (40) feet minimum. 
(2)  Off-street parking lots having more than fifteen (15) parking spaces shall provide a landscaped island every fifteen (15) spaces and at the end of each parking row or aisle. These landscape islands shall be a minimum of one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet in area for a single parking row and a minimum of two hundred fifty-six (256) square feet in area for a double parking row. Within the interior of the parking lot, a minimum of one (1) tree shall be provided for each fifteen (15) parking spaces. 
(3)  Trees shall be provided in accordance with the standards set forth in the master development plan for the office park. Tree standards shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements of the city's site plan ordinance. 
(b)  Buffer provisions. The following buffer areas shall be required when the O2 district abuts the following zoning districts of lesser intensity: 
(1)  Forty (40) feet when abutting any single-family district; 
(2)  Thirty (30) feet when abutting any multiple-family district; and 
(3)  Twenty (20) feet when abutting any R8 district. 
(c)  Other provisions. All development must conform to any special provisions established by the master development plan adopted by city council for the office park. 
(d)  Lighting provisions. Lights shall be directed inward. All other provisions shall be as established by the master development plan adopted by city council for the district created. 
(e)  General: There shall be no outside storage. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1807. - Traffic impact. 
A traffic impact study shall be filed with any request for a change of zoning for any O2 Office Park development. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1808. - Master development plan required. 
A master development plan for the O2 area to be created shall be filed with any request for a change of zoning. Upon adoption by the city council, the master development plan shall govern the physical development of the office park, including land use, the location of streets, physical amenities such as water features, and other provisions such as signage, improvements, lighting, pedestrian ways, trails, building materials, architecture, and landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-1809—45-1900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - O3 OFFICE/RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-1901. - General. 
The purpose of this article is to establish district regulations for office/research and development parks and science centers which are developed according to a master development plan to provide for the orderly expansion of research and development oriented industries and related educational facilities, and to promote the high technology diversification of Newport News' economic base. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1902. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in the O3 Office/Research and Development district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V, and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1903. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum area requirements: 
(1)  Minimum district size: Fifty (50) acres. 
(2)  Minimum lot size: Two (2) acres, except for public facilities and utilities which shall have no minimum lot size. 
(b)  Minimum yard setbacks for main buildings: All front yard, rear yard, and side yard setbacks and buffer areas shall be as established by the approved development plan for the office/research and development park. 
(c)  Maximum height: The maximum height of buildings in the office/research and development parks shall be as established by the approved master development plan for the office/research and development park. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1904. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
Parking spaces shall be as required by the approved master plan. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7247-16; Ord. No. 7436-18)  
Sec. 45-1905. - Sign regulations. 
Sign regulations shall be governed by the requirements of the City Code and the approved master development plan for the research and development park. In cases of conflict in the regulations, the provisions of the development plan shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1906. - Landscaping. 
A landscaping plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the site plan ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required green areas, buffers, trees and other plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1907. - Traffic impact. 
A traffic impact study shall be filed with the site plan for any new development in this district if it is estimated that all uses in the development would collectively generate more than five thousand (5,000) trips per day, based on the most current ITE manual. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-1908. - Master development plan required. 
A master development plan shall be required for the creation of an office/research and development park. Upon recommendations by the city planning commission, and approval by the city council, the master development plan shall govern the physical development of the office park, including: land use; the location of streets; building setbacks and lot coverage; parking; amenities such as landscaping, plantings, water features, pedestrian ways and trails; improvements such as water, sewerage and drainage; provisions such as signage and lighting; and, the orientation of main structures, building materials, and architecture. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7436-18)  
Secs. 45-1909—45-2000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - C1 RETAIL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Article XXXI, Overlay Zoning Districts, Hilton Village. 
 
Sec. 45-2001. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for business uses including offices, retail sales, retail services, business services and similar commercial activities. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2002. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2003. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: None 
(b)  Requirements for main buildings: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twelve (12) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Five (5) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Twenty-five (25) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: 
a.  All uses: Forty (40) feet. 
b.  Buildings may be higher than forty (40) feet provided the building is set back from the required side and rear yard one (1) foot for each foot of additional height above forty (40) feet. 
(3)  Minimum buffer area: 
a.  When abutting any single-family dwelling district: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  When abutting any multiple-family dwelling district: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Maximum floor area: Seventy-five (75) percent of lot area (Article XXVIII). 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent of lot area. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum yard setbacks: Same as for main building 
(2)  Maximum height: Same as for main building. 
(3)  See also Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2004. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2005. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2006. - Landscaping. 
A landscape plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the site plan ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required green areas, buffer areas, trees and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2007. - Traffic impact. 
A traffic impact study shall be filed with the site plan for any new development in this district if it is estimated that all uses in the development would collectively generate more than five thousand (5,000) trips per day, based on the most current ITE manual. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-2008—45-2100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - C2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-2101. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for a broad spectrum of general business uses including offices, retail sales, retail services, business services and other commercial activities such as automotive and marine sales and services. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2102. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2103. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: None. 
(b)  Requirements for main buildings: 
(1)  Minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twelve (12) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Five (5) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Twenty-five (25) feet for the side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: 
a.  All uses: Forty (40) feet. 
b.  Buildings may be higher than forty (40) feet provided the building is set back from the required side and rear yard one (1) foot for each foot of additional height above forty (40) feet. 
(3)  Minimum buffer area: 
a.  When abutting any single-family dwelling district: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  When abutting any multi-family dwelling district: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Maximum floor area: Fifty (50) percent of lot area (See Article XXVIII). 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent of lot area. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum yard setbacks: Same as for main building. 
(2)  Maximum height: Same as for main building. 
(3)  See Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2104. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2105. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2106. - Landscaping. 
A planting plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the site plan ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required green areas, buffer areas, trees and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2107. - Traffic impact. 
A traffic impact study shall be filed with the site plan for any new development in this district if it is estimated that all uses in the development would collectively generate more than five thousand (5,000) trips per day, based on the most current ITE manual. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-2108—45-2200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXII. - C3 REGIONAL BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-2201. - General. 
The purpose of this district is to encourage development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base, and to provide for stabilization and redevelopment of the geographic area known generally as the Downtown of Newport News. The area (henceforth referred to as the Regional Business District) is proposed for a concentration of professional and business offices, financial institutions, retail, manufacturing, municipal, cultural, transportation, entertainment and residential uses. 
To conserve the property values, facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community, and to promote an orderly development in this district, no building permit or other permit for construction or exterior alteration of any building or structure or the use of any land shall be issued until a project proposal report and/or site development plan as specified herein are recommended for approval to the site plan review committee in writing by the regional business district committee. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2202. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2203. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Every lot or parcel used for residential purposes in the Regional Business District shall meet the following dimensional requirements: 
(1)  For all dwelling units less than four (4) stories, there shall be no minimum lot size and the land density shall not exceed thirty (30) units per gross acre. 
(2)  Buildings of four (4) or more stories for residential use shall have a minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet which shall have a dimension of not less than fifty (50) feet at the front property line. There shall be provided on the lot or parcel containing a four (4) or more story residential building one (1) or more areas used for recreational and/or landscaped area equal to not less than fifteen (15) percent of the total floor area used for dwelling purposes. 
(b)  For non-residential uses, there shall be no minimum lot area, lot dimensions, or yards regulations in this district. Further regulations which shall apply are the following: 
(1)  A new non-residential building, structure, addition or site more than five thousand (5,000) square feet in gross floor area or site area shall provide a landscaped area no less than ten (10) percent of the lot area at a location forward of the rear building line. 
(2)  A new non-residential building, structure, addition or site of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less in gross floor area or site area shall provide a front and rear setback equal to the lesser of the setbacks provided on the adjoining lots. However, if any adjoining lot is undeveloped, a landscape area no less than ten (10) percent of the lot area at a location forward of the rear building line shall be provided. 
(3)  A new non-residential building, structure, addition or site of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less in gross floor area or site area may provide zero setbacks provided, however, that such building, structure, addition or site has been reviewed and approved by the regional business district review committee in accordance with the section 45-2211. 
(c)  For mixed residential and non-residential uses, the predominant gross floor area use shall determine the overall use of the building and the regulations governing such use shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6305-06)  
Sec. 45-2204. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2205. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
(a)  One on-site parking space or garage space per dwelling unit shall be provided, except as provided for by Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(b)  All off-street parking for commercial, community facilities and/or industrial uses shall be provided in accordance with a city council adopted parking management plan and a certificate as designated in such plan shall be obtained. 
(c)  Every building erected for non-residential activity which is determined by the zoning administrator to involve the distribution or receiving of materials or merchandise by motor vehicles shall provide and maintain on the same premises off-street loading spaces in conformity with Article XXX; provided further that when a combination of uses in loading group one, two or three are involved such that in the opinion of the zoning administrator one (1) or more loading spaces may be shared by the different uses, a reduction of up to fifty (50) percent of the total loading spaces may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2206. - General performance standards of design and operation. 
(a)  Landscaping. 
(1)  Any new non-residential building over the height of eighty (80) feet must provide a landscaped plaza or area at the street level equal to ten (10) percent of the lot area. Such area may be open to the sky, covered by the upper floors of the building, or covered by a bridge between the buildings or other structures, provided that such floor, bridge or structure leaves a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet in height and eight (8) feet in width at ground level. 
(2)  Off-street surface parking lots having at least fifteen (15) parking spaces shall provide a landscaped buffer ten (10) feet in width around the perimeter of the paved area designated for automobile parking (except for access points to public streets, alleys or plazas). 
(3)  Ground signs for buildings under eighty (80) feet in height shall provide five (5) square feet of landscaped ground area per square foot of sign area around the base of the sign. 
(4)  Street furnishings such as street furniture, pavement, plant materials, planter spacing and lighting shall be in accordance with the Regional Business District Development Manual approved and adopted by city council. 
(b)  Buffering provisions. 
(1)  Any new development adjoining a building originally and historically used as a church shall provide a landscape buffer at least fifteen (15) feet wide along the common property line, and such landscape buffer shall extend the entire length of the said property line. 
(2)  A twenty-foot wide landscape buffer shall be provided where a new non-residential use abuts an existing or approved residential use. However, no landscape buffer shall be required for a new building, structure, addition or site five thousand (5,000) square feet or less in gross floor area or site area. 
(3)  Any new non-residential development adjoining an existing residential use or an approved residential development shall provide a landscape buffer at least thirty (30) feet wide if the proposed development includes a structure fifty (50) feet or higher in height. Such required landscape buffer shall be provided the entire length of common property line. 
(4)  The landscape buffers required above may be reduced in size or width if the applicant adequately demonstrates that either: 
a.  The proposed development is similar in use, height and size with the use to be protected by the landscape buffer; and, the landscaping being provided in the reduced buffer will provide adequate screening to the adjoining use; or 
b.  The lot size, configuration, and orientation of the proposed development requires a smaller landscape buffer area; and, the landscaping being provided in the reduced buffer will provide adequate screening to the adjoining use. 
(5)  The landscape buffers required in this article shall contain living plants (i.e., trees, shrubs, ground covers or grass), natural features (i.e., rock, stone, bark chips, wood shavings or land contouring) and/or structural features (i.e., walls, pedestrian walkways, night lighting, street furnishings), and shall be designed and provided in accordance with the criteria in the Regional Business District Development Manual approved and adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Loading/unloading provisions. 
(1)  Any required off-street loading shall be constructed to be an integral part of the site being served and no vehicle using the loading spaces may project into any public right-of-way. 
(2)  Loading spaces may use the adjoining public right-of-way if the applicant sufficiently demonstrates (i) that no vehicle will project into any travel lane and (ii) that the use of the adjoining public right-of-way would create safer pedestrian and vehicular circulation on and off premises. 
(3)  Off-street loading space shall not be accessed from Washington Avenue, West Avenue, or Huntington Avenue except when the applicant sufficiently demonstrates that no other safe and convenient alternative is available for the development. 
(d)  Lighting provisions. 
(1)  Freestanding lighting fixtures shall conform to the design and color as provided in the Regional Business District Development Manual. 
(2)  Floodlighting utilized to highlight landscaping, building signs and/or distinctive architectural features of a building shall not produce glare or be directed to any off-site building or landscape feature. 
(3)  Primary pedestrian ways and major building entrance(s) shall be illuminated with at least five-foot candles of illumination measured at the pavement surface. 
(e)  General. 
(1)  All uses within the Regional Business District shall not produce excessive or unsafe noise, odors, glare, vibration, smoke, hazard or radiation, or waste. 
(2)  All storage in the Regional Business District shall be enclosed within a building. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2207. - Review committee. 
(a)  Within the Regional Business District, all preliminary and final development proposals for buildings, structures, additions or sites over five thousand (5,000) square feet gross floor area or site area and as provided in section 45-2203 B.3. will be reviewed by a committee which shall be comprised of the following members or their designees: 
(1)  Newport News City Manager, Chairman. 
(2)  Newport News Director of Planning, Vice Chairman. 
(3)  Newport News Redevelopment and Housing Authority Executive Director. 
(4)  A member of the Planning Commission appointed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission. 
(5)  A member of the Newport News Redevelopment and Housing Authority (NNRHA) appointed by the Chairman of the NNRHA Board. 
(6)  Two citizen members appointed by the planning commission. 
(b)  The regional business district review committee shall review the development proposals for conformity with this article and the Regional Business District Development Manual. Upon preliminary approval of the Review Committee, applicable projects shall be submitted to the Newport News Site Plan Review Committee in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan and Site Plan Ordinance. 
(c)  Said committee shall meet as necessary to expedite the review process and no less frequently than once every two (2) months when there is business before them. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6305-06)  
Sec. 45-2208. - Submittal requirements. 
(a)  The owner or developer of a new building, structure, addition or site over five thousand (5,000) square feet gross floor area or site area shall submit the proposed plan together with the payment of the filing fees in accordance with the provisions of this article to the director of planning not later than thirty (30) days prior to any scheduled meeting of the review committee. 
(b)  There is no filing fee when the owner or developer of a building, structure, addition or site of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less of gross floor area or site area submits plans for committee review in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The proposed plan shall include a site development plan and project proposal report in accordance with subsections (e) and (f) as described below. 
(d)  Before filing a site development plan and project proposal report, the developer may confer with the director of planning or his designated representative and such other agencies of the city as he or the director deems advisable concerning the general development concept. Such action is not to be construed as an application for approval in computing time limitations in relation thereto. 
(e)  The site development plan shall show the delineation at a scale of not less than one (1) inch to forty (40) feet the existing physical characteristics of the site, including: 
(1)  All information required for submission by the site plan review process. 
(2)  Proposed development schematics to explain the proposed development and its relationship with the surroundings. This may include perspective drawing(s), sketch elevation(s), photographs or a block model. 
(3)  The location and calculation of land which is intended for common, quasi-public, or amenity use but not proposed to be in public ownership, and draft proposed restrictions, agreements or other documents indicating the manner in which it will be held, owned and maintained in perpetuity for the indicated purposes. 
(4)  Justification for any requested reductions in required landscape buffers, or use of the public right-of-way for loading, or loading space access to Huntington Avenue, West Avenue or Washington Avenue. 
(f)  The project proposal report shall provide the following: 
(1)  A development program which shall state the sequence in which all structures, open space, amenities, and vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems are to be developed and a schedule of construction dates indicating the anticipated month of year of commencement and completion of the whole project and any major phases. 
(2)  For any residential use, the application shall state the type and number of units proposed. 
(3)  For any non-residential use, the project report shall include such sufficient data and evidence for an objective determination about noise levels, odors, glare, vibration, hazards and radiation, and waste associated with the proposed activity. 
(g)  Sign design shall be submitted as a part of the site plan as described in section 45-2208(e) or separately in accordance with this subsection. There is no filing fee for the sign design review, however, a request for the review shall be filed with the director of planning on a prescribed form along with the following documents: 
(1)  Site plan at a minimum scale of one (1) inch to forty (40) feet. Such site plan shall show the location of the proposed sign or signs, related structures and the proposed landscaping. 
(2)  Dimensioned elevations and/or photographs to illustrate the proposed sign locations and building facade relationship. 
(3)  True color samples, paint sample or sign manufacturers sample to illustrate the sign's palette of colors. 
(4)  Sign design showing framing dimensions, letter style and size and construction materials. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6305-06)  
Sec. 45-2209. - Review committee action. 
The regional business district review committee shall approve or disapprove the proposed development plan or sign design within sixty (60) days from the date of the final plan submission as specified in section 45-2208. The proposed plan shall be evaluated for compliance with the terms of this article and the mandatory criteria specified in the Regional Business District Development Manual. When disapproving a plan, the committee shall specify the reasons for disapproval and cite the provisions of this chapter, the comprehensive plan, the site plan ordinance and/or the Regional Business District Development Manual that have not been met. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2210. - Time requirements. 
After final approval by the review committee, all plans will be effective for a three-year time period and may be renewed for two-year increments upon written request to the review committee. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2211. - Relationship to the Newport News Comprehensive Plan and Site Plan Ordinance. 
(a)  No unapproved, disapproved or expired plan shall be approved by the Newport News Site Plan Review Committee for any project in the Regional Business District. Plans and reports submissions required by the site plan review committee and the Regional Business District Review Committee shall be coordinated according to the following process: 
(1)  Conference with the director of planning or his designee. 
(2)  Submission of required documents to the regional business district review committee for preliminary approval. 
(3)  Upon preliminary approval by the committee, the normal submission and approval process required by the site plan ordinance shall commence. 
(4)  Upon final approval of the site plan by the director of engineering, comments and recommendations shall be forwarded to the regional business district review committee for final action. 
(b)  Preliminary project review shall take no longer than twenty (20) days. Site plan review and final committee review shall also each take no longer than twenty (20) days, so that the entire review process shall not exceed sixty (60) days. Requests for additional information or resubmission shall not count against the sixty-day limit. Consequently, each resubmission shall begin a new sixty-day cycle. 
(c)  No clearing or building permits shall be issued until final project approval by the regional business district review committee has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6305-06)  
Sec. 45-2212. - Appeal. 
In the event the plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter is not approved, there may be an appeal from the decision of the committee to the board of zoning appeals provided the appeal is made in writing and filed with the zoning administrator within twenty (20) work days after notification of disapproval. In reviewing such appeal, and prior to any public hearing, the board shall refer the appeal to the city planning commission for its recommendation. The city planning commission, after referral of the appeal to the commission, shall review the appeal and submit its recommendation to the board within sixty (60) days of the first meeting of the planning commission, which report shall state whether the appeal is in harmony with the intent of applicable regulations of the regional business district. Failure of the planning commission to report within the prescribed sixty (60) day period shall be construed as an affirmative recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2213. - Filing fee. 
A one hundred dollar ($100.00) non-refundable filing fee shall be paid upon the filing of the site development plan and project proposal report. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2214. - Separability. 
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article (Regional Business District Regulations) is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-2216—45-2300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIII. - C4 OYSTER POINT BUSINESS DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-2301. - General. 
The purpose of this article is to establish district regulations creating a well organized, landscaped environment for Oyster Point business district which is proposed for a concentration of professional and business offices, financial institutions, retail, manufacturing, municipal, cultural, transportation and entertainment uses. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2302. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Generally, accessory uses and structures accessory to principal uses allowed in the district are permitted. However, certain accessory areas may have special requirements or need a special exception because of their impact. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2303. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot area: None. 
(b)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
(1)  Minimum front yard for all buildings: Thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Minimum side yard for all buildings: Ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard for all buildings: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(4)  Special setback: No improvements shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to Jefferson Avenue. 
(c)  Maximum height: One hundred twenty (120) feet; provided, one (1) foot of additional height is permitted above one hundred twenty (120) feet for each additional one (1) foot of setback from all required minimum setbacks. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent of lot area, but not less than ten (10) percent. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2304. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XXX, section 45-3004 and the landscaping requirements of the site plan ordinance. Loading areas shall be permitted only in side and rear yards and shall be screened by an opaque barrier. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2305. - Outside storage regulations. 
Outside storage shall not be permitted. Outside service areas shall be permitted only in side and rear yards and shall be screened by an opaque barrier. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2306. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2307. - Landscaping. 
See City Site Plan Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2308. - Traffic impact. 
A traffic impact study shall be filed with the site plan for any new development in this district if it is estimated that all uses in the development would collectively generate more than five thousand (5,000) trips per day, based on the most current ITE Trip Generation Manual. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-2309—45-2400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIV. - C5 OYSTER POINT BUSINESS/MANUFACTURING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-2401. - General. 
The purpose of this article is to establish district regulations creating the Oyster Point Business/Manufacturing district which is proposed for a concentration of manufacturing, industrial, institutional, transportation and supporting business uses. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2402. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402 
(b)  Accessory uses and structures. Generally, accessory uses and structures accessory to principal uses allowed in the district are permitted. However, certain accessory areas may have special requirements or need a special exception because of their impact. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2403. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot area: None. 
(b)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
(1)  Minimum front yard for all buildings: Thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Minimum side yard for all buildings: Ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard for all buildings: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(4)  Special setback: No improvements shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to Jefferson Avenue. 
(c)  Maximum height: Forty (40) feet; provided, one (1) foot of additional height is permitted above forty (40) feet for each additional one (1) foot of setback from all required minimum setbacks. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent of lot area. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6528-08)  
Sec. 45-2404. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
Off street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Article XXVIII, section 45-3004 and the landscaping requirements of the site plan ordinance. Loading areas shall be permitted only in side and rear yards and shall be screened by an opaque barrier. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2405. - Outside storage regulations. 
With the approval of the director of planning and development, outside storage and outside service areas shall be permitted only in the side and rear yards and shall be screened by an opaque barrier. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2406. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2407. - Landscaping. 
See City Site Plan Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2408. - Traffic impact. 
A traffic impact study shall be filed with the site plan for any new development in this district if it is estimated that all uses in the development would collectively generate more than five thousand (5,000) trips per day, based on the most current ITE Trip Generation Manual. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-2409—45-2500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXV. - M1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-2501. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for light industrial activities. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2502. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2503. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: None. 
(b)  Requirements for main buildings: 
(1)  Minimum yard requirements: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Ten (10) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: 
a.  All uses: Forty (40) feet. 
b.  Buildings may be higher than forty (40) feet provided the building is set back from the required side and rear yard one (1) foot for each foot of additional height above forty (40) feet. 
(3)  Minimum buffer area: 
a.  When abutting any single-family dwelling district: Forty (40) feet. 
b.  When abutting any multiple-family dwelling district: Thirty (30) feet. 
c.  When abutting any commercial district: Twenty (20) feet. 
d.  When abutting the downtown RBD district: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Maximum floor area: Seventy (70) percent of lot area (See Article XXVIII). 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage. Fifty (50) percent of lot area. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum yard setbacks: Same as for main building. 
(2)  Maximum height: Same as for main building. 
(3)  See also Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2504. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2505. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2506. - Landscaping. 
A planting plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the site plan ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required green areas, buffer areas, trees, and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2507. - Traffic impact. 
A traffic impact study shall be filed with the site plan for any new development in this district if all uses in the development would collectively generate more than five thousand (5,000) trips per day, based on the most current ITE Trip Generation manual. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-2508—45-2600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVI. - M2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-2601. - General. 
The intent of this article is to establish district regulations for heavy industrial uses. Because of the impactive nature of uses allowed in this district, this district is not intended to be located near areas of residential development. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2602. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Principal uses. Principal uses permitted in this district are set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Generally, uses accessory to principal uses allowed in this district are permitted. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. See Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2603. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: None. 
(b)  Requirements for main buildings: 
(1)  Minimum yard setbacks: 
a.  Front yard: Thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
c.  Side yard: 
1.  Interior lot: Twenty (20) feet. 
2.  Corner lot: Thirty (30) feet for side yard along the street. 
(2)  Maximum height: 
a.  All uses: Forty (40) feet. 
b.  Buildings may be higher than forty (40) feet provided the building is set back from the required side and rear yard one (1) foot for each foot of additional height above forty (40) feet. 
(3)  Minimum buffer width: 
a.  When abutting any single-family dwelling district: Forty (40) feet. 
b.  When abutting any multiple-family dwelling district: Thirty (30) feet. 
c.  When abutting any commercial district: Twenty (20) feet. 
d.  When abutting the downtown RBD district: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  Maximum floor area: Seventy (70) percent of lot area (See Article XXVIII). 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage. Fifty (50) percent of lot area. 
(c)  Requirements for accessory buildings and structures: 
(1)  Minimum yard setbacks: Same as for main building. 
(2)  Maximum height: Same as for main building. 
(3)  See also Article XXVIII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2604. - Off-street parking requirements. 
See Article XXX, section 45-3004. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2605. - Sign regulations. 
See City Code Chapter 33.01. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2606. - Landscaping. 
A planting plan shall be filed with the site plan required by the site plan ordinance of the City Code and shall show all required green areas, buffer areas, trees, and plantings. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2607. - Traffic impact. 
A traffic impact study shall be filed with the site plan for any new development in this district if all uses in the development would collectively generate more than five thousand (5,000) trips per day, based on the most current ITE Trip Generation Manual. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-2608—45-2700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVII. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 45-2701. - Purpose and intent. 
Within zoning districts, certain uses are of a nature requiring special review to determine whether they should be permitted in specified locations because of their impact on surrounding areas. Special conditions and safeguards may be applied if permission is granted in such locations. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2702. - Generally. 
The city council may authorize, by issuance of a conditional use permit, the use of land in a district in accordance with article IV, section 45-402, summary of uses by district, and may specify special conditions and safeguards governing the use authorized. 
A conditional use permit shall be issued only if all of the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  That the specific use will be compatible with and not injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property, nor significantly diminish or impair property values within the immediate vicinity; 
(2)  That the establishment of the specific use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property; 
(3)  That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary supporting facilities have been or will be provided; 
(4)  That the design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces provide for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent developments; 
(5)  That adequate nuisance prevention measures have been or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor, fumes, dust, noise and vibration; 
(6)  That directional lighting is provided so as not to disturb or adversely affect neighboring properties; 
(7)  That there are sufficient landscaping and screening to insure harmony and compatibility with adjacent property; 
(8)  That the proposed use is in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
The city council will not consider applications for uses which would be permitted as special exceptions in article XXXII. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2703. - Application requirements. 
Applications for a conditional use permit shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the director of planning. 
(2)  Such applications shall be made in the name of, and signed by, the owner of the property or a person having power of attorney from the owner. 
(3)  Such applications shall completely disclose the equitable ownership of the real estate to be affected including, in the case of corporate ownership, the names of stockholders, officers and directors and in any case the names and addresses of all of the real parties of interest. However, the requirement of listing names of stockholders, officers and directors shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is traded on a national or local stock exchange and having more than five hundred (500) shareholders. In the case of a condominium, the requirement shall apply only to the title owner, contract purchaser, or lessee if they own ten (10) percent or more of the units in the condominium. 
(4)  The application shall be accompanied by: 
a.  A written description of the nature and extent of the specific use for which a conditional use permit is being requested and a written explanation of how the conditions of section 45-2702 have been satisfied in order to warrant approval of the requested permit. 
b.  A legal description of the property for which the conditional use is requested. 
c.  Ten (10) copies and one (1) eight and one-half (8½) inch by eleven (11) inch reproducible copy of a site plan including a drawing or drawings of the proposed conditional use; such drawing shall be drawn to scale and in such manner as to show clearly the following information: 
1.  The actual dimensions and shape of the property; 
2.  The exact size and location on the property of existing and proposed structures; 
3.  The existing and proposed uses of all structures and open areas; 
4.  The name of the owner, as well as the name of any other person preparing the plan, together with the north point, scale and number of sheets of the plan; 
5.  Such additional supporting information as may be deemed necessary by the director of planning to perform the evaluations required herein, including but not limited to: topography, ingress and egress, traffic impact, vegetation, surrounding land uses, proposed connections to existing or proposed water, sewer and drainage facilities, and landscaping. 
(5)  Applications shall not be processed unless the applicant provides satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city which have been properly assessed against the subject property have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5865-02; Ord. No. 7315-16)  
Sec. 45-2704. - Filing fee. 
No action shall be taken on any application for a conditional use permit until the applicant shall have paid a filing fee to the City of Newport News in the amount of eight hundred dollars ($800.00), which shall not be refundable. An additional non-refundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be paid by the applicant for each continuance requested by the petitioner or his agent. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6416-07, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2705. - Procedure. 
(a)  Staff review. Prior to actions by the planning commission, review of said application shall be made to determine the possible impact of the proposal on the surrounding community and the administrative and enforcement aspects of the permit. The director of planning and development shall develop such report in coordination with appropriate city departments. When the parcel under consideration drains into any of the city's reservoirs, a recommendation from the director of waterworks shall be solicited and included as part of the planning and development director's report. 
(b)  Action by city planning commission. Following public notice as required by the law of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a use permit. Following such hearing, the commission shall prepare a report indicating its recommendation as to whether the use permit should be granted and as to conditions and safeguards, if any, which should be required in the particular case, based upon findings as to conformity with the general standards set forth in section 45-2702 above. Such recommendations shall be transmitted to the city council. 
(c)  Review by Hilton Village Architectural Review Board. Whenever an application for a conditional use permit is made for any property within the Hilton Village Historic District, as defined in article XXXI, the planning and development or zoning departments shall refer such applications to the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board for review and recommendation prior to making a recommendation to the city council on such application. The architectural review board shall make its report to the planning commission within thirty (30) days after the date the application was referred to the board. 
(d)  Action by city council. After receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, and following public notice as provided by law of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the city council shall hold a public hearing on each application for a conditional use permit. Following such hearing, the city council shall grant or deny the application for the conditional use permit with conditions and safeguards as recommended by the planning commission or with such appropriate modification of such conditions and safeguards. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7204-15)  
Sec. 45-2706. - Submission of final plans. 
When preliminary or final development plans or site plans are required, they shall contain in writing on the plan any conditions approved by the city council and be submitted to the department of engineering for final review and action. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2707. - Application to property. 
The occupant of a parcel of land may, in addition to any uses permitted by right for the zoning district as specified in Article IV, section 45-402, engage in the use for which he has obtained a conditional use permit, as long as the conditions attached thereto are complied with. All other regulations of the zoning district in which the use is located shall apply and remain in force unless modified by the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5233-98)  
Sec. 45-2708. - Time limit. 
Conditional use permits granted by the city council shall be deemed to have been abandoned and are hereby revoked twenty-four (24) months from the date the permit was approved in the event the construction or occupancy necessary to the use for which the permit was granted has not been commenced, unless extended by the city council. The commencement of construction shall be considered as the completing of any necessary foundation work. In addition, conditional use permits granted by city council shall be deemed to have been abandoned and are hereby revoked after twenty-four (24) months of continuous nonuse of the property for the use for which the permit was granted, or after the expiration of a time limit attached as a condition of the use, unless extended by the city council. For good cause shown, the city council may grant an extension of the conditional use permit for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) months. The city council may grant an additional extension; provided, however, that any request for such additional extension shall first be referred to the planning commission for its review and recommendations. A request for such an extension shall be made in writing, by the property owner or his duly authorized agent, and filed with the director of planning and development at least forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration date of the permit or extension. If a conditional use permit is abandoned and revoked, then all regulations and uses of the zoning district in which the use was located shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6415-07)  
Sec. 45-2709. - Hearings. 
(a)  Deferral of an application. An applicant may request the planning commission to defer action on an application for a conditional use permit. When such request is granted, the applicant shall pay a reprocessing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) before the application is considered by the planning commission. The fee shall not be required for an administrative deferral. 
(b)  Withdrawal of an application. An application for a conditional use permit may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to a public hearing; provided such request is filed by 5:00 p.m. on the Thursday prior to the public hearing; however; any resubmittal shall be deemed a new application. 
(c)  Denial of application. If the conditional use permit is denied by city council, substantially the same application shall not be reconsidered within one (1) year of denial. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2710. - Violations. 
Violation of a conditional use permit or any conditions and safeguards attached thereto shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and subject to the penalties and remedies set forth in Article XXXV. The city council may revoke a conditional use permit for violation of any terms or conditions thereof; provided, that ten (10) days written notice is given to the applicant or his successor and a public hearing is held following public notice as provided in Section 15.2-2204, of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
If a conditional use permit is terminated by the city council, then the regulations and uses of the zoning district shall apply to the property in which the use was located. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5268-99; Ord. No. 5667-01, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2711. - Appeals of city council decisions. 
Every action contesting a decision of the city council failing to grant a proposed conditional use permit shall be filed within thirty (30) days of such decision with the circuit court having jurisdiction of the land affected by the decision. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to create any new right to contest the action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-2712—45-2800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXVIII. - MODIFICATIONS AND ADJUSTMENTS OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-2801. - Purpose of article. 
The requirements set forth in this article modify, supplement or qualify the district regulations which appear elsewhere in this chapter, and shall apply in the specific areas enumerated. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2802. - Modifications to yard regulations. 
(a)  General modifications. 
(1)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by a building, structure or use except for: 
a.  Accessory buildings permitted in accordance with this ordinance; 
b.  The ordinary projection, not to exceed three (3) feet, of sills, belt courses, chimneys, pilasters, cornices and ornamental features; provided, such projections are not closer than three (3) feet from any lot line where a yard is required in this ordinance; and 
c.  Off-street parking spaces in a front, side or rear yard; provided, that no space within a clear-sight triangle composed of two (2) twenty-foot legs of the property lines abutting intersecting streets shall be occupied by off-street parking spaces. 
(2)  Terraces, steps, decks, and uncovered porches may project into the required side or rear yard not more than five (5) feet; provided, they do not come closer than three (3) feet to the side property line nor closer than fifteen (15) feet to the rear property line. 
(3)  Open fire escapes and mechanical equipment may project into a required side or rear yard; provided, that they be located not closer than three (3) feet to any side or rear property line. 
(b)  Front yard modifications. The front yard regulations shall be adjusted in applicable cases as follows: 
(1)  Where existing buildings occupy lots comprising fifty (50) percent of the block, the average setback of the existing buildings shall be taken in lieu of the front yard otherwise required. After a block is fifty (50) percent developed and the average setback of the existing buildings has been determined, such average shall not be reduced by the erection of new buildings and enclosed additions on the front of existing buildings in such block. 
(2)  In cases of double frontage lots, front yards shall be provided along each street frontage. 
(3)  Chimneys, unenclosed covered and uncovered stoops and porches, decks or other unenclosed projections may project no more than eight (8) feet into any front yard; provided, that no such projection may be nearer than fifteen (15) feet to the front property line. 
(4)  On corner lots where both intersecting streets are designated either as major or secondary thoroughfares on the Transportation Plan, the setback for major thoroughfares shall apply to both the front and the side yards abutting such streets; provided, however, that the buildable width of a nonconforming lot of record shall not be required to be less than forty (40) feet. 
(5)  Special setbacks shall be provided along all streets classified as major thoroughfares in conformity with section 45-2808 of this article. 
(6)  Gasoline supply station pumps and pump islands, including accompanying unenclosed canopies, may be located within a front yard in the C3 or in any M district; provided they are located not less than fifteen (15) feet from the property line; and in no district shall these accessory uses be located less than fifty (50) feet from the boundary line of any residential district. 
(c)  Lot or site width front, setback modifications. The required lot width shall be established at the recorded front yard setback line. The front yard setback line may be recorded at a distance no greater than ten (10) feet farther from the front lot line than the minimum front yard set back required by this ordinance. 
(d)  Rear yard modifications. Where the rear line of a lot abuts an alley, up to one-half (½) of the width of such alley may be counted toward the required rear yard, but in no case shall the required rear yard be reduced to less than five (5) feet. 
(e)  Transitional buffer area required between zoning districts of different intensity. 
(1)  A special transitional buffer area shall be required in any zoning district when that zoning district abuts a lower intensity zoning district and shall be measured from the zoning district line to produce a transitional buffer area with the minimum width indicated by the following table 28-1. 
TABLE 28-1 

TRANSITIONAL BUFFER AREA REQUIRED BETWEEN 

ZONING DISTRICTS OF DIFFERENT INTENSITIES 
Abutting

(Higher Intensity) 

District 	Abutted (Lower Intensity) District 
	R1, R2, 
R3, R4 	P1 	R5, R6, 
R7, R8 	R9, O1, O2, O3, C1, C2, C3, C4 
R5, R6, R7, R8 	20 feet 	— 	— 	— 
P1 	20 feet 	— 	— 	— 
R9, O1, O2, O3, C1, C2, C3, C4 	30 feet 	20 feet 	20 feet 	— 
M1, M2, C5 	40 feet 	30 feet 	30 feet 	20 feet 
 
(2)  In accordance with section 45-3128(d) of this article, transitional buffer areas shall not be required within the neighborhood conservation district when multiple family zoning districts abut single-family zoning districts. 
(3)  The term "transitional buffer area" as used in this section shall apply to the area in the higher intensity district between the principal use and the zoning district line. This transitional buffer area shall contain a minimum number of plant materials in order to meet the standards set forth in this section and to provide the required vegetative density. The required vegetative density for transitional buffer area(s) shall be defined as each four hundred (400) square feet of transitional buffer areas (created by a twenty-foot by twenty-foot grid, excluding approved improvements, easements, or accessways) which contains at least two (2) healthy trees of two-inch caliper measured six (6) inches above the ground for single-stemmed deciduous trees or for multi-stemmed or evergreen trees, no less than eight (8) feet in height, or a combination thereof; and two (2) large growing evergreen shrubs, with a minimum height of forty-eight (48) inches, capable of reaching ten (10) feet at maturity. It is the purpose and intent of this ordinance that in the transitional buffer area(s) the owner of said property shall retain existing mature vegetation and to supplement such vegetation where necessary to meet the vegetative density defined above. All transitional buffer area(s) shall be properly maintained to assure that they will function effectively and continuously. 
The transitional buffer area shall contain no structure or improvements that promote or encourage the concentration of people, vehicles, or noise or otherwise produce conditions not compatible with the intensity of uses permitted in the abutted lower intensity district. 
When supplementing the plant materials in the area(s) buffer to meet the required vegetative density, any re-vegetation shall require the planting of two (2) trees (one (1) shall be a large growing variety and one (1) shall be a small growing variety) per four hundred (400) square feet of transitional buffer area. If the two (2) trees will be newly installed, then one (1) shall be evergreen, and one (1) shall be deciduous. The minimum sizes for the installed trees shall be two-inch caliper, measured six (6) inches above the ground, for single stemmed, deciduous trees, and eight (8) feet in height for multi-stemmed or evergreen trees. 
In addition to the trees, two (2) large growing evergreen shrubs, with a minimum forty-eight (48) inches installed height, shall be required every four hundred (400) square feet of transitional buffer area for transitional buffer areas non-adjacent to public streets. For transitional buffer areas adjacent to public streets, the installation of three (3) low growing shrubs, capable of maturing at three (3) feet in height shall be required for every four hundred (400) square feet of transitional buffer area. The low growing shrubs may be evergreen or deciduous, with a minimum installed height and/or spread of eighteen (18) inches. When visual barriers are required by Site Regulations Section 33.02-51(6)c. and the two (2) land areas coincide, then the visual barrier shrub requirement shall govern and serve to fulfill the transitional buffer area shrub requirement. 
Hand grooming of dead, diseased, or injured vegetation, and removal of nuisance vines shall be permitted within transitional buffer area(s). No grading shall be permitted within transitional buffer area(s). Maintenance of grass, and removal of weeds, trash and debris as specified in sections 13-150 and 13-180 of the City Code shall be required. All plant materials, pre-existing or newly installed, within the transitional buffer area(s) shall be maintained in perpetuity in accordance with an approved site plan or development plan whichever is applicable. Appropriate plant replacements shall be provided in the event that fifty (50) percent or more of a plants' vegetation is diseased, damaged or dead and the affected vegetation creates a deficit or void in the required vegetative density. 
Tree protection fencing for existing vegetation shall be erected prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit and shall be maintained until all construction activities on the site have been completed. The limits of tree protection fencing shall be established no closer than five (5) feet outside the dripline of the existing vegetation and shall be a minimum height of forty (40) inches and sufficient to prevent intrusion into the protected area. The location, type and installation details for the tree protection fencing shall be clearly shown on the approved site plan or development plan whichever is applicable. 
(4)  If the transitional buffer area does not abut a public street and contains existing vegetation (trees, shrubs, or ground covers) the transitional buffer area shall remain undisturbed, in its natural state, and supplemented, where necessary, to meet the required vegetative density. Within the transitional buffer area, all existing healthy trees, shrubs, and ground covers shall be preserved and protected. Hand grooming shall be limited to the removal of dead, diseased, or injured limbs. If the transitional buffer area does not meet the required vegetative density, then additional plant materials (except those trees prohibited in the Site Regulations, Section 33.02-51.(c)(2)e.) shall be planted in conformance with the standards of the most recent edition of the "American Standards for Nursery Stock" and the standards defined above. 
(5)  If the transitional buffer area abuts a public street(s), then removal of existing shrubs or ground covers and/or trees less than six (6) inches in caliper shall be permitted with an approved landscape plan showing the required re-vegetation of one (1) large tree, one (1) small tree and three (3) low growing shrubs. Existing overstory trees may be "limbed-up" to a maximum height of ten (10) feet above the tree base and existing understory trees may be "limbed-up" to a maximum height of six (6) feet. The landscape plan shall provide the required vegetative density (consisting of either newly proposed and/or existing) and replacement plant materials as set forth above. 
(6)  When the zoning line falls on a public street, railroad, or other public right-of-way, the buffer shall begin along the property line of the higher intensity district. Where the zoning line falls within a body of water, the buffer shall begin at the edge of mean low water of the higher intensity district. However, pedestrian and vehicular access such as sidewalks, driveways, entrances, landscaping, plantings, street furniture and the like shall be permitted in buffers along public streets, railroads, other public rights-of-way, and bodies of water. 
(7)  For undeveloped sites that are greater than ninety thousand (90,000) square feet, when a required buffer coincides or shares land area with an easement, the transitional buffer area width or easement width shall be relocated so that they will not coincide or overlap. The relocation of either area shall begin at the adjacent interior shared edge of the transitional buffer area or easement. In determining the relocation of the area(s), consideration shall be given to existing trees/vegetation residing on the site. The transitional buffer area(s) shall be located to maximize the inclusion of naturally occurring trees/vegetation on the site. Where no vegetation exists within the transitional buffer area(s), plant materials shall be installed, maintained and replaced in accordance to [sub]section (2) above. 
(8)  For redeveloped sites or sites that are equal to or less than ninety thousand (90,000) square feet, collocation of easements and transitional buffer areas shall be permitted up to fifty (50) percent of the greater of the two (2) widths. Should the easement width be greater than the transitional buffer area width, no more than fifty (50) percent of the transitional buffer area width shall coincide within the easement area. In determining the collocation of the areas, consideration shall be given to existing trees/vegetation residing on the site. The transitional buffer area(s) shall be located to maximize the inclusion of naturally occurring trees/vegetation on site. Where no vegetation exists within the transitional buffer area(s), plant materials shall be installed, maintained and replaced in accordance to [sub]section (2) above. The portion of the transitional buffer area that is collocated within an easement shall be exempt from re-vegetation, but that same portion shall remain a green area consisting of a viable turf grass and maintained according to sections 13-150 and 13-180 of the City Code. 
(9)  Within a transitional buffer area, an easement shall be permitted to cross the transitional buffer area in such a way as to minimize the land area impacted by the crossing and shall be excluded from the re-vegetation requirement. All breaks shall cross transitional buffer areas at right angles. 
(10)  The board of zoning appeals may grant a special exception for the use or reduction of the transitional buffer area subject to the conditions prescribed in Article XXXII, section 45-3204. 
(f)  Special provisions for the waiver of yard requirements in commercial zoning districts. In order to allow the subdivision of commercial property on which commercial units are for sale, for sale in condominium or for lease and which are constructed as part of a multi-unit structure in which the units share common walls or as part of a multiple-structure commercial development, and provided the entire development has been planned and designed as a cohesive, coordinated unit under a single master plan, a waiver may be granted from any part of section 45-2003, section 45-2103 and section 45-2203 upon finding that: 
(1)  The overall complex or structure, if considered as a single unit, meets all of the requirements of section 45-2003, section 45-2103 or section 45-2203 upon finding that; 
(2)  Adequate parking is provided as per the requirements of this chapter and, where deemed necessary by the commission, adequate easements or other agreements are recorded to guarantee access and maintenance of the parking areas and other common areas. 
(g)  Side yard modifications. For additions to buildings on developed corner lots existing on the date the zoning ordinance became effective, August 1, 1997, the required side yard along the street shall be established as a straight line drawn from the closest side corner(s) of the building and extended to the rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5096-98, § 1; Ord. No. 5723-02; Ord. No. 6572-09; Ord. No. 6728-10)  
Sec. 45-2803. - Modification of lot frontage. 
The minimum lot frontage of a lot shall be not less than the lot width at the front yard setback line. The frontage of any lot located on the turnaround of a cul-de-sac (dead-end street) may be reduced to not less than that specified for a cul-de-sac in each district. Except where easements or topography require otherwise, in single-family detached subdivisions lot lines shall be established radially on culs-de-sac and curvilinear streets and perpendicular to the right-of-way on straight streets. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2804. - Modification to lot area and floor area ratio regulations. 
(a)  Usable land area. Not less than eighty (80) percent of the minimum lot area required by the zoning ordinance shall be usable land by reason of elevation above flood level and not less than fifty (50) percent of such required minimum lot area shall be usable by reason of absence of easements or servitudes; provided, however, that all of the minimum area required for the building itself together with its required front, side and rear yard lines shall be usable land. 
(b)  For computing floor area ratio. Within any district in which floor area ratio is specified as a regulation, such permissible floor area shall be computed based on the actual lot area and the actual floor area. To be excluded from total floor area, parking or recreational space shall be specifically equipped and permanently reserved for such use. Any open area which includes permissible facilities such as a swimming pool, roof gardens, sitting areas or other such uses shall be regarded as creditable recreational area only if such areas meet all of the requirements specified below. For computing the permitted floor area, the following shall be excluded from the computation of total floor area: 
(1)  The total area used on the same lot for required off-street parking spaces permanently located within any enclosed building or structure. 
(2)  The actual open area used for recreational activities located within or upon buildings or structures; provided: 
a.  Such space is open, usable and accessible to all persons who occupy dwelling units on the same premises; provided, however, that for the purposes of safety of the residents, such facilities may be restricted to use during reasonable hours. 
b.  No dimension of such recreational area shall be less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
c.  Such areas are located on the same lot as the principal use it serves. 
(c)  For computing open lot area. Within a district in which open lot area is specified as a regulation for multiple-dwelling units, such open lot area shall be computed by subtracting such area of a lot as may be covered by an existing or proposed building or structure from the total lot area, or in lieu thereof, the adjusted lot area as defined in this section. 
(d)  Adjustment to lot area requirement for number of bedrooms. The lot area or open lot area requirement, as the case may be, for multiple dwelling uses required in this chapter applies to dwelling units having two (2) bedrooms exclusive of any floor area used or designed to be used primarily for other than sleeping purposes. In any zoning district where a multiple-family dwelling project contains dwelling units containing either more or less than two (2) bedrooms, the required minimum lot area or open lot area shall be adjusted for such dwelling units according to the following table: 
TABLE 28-2 

ADJUSTMENTS FOR REQUIRED LOT AREA OR OPEN LOT AREA 
Number of Bedrooms in Dwelling Unit 	Increase or Decrease in Minimum Lot Area or Open Lot Area 
4 Bedrooms or more 	Add 200 square feet per dwelling unit 
3 Bedrooms 	Add 100 square feet per dwelling unit 
1 Bedroom 	Subtract 100 square feet per dwelling unit 
Efficiency Apartment 	Subtract 200 square feet per dwelling unit 
 
(e)  For computing lot coverage. The percentage of lot coverage shall be computed by dividing the total ground floor area of proposed buildings or structures by the total area of the developed site as follows: 
Lot Coverage = (Total Ground Floor Area Division ° Total Site Area) × 100% 
In determining lot coverage, the following shall be excluded from ground floor area: surface parking lots; underground parking structures; recreational amenities and features such as swimming pools, fountains, walks, gardens, sitting areas; and, works of art. The ground floor area of above ground parking structures also shall be excluded when an equivalent amount of recreational or landscaped open space is provided on the same developed site. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2805. - Modification to height regulations. 
Height regulations may be adjusted as follows: 
(1)  Public buildings. Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, schools or institutions when permitted in a district maybe erected to any height if the building is set back from the side and rear yard lines one (1) additional foot for each one (1) foot of building height above the height limit of the district in which the building is located. 
(2)  Projections above maximum height limitations. The height regulations of this chapter shall not apply to parapet walls extending not more than four (4) feet above the limiting height of the building, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, fire towers, cooling towers, elevator head houses, silos, ornamental towers, chimney flues, flagpoles, or antennas. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2806. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
Accessory buildings and structures may be constructed in a rear or side yard in conformity with regulations for accessory buildings in the district in which such use is located and the following regulations: 
(1)  Percent of yard covered. Not more than thirty (30) percent of a required rear yard shall be occupied by an accessory building or structure. 
(2)  When part of main building. Accessory buildings and structures located closer than ten (10) feet to the main building shall be construed to be a part of the main building for the purposes of yard regulations and such buildings and structures, whether connected to the main building or not, shall observe all front, side and rear yard regulations applicable to main buildings. 
(3)  Construction and use. No accessory building and structure shall be authorized or constructed upon a lot until the construction of a main building has been completed; and no accessory building and structure shall be used until the main building has been completed and is in use. 
(4)  Tents. Tents or tent-like structures shall not be erected as main buildings on any lot or tract in any district, temporarily or permanently, unless specifically provided for in the district regulations. 
(5)  Prohibited in front yards. Accessory buildings and structures shall not be permitted in the front yard of properties used for individual single-family, two-family, mobile home and townhouse units. 
However, if a main building is farther from the street than the front yard setback line established by a recorded subdivision plat, then an accessory building or structure may be placed in the portion of the front yard between the main building and the setback observed by the adjacent main building farthest from the street on the adjoining lots. 
(6)  Maximum height and floor area. The overall height and floor area of accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed one and one-half (1½) stories, the height or ground floor area of the main building on properties used for individual single-family, two-family, mobile homes and townhouse units. 
(7)  Signs, fences, walls and obstructions. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to alter or amend the provisions of Article XXVII of this Chapter or Chapter 33.01, Signs, of the City Code. Neither shall this section be construed to alter or amend the provisions of section 45-2807, Walls, Fences and Obstructions, below. 
(8)  Side yard modifications. For accessory buildings and structures on developed corner lots existing on the date the zoning ordinance became effective, August 1, 1997, the required side yard along the street shall be established as a straight line drawn from the closest side corner(s) of the building or structure and extended to the rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5096-98, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2807. - Walls, fences and obstructions. 
(a)  Applicability. Yard requirements shall not apply to any necessary retaining wall, nor shall they apply to fences or other walls which are erected in conformity with other applicable municipal ordinances. 
(b)  Corner lots. On a corner lot, no planting, wall, fence, sign, display, or other obstruction to motorists' vision shall be planted, erected or maintained at any height between three (3) feet and ten (10) feet above the adjoining street curb grade or the edge of pavement, whichever is higher, within a clear sight triangle comprised of two (2) twenty (20) foot legs measured from the point of intersection of the property lines that abut rights-of-way. This section shall not apply in the C3 zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2808. - Special building setbacks along expressways, arterials and collector streets. 
The special setback regulations included in this section shall apply to buildings and structures in all districts abutting any portion of the expressways, arterials and collector streets in the following table 28-3 where the minimum front yard requirements would produce a building line closer to the centerline of the proposed right-of-way than the special building setback requirements listed: 
Table 28-3 
SPECIAL BUILDING SETBACKS ALONG EXPRESSWAYS, 
ARTERIALS AND COLLECTOR STREETS 
Street Classification 	Right-of-Way 
Width 
(in feet) 	Street Name 	From 	To 	Special Setback 
from Center of 
Right-of-Way 
(in feet) 
EXPRESSWAY 	120 	CSX Corridor 	35th Street 	James City County 	140 
EXPRESSWAY 	100 	CSX Corridor 	35th Street 	25th Street 	100 
ARTERIAL 	120 	Warwick Blvd. 	Mercury Blvd. 	J. Clyde Morris Blvd. 	90 
ARTERIAL 	80 	Briarfield Road 	Jefferson Avenue 	City of Hampton 	70 
ARTERIAL 	100 	Harpersville Rd. 	Ferguson Lane 	Warwick Blvd. 	80 
ARTERIAL 	120 	Oyster Point Rd. 	Jefferson Avenue 	Warwick Blvd. 	90 
ARTERIAL 	120 	Atkinson Blvd. 	Jefferson Ave. 	Ft. Eustis Blvd. 	90 
ARTERIAL 	120 	J. Clyde Morris Blvd. 	Jefferson Avenue 	Warwick Blvd. 	90 
ARTERIAL 	80 	Yorktown Road 	Warwick Boulevard 	I-64 	70 
ARTERIAL 	80 	Yorktown Road 	Jefferson Avenue 	York County 	70 
ARTERIAL 	100 	Warwick Blvd. Relocated 	Ft. Eustis Blvd. 	James City County 	80 
ARTERIAL 	80 	Warwick Blvd. 	Relocated Warwick Blvd. 	Yorktown Road 	70 
COLLECTOR 	80 	Denbigh Blvd. 	Moyer Rd. 	Catalina Dr. 	70 
COLLECTOR 	80 	Harpersville Rd. 	Hampton Roads Center Parkway 	J. Clyde Morris Blvd. 	70 
COLLECTOR 	70 	Lucas Creek Rd. 	Denbigh Blvd. 	Warwick Blvd. 	65 
COLLECTOR 	60 	Lucas Creek Rd. 	Old Lucas Creek Rd. 	Menchville Rd. 	60 
COLLECTOR 	100 	Lucas Creek Rd. Extended 	Warwick Blvd. 	Atkinson Blvd. 	80 
COLLECTOR 	60 	Richneck Road 	Woodside Lane 	York County 	60 
COLLECTOR 	100 	Saunders Road 	City of Hampton 	Harpersville Road 	80 
COLLECTOR 	100 	Turnberry Blvd. 	Jefferson Ave. 	Old Denbigh Rd. 	80 
 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6992-13; Ord. No. 7379-17)  
Secs. 45-2809—45-2900. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXIX. - NONCONFORMING USES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Article XXXII. 
 
Sec. 45-2901. - General. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the impairment of any vested right; except that uses existing at the effective date of this chapter which do not conform to the zoning prescribed for the district in which they are situated may be continued only so long as: 
(1)  The then existing or a more restricted use continues; 
(2)  Such use is not discontinued for more than two (2) years; 
(3)  The buildings or structures are maintained in their then structural condition; and 
(4)  The uses of such buildings or structures shall conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located whenever they are enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, except as provided elsewhere in this article. 
(5)  No nonconforming building or structure may be moved on the same lot or to any other lot which is not properly zoned to permit such nonconforming use. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city, after making a reasonable attempt to notify such property owner, from ordering the removal of a nonconforming sign that has been abandoned. For purposes of this section, a sign shall be considered abandoned if the business for which the sign was erected has not been in operation for a period of at least two (2) years. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the land owner or home owner from removing a valid nonconforming manufactured home from a mobile or manufactured home park and replacing that home with another comparable manufactured home that meets the current HUD manufactured housing code. In such mobile or manufactured home park, a single-section home may replace a single-section home and a multi-section home may replace a multi-section home. The owner of a valid non-conforming manufactured home not located in a mobile or manufactured home park may replace that home with a newer manufactured home, either single- or multi-section, that meets the current HUD manufactured housing code. Any such replacement home shall retain the valid nonconforming status of the prior home. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5954-03, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2902. - Reconstruction. 
In the event that all or a part of a nonconforming structure or structure supporting a nonconforming use is destroyed by accidental fire, excluding arson committed by the property owner, or by act of God, the structure may be reconstructed providing: 
(1)  Reconstruction shall be limited to structures destroyed by such fire or act of God and shall not exceed the degree of nonconformity which existed prior to such destruction; 
(2)  All yards, height and other applicable dimensional regulations of the district in which the use is located shall be observed, to the extent physically possible; 
(3)  Any reconstruction shall be limited to the same premises on which the structure existed at the time the use or structure became nonconforming; provided, that in no case shall the nonconforming use be expanded; 
(4)  The owner shall apply for a building permit and any work done to repair, rebuild or replace such structure shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and any work done to repair, rebuild or replace such structure shall be in compliance with the provisions of the city's floodplain regulations; and 
(5)  Unless the nonconforming structure is repaired, rebuilt or replaced within two (2) years of the date of such fire, natural disaster or other act of God, such structure shall only be repaired, rebuilt or replaced in accordance with the provisions of the city's zoning ordinance. However, if the nonconforming structure is in an area under federal disaster declaration and the structure has been damaged or destroyed as a direct result of conditions that gave rise to the declaration, then the owner shall have an additional two (2) years for the structure to be repaired, rebuilt or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6275-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6618-09, § 1)  
Sec. 45-2903. - Filing fee waiver for rezoning, conditional use permits and special exceptions. 
If a use does not conform to the zoning prescribed for the district in which the use is situated, and if: 
(1)  A business license was issued for the use, 
(2)  The holder of such business license has operated continuously in the same location for at least fifteen (15) years, and 
(3)  Has paid all local taxes related to the use, 
the holder of such business license shall be permitted to apply for a rezoning, a conditional use permit, or a special exception without charge. 
(Ord. No. 7302-16)  
Sec. 45-2904—45-3000. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXX. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-3001. - General. 
(a)  When required. Unless otherwise modified or exempted in the district regulations or in Article XXVIII, there shall be provided in all districts at the time any building or structure is erected, off-street parking and loading spaces in conformity with the requirements of this article. In the event a building or structure is altered so as to increase its floor area, off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided for such enlargement in conformity with this article. 
(b)  Continued use required. Any off-street parking or loading space required by this article shall be maintained for parking or loading use, as the case may be, as long as the principal use such off-street parking or loading spaces were established to serve shall remain. 
(c)  Encroachment upon existing spaces. In no case shall an addition to a building or structure be made in such a way as to reduce the number of existing parking or loading spaces of an existing building or structure below the minimum requirements of this article unless provisions are made elsewhere on the same premises to re-establish any required parking or loading spaces which may be removed or relocated. 
(d)  Location on same premises. Except as otherwise provided, all off-street parking and loading spaces required by this article shall be located on the same premises with the principal use such spaces are established to serve. 
(e)  Ingress and egress. Ingress and egress to and from off-street parking and loading spaces shall be made through driveway openings, the required number, location and width of which shall be determined by the city's traffic engineer. 
(f)  Distinction between loading and parking spaces. Off-street loading spaces shall be exclusive of the number of off-street parking spaces required in this article. 
(g)  Method of computing number of spaces. In computing the number of parking or loading spaces required by this article, the following rules shall govern. 
(1)  Floor area shall mean the gross usable floor area of a particular use, building or structure. 
(2)  Where a fractional space results, the number of parking spaces required shall be construed to be the next whole number. 
(3)  If a particular use is not included in the listing of specific uses in this article, such use shall be provided with parking spaces as required for a listed use of similar nature. 
(4)  Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, or modified as to increase the number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity in or any other manner to create a need for a greater number of parking or loading spaces than the use existing, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change in conformity with this article. 
(5)  In the event more than one (1) use which requires parking and loading spaces is erected on the same premises, the total parking spaces or loading space requirements shall be the sum of the requirements of individual uses computed separately. 
(6)  Whenever commercial motor vehicles, mobile products, or special equipment are required to be parked on the premises in connection with a use, any required off-street parking spaces shall be in addition to the space requirement to park such commercial vehicles. 
(7)  For the purposes of this chapter, unoccupied floor area shall not be included in the computation of required parking spaces. Such floor area shall include, but not be limited to the following: vaults, refrigerated storage rooms, bulk storage, machine rooms, automated production areas, aircraft hangers, heavy equipment and/or vehicle storage, and stockrooms or offices for retail establishments . 
(h)  Parking commercial vehicles. 
(1)  Parking of commercial vehicles on property in residential districts shall be limited to one (1) small commercial vehicle per parcel for any detached single-family dwelling and shall be limited to one (1) such small commercial vehicle per single-family dwelling unit on any multiple-family residential site; provided that, one (1) additional small or large commercial vehicle may be parked on the same property in an enclosed and approved accessory building. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any commercial vehicle while in the process of loading or unloading. 
(2)  The parking of school buses shall be permitted on school property. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of section 45-515, pertaining to recreational vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5204-98)  
Sec. 45-3002. - Screening and lighting. 
Surface lots when abutting any residential use shall be screened by privacy fencing no less than six (6) feet in height, or a seven-foot wide treed buffer planted with evergreen trees at a minimum height of eight (8) feet and no more than ten (10) feet apart, as provided in Chapter 33.02 of the City Code, except where buffer areas are required by Article XXVIII, of this chapter. Such fencing shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with, and not detract from, the surrounding neighborhood and shall be erected in a manner as to provide adequate air and light and to not obstruct clear sight vision for traffic safety purposes. The board of zoning appeals may grant a special exception for the reduction or elimination of the fencing or treed buffer, subject to the conditions prescribed in Article XXXII, section 45-3204. Where lighting is required by this or any other ordinance of the city, it shall be erected and shielded in a manner as to direct lighting inward to the property being developed and prevent glare to adjacent properties or vehicular public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5204-98)  
Sec. 45-3003. - Parking design standards. 
See Design Criteria Manual, City of Newport News. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3004. - Parking requirements for specific uses. 
(a)  Parking requirements for specific uses shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of this section. Unless otherwise specifically set forth, the requirements shall be minimum requirements and may be exceeded at the discretion of the premises owner or developer. 
(b)  Dwelling and related living facilities uses. 
(1)  Single-family dwelling: One (1) parking space for each dwelling unit. 
(2)  Two-family or multiple-family attached dwellings: One and one-half (1½) parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(3)  Manufactured homes: One and one-half (1½) off-street parking spaces shall be provided on or adjacent to each manufactured home site. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast or halfway house: One (1) parking space for each sleeping room. 
(5)  Dormitory or fraternity/sorority house: One (1) parking space for every three (3) sleeping rooms or for every six (6) members, whichever is greater. 
(6)  Hotel or motel: One (1) parking space for each guest room or suite. 
(7)  Tourist home: One (1) parking space for each guest room or suite. 
(8)  Homeless shelter: One (1) parking space for each room. 
(9)  Multiple-family housing for handicapped persons or the elderly: One (1) parking space for each dwelling unit that is permanently allocated for occupancy by handicapped persons or by elderly persons at least sixty (60) years of age. Parking space for dwelling units allocated for individuals with physical handicaps shall be thirteen (13) feet wide with an unobstructed, near level, paved surface that is suitable for wheeling and walking. 
(10)  Congregate housing for children: One (1) parking space per employee attending a shift. 
(c)  Community facilities and places of assembly. 
(1)  Hospitals, sanitariums, asylums, nursing homes, convalescent houses, homes for the aged, and similar institutions: One (1) parking space for each four (4) beds. 
(2)  Church or place of worship: One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the main sanctuary or auditorium, in addition to three (3) spaces for each classroom used for Sunday school or educational purposes. 
(3)  Elementary school: One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the auditorium or main assembly room. 
(4)  High school, secondary school: One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in the auditorium plus two (2) spaces for each classroom or laboratory room. 
(5)  College: One (1) parking space for every three (3) accommodations for students in classrooms, laboratories, etc. 
(6)  Library or museum: One (1) parking space for every three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, but not less than ten (10) spaces. 
(7)  Country club, golf club, yacht club, or swimming pool club: One (1) parking space for each five (5) adult members or one (1) parking space for each four (4) seats in a place of assembly, whichever is greater. 
(8)  Stadium, sports arena, community center, or other similar places of assembly: One (1) parking space for every four (4) seats, or if fixed seats are not included, then one (1) space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor space. 
(9)  Theatre or auditorium: One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats or seating spaces. 
(10)  Bingo hall: One (1) parking space for every forty (40) square feet of floor area. 
(11)  Fraternal lodges or veteran organizations or service clubs: One (1) parking space for each four (4) seats or one (1) parking space for every fifty (50) square feet of floor area. 
(12)  For mobile home park administrative buildings: Not less than one (1) parking space for every fifteen (15) manufactured home sites within the park shall be provided at the administrative building. 
(13)  For mobile home park swimming pools, community buildings or recreational areas: Not less then one (1) space for every fifteen (15) manufactured home sites within the park shall be located at any swimming pool, community building or recreational area serving the development. 
(14)  Multiple-family mobile home park accessory or maintenance buildings: For accessory or maintenance buildings, one (1) space for each vehicle used in connection with the maintenance of the mobile home park or multiple-family development shall be provided. 
(15)  Marinas: Not less than one (1) parking space for every two (2) boat slips. 
(16)  Miniature golf course: One and one-half (1½) parking spaces for each hole. 
(d)  Commercial and related uses. 
(1)  Medical or dental clinic: Two (2) parking spaces for each room, chair or other facility in which patients are examined or treated by a physician. 
(2)  Business or professional office, bank or studio: One (1) parking space for every three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, but not less than three (3) parking spaces for each use. 
(3)  Retail store or personal service establishment: Unless otherwise listed below, a minimum of one (1) parking space for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area and a maximum of one (1) parking space for every two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
(4)  Restaurant, cafeteria, or other eating or drinking establishment: One (1) parking space for every one hundred (100) square feet of total floor area, including kitchen area. 
(5)  Furniture or appliance store, wholesale establishment or service shop: No more than one (1) parking space for every five hundred (500) square feet of floor area. 
(6)  Commercial recreation center: One (1) parking space for every fifty (50) square feet of floor space; provided however, that fifty (50) percent of all space used for bowling alleys, indoor racquetball courts, indoor tennis courts, skating rinks, indoor tracks or similar indoor recreation facilities may be deducted in computing this parking requirement. 
(7)  Funeral home or mortuary: One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor area used for chapels, reposing rooms or other public or semi-public uses incidental to funeral services, plus one (1) space for each vehicle maintained on the premises and one (1) space for any dwelling use on the same premises. 
(8)  Enclosed mall building: No more than one (1) parking space for every two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross leasable area. 
(9)  Child care center: One (1) parking space per employee in addition to on-site circulation space for delivering children. 
(10)  Coin-operated commercial laundry: One (1) space per three (3) pieces of washing/drying equipment for rent. 
(11)  Medical and dental laboratory: One (1) space per employee. 
(12)  Office and two-family residential within one building: One and one-half (1½) spaces per residential unit plus one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of utilized office. 
(13)  Banquet/function hall: One (1) parking space per one hundred (100) square feet of total floor area. 
(e)  Industrial, wholesale and similar uses. One (1) parking space for each five (5) persons employed on a maximum shift, plus one (1) space for every vehicle maintained on the premises, but not less than one (1) parking space for every five hundred (500) square feet of occupied floor area. 
(1)  Mini-storage warehouse: Three (3) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of office space plus one (1) space per employee. 
(2)  Propane storage and distribution: One (1) space per two thousand (2,000) square feet of service area. 
(3)  Shooting range: One (1) space per firing position. 
(4)  Animal shelter: One (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. 
(f)  Neighborhood Conservation District. Off-street parking is not required for commercially zoned property within the Neighborhood Conservation District. 
(g)  Parking spaces for the disabled shall not be shared or provided off-site. 
(h)  Proposed changes in use for a premises subject to an approved on-premises shared parking plan or off-site parking plan shall require proof that adequate parking continues to be available. 
(i)  O3 Office/Research Development District. Off-street parking shall be established by the approved master plan as required in section 45-1908. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5751-02; Ord. No. 6803-11; Ord. No. 6890-12; Ord. No. 7436-18)  
Sec. 45-3004.1. - Requirements and procedures for parking increases. 
The zoning administrator shall allow an increase of no more than thirty (30) percent of the number of on-premises parking spaces required or permitted for uses listed in section 45-3004(d)(3), (d)(5) and (d)(8) subject to the following: 
(1)  No action shall be taken on any application for such an increase until the applicant shall have paid a filing fee to the City of Newport News in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) which shall not be refundable. 
(2)  Applications for parking space increases shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the use will generate a greater need for parking spaces than is provided in this ordinance. 
b.  The applicant shall prepare a parking increase landscaping plan for the premises. This plan shall not reduce other landscaping prescribed for the premises but shall provide a landscaped buffer ten (10) feet in width around the perimeter of the paved area designated for parking. This buffer shall contain one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs for every four hundred (400) square feet of the buffer area less access ways into the parking area. The landscaping plan shall be approved by the director of planning and development prior to the zoning administrator's approval of the parking space increase application. 
(Ord. No. 5751-02; Ord. No. 6417-07, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3004.2. - Requirements and procedures for parking reductions using on-premises shared parking plans. 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall allow a reduction of required or permitted on-premises parking spaces when an applicant proposes an on-premises shared parking plan subject to the following: 
(1)  No action shall be taken on any application for such a reduction until the applicant shall have paid a filing fee to the City of Newport News in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) which shall not be refundable. 
(2)  Applications for parking space reductions using on-premises shared parking plans shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  The proposed development of premises shall be for commercial and related uses listed in section 45-3004(d), community facilities or recreational services and shall involve two (2) or more uses. The application shall include a parking plan for the combination of uses proposed for the premises. 
b.  The application shall include data reflecting the actual peak demand for each individual land use proposed for the premises. 
c.  The on-premises shared parking facility shall contain at least the minimum required spaces of the largest individual use that will be sharing the facility and shall be developed in accordance with the standards of the city's site regulations. 
d.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the on-premises shared parking plan shall be long-term, i.e., not less than twenty (20) years in length. 
e.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed reduction in parking does not affect the parking of employees of the facility and any adjoining use in a materially, adverse manner. 
f.  After approval of an on-premises shared parking plan, the city zoning administrator shall approve no changes which would affect premises served by that plan unless additional parking spaces are made available to serve the premises and the on-premises shared parking plan is again approved by the zoning administrator. 
g.  A parking reduction which was granted based on an on-premises shared parking plan shall be void in the event that said parking plan is terminated in whole or in part. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent the use of both on-premises shared parking plans and off-site parking plans in appropriate circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 5751-02; Ord. No. 6417-07, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3004.3. - Requirements and procedures for parking reductions for certain residential uses. 
The parking requirements for certain residential uses may be reduced up to but no more than seventy-five (75) percent by issuance of a permit by the zoning administrator granting such a reduction. The permit shall be valid for a period of two (2) years and shall be renewable for additional two-year periods in the event that the applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator that the conditions supporting issuance of said permit are still met. The permit to reduce the number of parking spaces shall be issued by the zoning administrator in the event that the following conditions are met: 
(a)  No action shall be taken on any application for such a reduction until the applicant shall have paid a filing fee to the City of Newport News in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) which shall not be refundable. 
(b)  Only the following residential uses may be approved for parking reductions: 
1.  Housing for older persons, multiple-family; 
2.  Group home; 
3.  Halfway house; 
4.  Boardinghouse; 
5.  Adult care residence; 
6.  Homeless shelter; 
7.  Congregate housing for children; 
8.  Single room occupancy dwellings; and 
9.  Housing for older persons, single-family attached. 
(c)  The facility for which the reduction is sought must be used for residential purposes only; 
(d)  The applicant requesting the reduction in parking must clearly demonstrate that the proposed use requires a lesser amount of parking than is specified in section 45-3004; 
(e)  The applicant requesting the reduction shall demonstrate the number of parking spaces that will be needed; and 
(f)  The applicant requesting the reduction shall demonstrate that the proposed reduction in parking does not adversely affect the parking requirements of employees of the facility or any adjoining residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 5751-02)  
Sec. 45-3005. - Off-street loading requirements for specific uses. 
Every building erected or occupied by a commercial, manufacturing or service establishment; a place of public assembly or accommodation; storage or warehouse facilities or any other enterprise or activity which is determined by the zoning administrator to involve the distribution or receiving of materials or merchandise by motor vehicles shall provide and maintain on the same premises off-street spaces for loading in conformity with the requirements of this section. Space for loading shall be a paved space of not less than twelve (12) feet by forty-five (45) feet and shall have a fourteen-foot vertically clear access from a public street or alley. 
(1)  Group one. The following uses or any use similar to a use listed below shall be provided with not less than one (1) space for loading plus one (1) additional space for loading for every twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet: 
a.  Retail store, or a group of related retail stores. 
b.  Furniture and appliance store. 
c.  Wholesale store. 
d.  Household equipment store. 
e.  Any establishment offering alcoholic beverages, food or refreshment for sale and consumption. 
f.  Bowling alley. 
g.  Funeral home or mortuary. 
h.  Manufacturing and industrial uses. 
i.  Place of public assembly such as convention hall, auditorium (except school) or theatre. 
(2)  Group two. The following uses or any use similar to a use listed below shall be provided with not less than one (1) space for loading for every fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof: 
a.  Apartment hotel building. 
b.  Hotel. 
c.  Dormitory or fraternity/sorority house. 
d.  Hospital. 
e.  Office building or medical clinic. 
(3)  Group three. The following uses or any use similar to a use listed below shall be provided with not less than one (1) space for loading for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof in excess of three thousand (3,000) square feet: 
a.  Truck terminal, transfer or storage terminal. 
b.  Distributors of food, beverages or merchandise where the principal activity is transfer of products from one (1) form of transportation to another when at least one (1) such form of transportation utilizes highway vehicles. 
c.  Freight station or transportation terminal. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-3006—45-3100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXI. - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO PROPERTY ON AND SURROUNDING THE AIRPORT 
 
Sec. 45-3101. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of property in the vicinity of Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport located within the City of Newport News by establishing an airport approach restricted use zone. All regulations set forth in this article shall apply in regulating the height of structures and objects of natural growth. 
(b)  It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property of the users of an airport and of the occupants of land in its vicinity and, if the obstruction type, reduces the size of the area available for landing and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of airports within the city and the public investment therein. 
Accordingly, it is declared: 
(1)  That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are hazards to air navigation be prevented; 
(2)  That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential for being a public nuisance and may injure the area served by the airport; 
(3)  That the City of Newport News derives economic development and enhanced interstate commerce from Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport; and, developments in the vicinity of the airport are held strictly to the highest possible safety standards to protect economic benefits derived from the airport; and 
(4)  That the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3102. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(1)  Administrator: The zoning administrator of the City of Newport News. 
(2)  Airport: Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport. 
(3)  Airport elevation: Forty-three (43) feet above mean sea level. 
(4)  Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface, and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 45-3104 of this chapter. In plan view the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
(5)  Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones: The airspace zones as set forth in section 45-3103 of this chapter. 
(6)  Conical surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
(7)  Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of navigable airspace. 
(8)  Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
(9)  Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane one hundred and fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
(10)  Larger than utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than twelve thousand and five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft. The width of this runway surface is set forth in section 45-3103. 
(11)  Nonconforming use or object: Any preexisting structure or object of natural growth which is inconsistent with the provisions of, or any amendment to, this chapter. 
(12)  Nonprecision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
(13)  Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 45-3103. 
(14)  Permit: A document issued by the City of Newport News allowing a person to begin an activity which may result in any structure or vegetation exceeding the height limitations provided for in section 45-3107. 
(15)  Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity. The term includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
(16)  Precision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS or MLS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan. 
(17)  Primary surface: A surface, with a specified width as provided in section 45-3103 of this chapter, longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specifically prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of the primary surface is set forth in section 45-3103. 
(18)  Runway: A specified area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
(19)  Structure: Any object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by any person, including but not limited to buildings, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, towers, poles, and overhead transmission lines. 
(20)  Transitional surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet, measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(21)  Tree: Any object of natural growth. 
(22)  Visual runway: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
(23)  Zone: All areas provided for in section 45-3103 of this article, generally described in three (3) dimensions by reference to ground elevation, vertical distances from the ground elevation, horizontal distances from the runway centerline and the primary and horizontal surfaces, with the zone floor set at specific vertical limits by the surfaces found in section 45-3104. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3103. - Airport zones and zoning map. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones that include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport. Such zones are shown on the City of Newport News Zoning Maps. 
An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: 
a.  This zone applies to runway 7R-25L and proposed runway 7L-25R. 
b.  The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is one thousand (1,000) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of sixteen thousand (16,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-quarters (¾) mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: 
a.  This zone applies to runway 2-20. 
b.  The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Transitional zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(4)  Horizontal zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging an arc of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(5)  Conical zone: The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there from a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5986-03)  
Sec. 45-3104. - Airport zone height limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this chapter, to a height in excess of the applicable height herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question, as follows: 
(1)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: Slopes fifty (50) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward forty (40) feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of forty thousand (40,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-quarter (¾) mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes thirty-four (34) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Transitional zones: Slopes seven (7) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each one (1) foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Horizontal zone: Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which amounts to a maximum height of one hundred ninety-three (193) feet above mean sea level. 
(5)  Conical zone: Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation which amounts to a maximum height of three hundred ninety-three (393) feet above mean sea level. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5986-03)  
Sec. 45-3105. - Airport approach restricted use zone. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and within the area below the horizontal limits of any zone established by this chapter, no use may be made of land or water in such manner as to: 
(1)  Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and airborne aircraft; 
(2)  Diminish the ability of pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights; 
(3)  Result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport; 
(4)  Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport; 
(5)  Create bird strike hazards; or 
(6)  Otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3106. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive: Except as provided in section 45-3107(b) of this article, the regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this chapter, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Obstruction marking and lighting: Notwithstanding the provisions of section 45-3107(a) of this article, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of whatever markers and lights deemed necessary by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Virginia Department of Aviation or the Zoning Administrator to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of that airport obstruction. These markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the airport owners, and not the owner of the nonconforming structure in question. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3107. - Permits. 
(a)  Future use: No structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in the horizontal zone created by this chapter which will exceed one hundred and ninety-three (193) feet of vertical height above mean sea level unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for to include filing of FAA for 7460 available at the airport and provided that a variance has been approved as provided in subsection (d). 
(b)  Existing uses: No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use or structure to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto other than with relief as provided for in subsection (d). 
(c)  Reconstruction: No permit shall be granted that would enable a nonconforming structure or object to be rebuilt, reconstructed, or otherwise refurbished so as to exceed the applicable horizontal zone height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations contained in this chapter except as provided for in Article XXIX, Nonconforming uses, section 45-2902, Reconstruction, of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  Variances: Any person desiring to erect or increase the height or size of any structure not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article may apply for a variance from such regulations to the board of zoning appeals as described in Article XXXII of the Zoning Ordinance. Such application shall be properly advertised and be reviewed and considered through a public hearing. Prior to being considered by the board of zoning appeals, the application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Virginia Department of Aviation as to the facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall only be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this article. Additionally, no application for a variance to the requirements of this article may be considered by the board of zoning appeals unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the airport owner for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the airport owner does not respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt, the board of zoning appeals may act on its own to grant or deny the application for a variance. 
(e)  Obstruction marking and lighting: Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be deemed necessary by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Virginia Department of Aviation or the zoning administrator. If deemed proper by the board of zoning appeals, this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the airport owner, at his own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3108. - Conflict with other regulations. 
In any case where the requirements of this chapter conflict with any other provision of the Code of the City of Newport News or existing state or federal regulations, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3109. - Enforcement. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each day's continuance of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
DIVISION 2. - FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-3110. - Purpose and authority. 
This division is adopted pursuant to authority granted by Virginia Code § 15.2-2280 and Virginia Code §10.1-600, et seq. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(1)  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies. 
(2)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within district subject to flooding. 
(3)  Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone districts to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage. 
(4)  Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3111. - General provisions. 
(a)  Applicability: These provisions shall apply to all privately and publicly owned lands within the jurisdiction of Newport News and identified as areas of special flood hazard according to the flood insurance rate map that is provided to the city of Newport News by FEMA, as set forth in section 45-3114(a)(1) below. 
(b)  Compliance and liability: No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
(1)  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district or that land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(2)  This section shall not create liability on the part of the city of Newport News or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(c)  Records: Records of actions associated with administering this section shall be kept on file and maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(d)  Abrogation and greater restrictions: This division supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood-prone districts. 
(e)  Severability: If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this division shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this division. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this division are hereby declared to be severable. 
(f)  Penalty for violations: Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the division of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties therefore. 
(1)  Chapter 13 Building Regulations of the Newport News City Code section 13-23 Adopted; general construction standards adopts the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VA USBC). Section 13-2 addresses the general penalty for violations of chapter 13. Violations and associated penalties of chapter 45, Zoning Ordinance, of Newport News City Code are addressed in article 35, Administration, Enforcement, Violation Penalty and Remedy. Any violations of chapter 13 and chapter 45 may be enforced according to said sections and may be brought in addition to the violations of division 2, article XXXI of chapter 45. 
(2)  In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this article may be declared by the City of Newport News to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3112. - Definitions. 
(a)  Administrator: the federal insurance administrator responsible for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program (34 F.R. 2600-81, February 27, 1969). 
(b)  Appurtenant or accessory structure: Accessory structures not to exceed 200 sq. ft. 
(c)  Base flood/one-hundred-year flood: A flood having a one percent chance of occurring each year being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(d)  Base flood elevation: The water surface elevation at which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated one (1) percent annual chance water surface elevation. The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map. For the purposes of this division, the one-hundred-year flood or one (1) percent annual chance flood. 
(e)  Basement: Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
(f)  Board of zoning appeals: The board appointed to review appeals, variances and special exceptions made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning administrator in the interpretation of this chapter of the City Code. 
(g)  Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. 
(h)  Coastal A Zone: Flood hazard areas that have been delineated as subject to wave heights between one and one-half (1.5) feet and three (3) feet. 
(i)  Coastal high hazard area: Areas of waves greater than three (3) feet and seaward of the landward toe of the primary frontal dune. 
(j)  Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, storage of equipment and materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
(k)  Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers). 
(l)  Encroachment: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, introduction of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
(m)  Existing construction: structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before May 2, 1977 for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
(n)  Flood or flooding: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
c.  Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection b. above of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1) above. 
(o)  Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM): An official map of a community issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide, and related erosion areas have been designated and the floodway, floodway fringe, approximated floodplain and coastal high hazard areas have been delineated. 
(p)  Flood hazard district: A district established by the Zoning Ordinance for the City of Newport News and in which the restrictions and conditions of these regulations apply. 
(q)  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): An official map of a community on which FEMA has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM). 
(r)  Flood Insurance Study (FIS): a report by FEMA that examines, evaluates and determines flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
(s)  Floodplain: 
(1)  A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; 
(2)  An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface water from any source. 
(t)  Flood-prone area: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
(u)  Flood proofing: means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities, structure and contents of buildings to include the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code as amended. 
(v)  Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
(w)  Freeboard: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. When a freeboard is included in the height of a structure, the flood insurance premiums may be less expensive. 
(x)  Highest adjacent grade: the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
(y)  Historic structure: Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places which has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or, 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
(z)  Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis: Analyses performed by a licensed professional engineer, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation and FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles. 
(aa)  Intermediate regional flood: A flood which is caused by rainfall runoff and is not primarily affected by tidal action. 
(bb)  Intermediate regional tidal flood: a flood which is caused by tidal action and is not primarily affected by rainfall runoff. 
(cc)  Letters of map change (LOMC): A Letter of map change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
(dd)  Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. ALOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
(ee)  Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
(ff)  Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision. 
(gg)  Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44CFR §60.3. 
(hh)  Manufactured home: A structure subject to federal regulations which is transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length in the traveling mode or is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet when erected on-site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required facilities; and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, but does not include a recreational vehicle. 
(ii)  Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
(jj)  New construction: For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after May 2, 1977, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
(kk)  Post-FIRM structures: A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after May 2, 1977. 
(ll)  Pre-FIRM structures: A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before May 2, 1977. 
(mm)  Recreational vehicle: A vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
(nn)  Repetitive loss structure: A building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two (2) occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the building at the time of each flood event. 
(oo)  Shallow flooding area: A special flood hazard area with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
(pp)  Special flood hazard area: The land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) for the city of Newport News prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration. 
(qq)  Start of construction: For other than new construction and substantial improvement under the Coastal Barriers resource Act (P.L. - 97-348) 16 U.S.C. § 3501, et seq., mean the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings piers, or foundations of the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds nor occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(rr)  Structure: for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
(ss)  Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(tt)  Substantial improvement: Any reconstruction rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structures continued designation as a "historic structure". 
(3)  Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(uu)  Trailer park (mobile home park): An area designed, constructed, equipped, operated and maintained for the purpose of providing spaces for trailers or mobile homes intended to be used as temporary or permanent living facilities. 
(vv)  Violation: the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence required to demonstrate compliance with the City of Newport News floodplain management regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(ww)  Watercourse: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3113. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the floodplain administrator. City manager, is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the floodplain administrator, unless the city manager, in writing, appoints a floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may: 
(1)  Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees. 
(2)  Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another community or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. Section 59.22. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located in flood hazard areas. 
(2)  Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood elevation and flood hazard information. 
(3)  Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the requirements of these regulations. 
(4)  Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from the Federal, State or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required; in particular, permits from state agencies for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts, structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the one-hundred-year frequency floodplain of free flowing nontidal waters of the state. 
(5)  Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent communities, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management), and other appropriate agencies (VADEQ, USACE) and have submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA. 
(6)  Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areas if the provisions of these regulations have been met, or disapprove applications if the provisions of these regulations have not been met. 
(7)  Inspect or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for which permits have been issued to determine compliance with these regulations or to determine if non-compliance has occurred or violations have been committed. 
(8)  Review elevation certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be corrected. 
(9)  Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the city of Newport News, within six (6) months after such data and information becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations. 
(10)  Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the administration of these regulations, including: 
a.  Flood insurance studies, Flood insurance rate maps (including historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps) and letters of map change; and 
b.  Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits, elevation certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been flood proofed, other required design certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these regulations. 
(11)  Enforce the provisions of these regulations, investigate violations, issue notices of violations or stop work orders, and require permit holders to take corrective action. 
(12)  Advise the board of zoning appeals regarding the intent of these regulations and, for each application for a variance, prepare a staff report and recommendation. 
(13)  Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings: 
a.  Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged. 
b.  Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct, and prohibit the non-compliant repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to prevent additional damage. 
(14)  Undertake, as determined appropriate by the floodplain administrator, due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit requests and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claims for increased cost of compliance coverage under NFIP flood insurance policies. 
(15)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Newport News have been modified and: 
a.  Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to these regulations has either been assumed or relinquished through annexation; and 
b.  If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in this division prepare amendments to this division to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to City Council for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended division shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA. 
(16)  Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning participation in the NFIP which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the SFHA, number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for development in the SFHA. 
(17)  It is the duty of the floodplain administrator to take into account flood, mudslide and flood-related erosion hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions relating to land management and use throughout the City of Newport News, whether or not those hazards have been specifically delineated geographically (e.g. via mapping or surveying). 
(c)  Use and interpretation of FIRMs. The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data: 
(1)  Where field surveyed topography indicates that ground elevations: 
a.  Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this division; 
b.  Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regarded as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(2)  In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, any other flood hazard data available from a federal, state, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used. 
(3)  Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reduced floodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations. 
(4)  Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs. 
(5)  If a preliminary flood insurance rate map and/or a preliminary flood insurance study has been provided by FEMA: 
a.  Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard data previously provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations. 
b.  Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available data pursuant to section 1.5(C) and used where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas are provided on the effective FIRM. 
c.  Prior to issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway areas exceed the base flood elevations and/or designated floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA. 
(d)  Jurisdictional boundary changes. All plats or maps of annexation shall show the floodplain boundaries, base flood elevation, and location of the floodway where determined. 
If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in this division, the floodplain administrator, with the assistance of the city attorney, will prepare amendments to this division to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the City Council for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended division shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA. 
In accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44 Subpart (B) Section 59.22(a)(9)(v), the city must notify the Federal Insurance Administration and optionally the state coordinating office in writing whenever the boundaries of the city have been modified by annexation or the city has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. 
In order that all flood insurance rate maps accurately represent the city's boundaries, a copy of a map of Newport News suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the city has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority must be included with the notification. 
(e)  District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the city of Newport News where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(f)  Interpretation of district boundaries. Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the zoning officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. 
(g)  Submitting technical data. The city's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes available, the city shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and flood plain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(h)  Letters of map revision. When development in the floodplain causes a change in the base flood elevation, the applicant must notify FEMA by applying for a conditional letter of map revision or a letter of map revision. 
Examples: 
•Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway. 
•Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one (1) foot in the base flood elevation. 
•Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges, as required by 44 C.F.R. § 65.3 and §65.6(a)(12). 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3114. - Establishment of flood hazard overlay district. 
(a)  An overlay district to be known as the FH-flood hazard district is hereby established. Upon identification by the floodplain administrator, areas having special flood hazards but where water surface elevation data for the one-hundred-year flood and data sufficient to identify the floodway have not been delineated, the definitions of section 45-3112 are in effect. 
(1)  Basis of district. The various floodplain districts shall include the special flood hazard areas (SFHAs). The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study (FIS) and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for the city of Newport News prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated December 9, 2014 and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. 
The city of Newport News may identify and regulate local flood hazard or ponding areas that are not delineated on the FIRM. These areas may be delineated on a "Local Flood Hazard Map" using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record, historic high water marks or approximate study methodologies. 
The boundaries of the SFHA districts and floodplain districts are established as shown on the FIRM, which is declared to be a part of this division and which shall be kept on file at the City of Newport News Department of Engineering. 
a.  The floodway district is in an AE Zone and is delineated, for purposes of this regulation, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one (1) percent annual chance flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. The areas included in this district are specifically identified in the above-referenced FIS and shown on the accompanying FIRM. The following provisions shall apply within the floodway district of an AE zone (see, 44 CFR 60.3(d)): 
1.  Within any floodway area, no encroachment, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
Development activities which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies, with the city on Newport News' endorsement, for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR), and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
If the requirements of this section are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article 4. 
2.  The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) is prohibited, except in an existing manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring, elevation and encroachment standards are met. 
(b)  The AE zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas for which one (1) percent annual chance flood elevations have been provided and the floodway has not been delineated, The following provisions shall apply within an AE zone: 
(1)  Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as Zones A1-30 and AE on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the City of Newport News. This requirement, pursuant to 44 CFR 63.3(c)(10), only applies along rivers, streams, and other watercourses where FEMA has provided base flood elevations. The requirement does not apply along lakes, bays and estuaries, and the ocean coast. 
(2)  Development activities in Zones A1-A30 and AE, on the city of Newport News FIRM which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies, with the City of Newport News' endorsement, for a conditional letter of map revision, receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(c)  The A zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the one (1) percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated. For these areas, the following provisions shall apply, pursuant to 44 CFR 60.3(b): 
(1)  The approximated floodplain district shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a one-hundred-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as Zone A on the maps accompanying the FIS. For these areas, the base flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, local and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific one (1) percent annual chance flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers floodplain information reports, U.S. Geological Survey flood-prone quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this base flood elevation. For development proposed in the approximate floodplain the applicant must use technical methods that correctly reflect currently accepted non-detailed technical concepts, such as point on boundary, high water marks, or detailed methodologies hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. Studies, analysis, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
(2)  The floodplain administrator reserves the right to require a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for any development. When such base flood elevation data is utilized, the lowest floor shall be elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level. During the permitting process, the floodplain administrator shall obtain: 
a.  The elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and 
b.  If the structure has been floodproofed in accordance with the requirements of this article, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be obtained from other sources or develop using detailed methodologies comparable to those contained in a FIS for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(d)  The AO zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall of those areas of shallow flooding identified as AO on the FIRM. For those areas the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood depth specified on the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood depth specified on the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to the specified flood level so that any space below that level is watertight with wall substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyance. 
(3)  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be provided to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(e)  The Coastal A Zone District shall be those areas designated as Limits of Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA) line and the VE Zone on the FIRM, and subject to wave heights between one and one-half (1.5) feet and three (3) feet. Buildings and structures in the these areas shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus two (2) feet of freeboard, and must comply with applicable provisions of sections 45-3114 and 45-3115 of this division. 
(f)  The VE or V Zones on FIRMs accompanying the FIS shall be those areas that are known as Coastal High Hazard areas, extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast. For these areas, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements in Zones V and VE (V if base flood elevation is available) shall be elevated on pilings or columns so that: 
a.  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated two (2) feet above the base flood level if the lowest horizontal structural member is parallel to the direction of wave approach or elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood level of the lowest horizontal structural member is perpendicular to the direction of wave approach; and. 
b.  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (one (1) percent chance). 
(2)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of these regulations. 
(3)  The floodplain administrator shall obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures in Zones V and VE. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all such information. 
(4)  All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(5)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood-lattice work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of twenty (20) pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions: 
a.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
b.  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(6)  The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be portioned into multiple rooms, temperature-controlled, or used for human habitation. 
(7)  The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited. When non-structural fill is proposed in a coastal high hazard area, appropriate engineering analyses shall be conducted to evaluate the impacts of the fill prior to issuance of a development permit. 
(8)  The man-made alteration of sand dunes, which would increase potential flood damage, is prohibited. 
(g)  Overlay concept. The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning ordinance map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. 
If there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply. 
In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6577-09; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3115. - District provisions. 
(a)  Permit and application requirements. 
(1)  Permit requirement. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district, including placement of manufactured homes, shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a zoning permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this division and with other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended, such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VA USBC) and the City of Newport News Subdivision Regulations. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the floodplain administrator shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and shall review all sites to assure they are reasonably safe from flooding. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(2)  Site plans and permit applications. All applications for development within any floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
a.  The elevation of the base flood at the site. 
b.  The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or, in V zones, the lowest horizontal structural member. 
c.  For structures to be floodproofed (non-residential only), the elevation to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
d.  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(b)  General standards. The following provisions shall apply to all permits: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be according to the this division and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VA USBC), and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  In addition to provisions (1)—(8) above, in all special flood hazard areas, the additional provisions shall apply (i) prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained from the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations.) Furthermore, in riverine areas, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the department of conservation and recreation (division of dam safety and floodplain management), other required agencies, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency and (ii) the flood-carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. 
(c)  Elevation and construction standards. In all identified flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS or generated by a certified professional the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) in zones AE, AO, and A with detailed base flood elevations shall at a minimum have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building (or manufactured home) shall at a minimum have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level. Buildings located in all AE zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the BFE plus two (2) feet are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification, including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Space below the lowest floor. In zones A, AO, and AE, fully enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall: 
a.  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking, building access and storage in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
b.  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
c.  Include measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2.  The total net area of all openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
3.  If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area, each area must have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit. 
4.  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade. 
5.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
6.  Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above. 
(d)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
(1)  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the elevation and anchoring requirements in section 45-3115(b) and (c). 
(2)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for manufactured homes in section 45-3115(d)(1). 
(e)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be obtained from other sources or developed using detailed methodologies, hydraulic and hydrologic analysis, comparable to those contained in a flood insurance study for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(f)  [Obtaining permits prior to work.] Within any flood hazard district, the property owner or corporation having fee simple title or rights of construction to a property, shall obtain a permit for all proposed development prior to the initiation of work. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1; Ord. No. 7593-19)  
Sec. 45-3116. - Relationship of city approval to National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended. 
(a)  The city shall maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request, with respect to each area having special flood hazards, information on elevations (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floors, including basements, of all new or substantially improved structures and, where there is a basement, the distance between the first floor and the bottom of the lowest opening where water flowing on the ground will enter. For structures which have been floodproofed (nonresidential only), the elevation to which the structure has been flood proofed shall be maintained. For all structures within the coastal high hazard area, the elevation of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor excluding pilings or columns shall also be recorded and maintained. All such information shall be filed in the department of codes compliance. 
(b)  In approving new construction and improvements, the city assumes no obligation to act on behalf of the property owner in obtaining approval for flood insurance under the terms of the Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended (42 U.S.C. 4001-4127). Nor does the city assume responsibility for errors or omissions in submitted material which may affect the flood insurance rates for an individual's property. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3117. - Existing structures in floodplain areas. 
A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Existing structures in the floodway area shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain areas to an extent or amount of less than fifty (50) percent of its market value shall conform to this division and the VA USBC. 
(3)  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain area to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with this division and shall require the entire structure to conform to the Virginia USBC. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5644-01; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3118. - Uses permitted—General restrictions. 
Any use normally permitted in the regular zoning district shall be permitted in a flood hazard district with the following restrictions: 
(1)  No construction on or improvement of land within a flood hazard district except for nonstructural agricultural and outdoor recreational purposes and certain water related structures as provided in subsection (g) below may be initiated until a permit shall have been obtained as provided in section 45-3115(g). 
(2)  No construction or improvement within the flood hazard district shall obstruct any channel whether or not such channel lies within a designated floodway. 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvement of residential structures shall have the lowest floor level (including basements) elevated a minimum of two (2) feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. The elevation of the lowest floor level shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer, and filed in the department of codes compliance. 
a.  Manufactured homes, whether residential or nonresidential, to be located within the floodplain or the flood hazard district of the City of Newport News shall be placed in accordance with the building code adopted in chapter 13 of the City Code. 
b.  An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed by the owner with the civil defense director for manufactured home subdivisions located within the floodplain or flood hazard district. 
(4)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of two (2) feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
(5)  When flood proofing is not utilized, the elevation of the lowest floor level shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and filed in the department of codes and compliance. 
(6)  Sites for the storage or processing of bases, chemicals or other materials that are buoyant, flammable or explosive shall be elevated to a level no less than three (3) feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood and securely anchored; provided, however that buried fuel tanks, when adequately anchored to prevent flotation when empty and sealed to prevent entry of flood water or discharge of fuel therefrom, may be at the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood. 
(7)  The following activities may occur below the level of the one-hundred-year flood: 
a.  Nonstructural agricultural activities providing that any storage or stockpiling of manure shall be elevated to a level no less than three (3) feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood. 
b.  Outdoor recreational uses including park areas, golf courses, tennis courts, basketball courts, and swimming pools. 
c.  Water related structures such as docks, piers and wharves. 
d.  Access roads and parking areas for the above. 
(8)  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3119. - Special restrictions for riverine floodplain area. 
(a)  In riverine situations, all adjacent communities and the state coordinating office shall be notified prior to any relocation or alteration of a watercourse; copies of such notifications shall be submitted to the federal insurance administrator. 
(b)  The city manager, or designee, shall assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3120. - Floodway. 
The following special restrictions shall apply to construction or improvements to land within the floodway: 
(1)  Existing nonconforming uses within the floodway may not be expanded; however, they may be repaired, altered or modified to incorporate flood proofing measures provided such measures do not raise the level of the one-hundred-year flood. 
(2)  No use, change, fill or other encroachment within the designated floodway can be initiated or accomplished without obtaining a permit as provided in section 45-3115. There shall be no exceptions to this permit requirement in the floodway. 
(3)  In no case shall a permit be issued for work which would impair the ability of the floodway to pass the one-hundred-year flood except where the effect upon elevations is fully offset by floodway improvements. 
Such proposals shall be submitted to the city manager, or designee, along with plans, data and computations necessary to fully evaluate the effect of the proposal. 
(4)  No manufactured home may be placed within a floodway except in an existing manufactured home subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3121. - Coastal high hazard area (CHHA). 
The following special restrictions apply to land within the coastal high hazard area: 
(1)  Existing structures located on land below the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood in the CHHA shall not be expanded. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements in Zones V and VE (V if base flood elevation is available) shall be elevated on pilings or columns so that: 
a.  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood level if the lowest horizontal structural member is parallel to the direction of wave approach or elevated at least two (2) feet above the base flood level if the lowest horizontal structural member is perpendicular to the direction of wave approach; and, 
b.  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (one (1) percent annual chance). 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures in Zones V and VE. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all such information. 
(5)  No land below the level of the one-hundred-year flood in a CHHA may be developed unless the structure or substantial improvements: 
a.  Is located landward of the reach of the mean high tide. 
b.  Is constructed in accordance with the building code adopted in chapter 13 of the City Code. 
(6)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood-lattice work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of twenty (20) pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions: 
a.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
b.  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(7)  The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be partitioned into multiple rooms, temperature-controlled, or used for human habitation. 
(8)  The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited. When fill is proposed in a coastal high hazard area, appropriate engineering analyses shall be conducted to evaluate the impacts of the fill prior to issuance of a development permit. 
(9)  No manufactured home shall be placed within the CHHA except in existing manufactured home subdivisions. 
(10)  No manmade alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands within the CHHA will be permitted which will increase potential flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5644-01; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3122. - Utilities. 
All new or replacement water and/or sanitary sewage systems and all other new or replacement utilities or facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. On-site sanitary waste systems, including septic tank systems, shall be a minimum of two (2) feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3123. - Special exception uses permitted in regular zoning district. 
(a)  Special exception uses permitted in the regular zoning district may be authorized in the flood hazard district; provided that applicable restrictions of this article are observed, and provided that the plans as required for the issuance of a building permit shall be submitted to the city manager or designee for review and recommendation prior to public hearing by the board of zoning appeals. 
(b)  Any application for special exception requested in the flood hazard district along with the required plans shall be referred to the zoning administrator and the director of engineering not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5644-01; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3124. - Special regulations for land development. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article the term "land development" shall include any subdivision of land as defined in the Subdivision Ordinance of Newport News, Virginia, as amended and any planned residential development, mobile home park, condominium, townhouse or apartment project, commercial or industrial project, and any community facility, whether publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to churches, schools, colleges, fire stations and libraries. 
(b)  In addition to the general and special restrictions of this article, the following special requirements pertain to a land development, whether new construction or improvement, when such development is in part or in whole within a flood hazard district: 
(1)  All drawings and plans including record plats shall show thereon boundaries and locations of designated floodplains having special flood hazards, floodway, coastal high hazard areas and elevations of the one-hundred-year flood. 
(2)  Each parcel or lot established for purposes of sale and/or construction thereon within the land development must be capable of permitting new construction meeting the requirements of the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Utility systems such as water, sewer, gas and electrical systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from such systems into flood waters. Sanitary sewer facilities shall be elevated two (2) feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood so as to eliminate entrance of flood water into the system. Manhole tops shall either be elevated to a minimum of two (2) feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood, or have installed water-tight frames and covers, or utilize manhole inserts to eliminate the entrance of flood water into the system. 
(4)  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to provide such plans, data and computations, certified by a registered professional engineer, to demonstrate compliance with this section to the satisfaction of the city manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3125. - Annual report to administrator. 
The city manager, or his designated representative, is hereby designated as the official responsible to submit an annual report to the administrator on the progress made during the past year in the development and implementation of floodplain and/or mudslide area management measures. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3125.5. - Variances. 
No variances to the provisions of division 2, Floodplain Development Regulations, shall be considered by the board of zoning appeals. 
(Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 7123-14, § 1, enacted provisions intended for use as § 45-3126. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, said section has been included herein as § 45-3125.5 at the discretion of the editor.  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 45-3126. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to create a Neighborhood Conservation District within the City of Newport News, and to prescribe standards for the construction and reconstruction of dwelling uses within such area. Regulations for the Neighborhood Conservation District set forth in this article supplement and modify district regulations set forth in other articles. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3127. - Established boundaries. 
(a)  Neighborhood Conservation District established: For the purposes enumerated in Article I of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Newport News, and in section 45-3119 of this article, the following special district has been established and known as the NC-Neighborhood Conservation District. 
(b)  Area boundaries established: The district boundaries of the NC-Neighborhood Conservation District are established on the Zoning District Map, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3128. - Modifications of use and dimensional regulations. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations generally. The special modifications of use and dimensional regulations set forth in this article and table 31-1 shall apply to residential uses only and in such cases shall be limited to those uses which are permitted in the general zoning district in which the use is located. The regulations cover lots of record in the specific cases enumerated. 
(b)  Modifications of residential use regulations. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings, including dwellings with zero lot lines, may be constructed or reconstructed on a lot of record having a width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet provided neither of the abutting lots on each side of such lot are held in the same ownership at the time of passage of this article provided: 
a.  The open lot area on each lot is not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the total lot area. 
b.  The development complies with the provisions of section 45-507. 
(2)  Two-family attached dwellings may be constructed on two (2) contiguous twenty-five (25) foot lots fronting on the same street provided: 
a.  The dwelling units are attached vertically and constructed simultaneously as an integral unit. 
b.  The combined width of all required side yards for each lot be provided on the detached side of each unit. 
c.  The common vertical wall of the two (2) dwellings is constructed on the common property line. 
d.  The open lot area on each lot is not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the total lot area. 
e.  One (1) story, two (2) family dwellings shall not be permitted. 
(3)  Multiple dwelling projects shall be permitted within the neighborhood conservation district in conformity with the requirements of the district in which the use is otherwise located. However, when multiple family dwellings and/or single family attached dwellings provide rear parking by a public or private alleyway the building setbacks may be established based on a submitted development plan in accordance with the established building setback patterns consistent with pre-existing multiple family dwellings and/or single family attached dwellings within the same block or surrounding blocks. 
(c)  Modifications to lot area and dimensional regulations within the neighborhood conservation district. 
(1)  The minimum area and dimensional regulations for single-family, two (2) family and townhouse dwelling uses are hereby modified within the NC district as set forth in the following table 31-1. Front yard modifications are permitted as provided in article XXVIII. 
(2)  Planned residential developments such as are authorized under article XV may be modified with the neighborhood conservation district as follows: 
a.  Any parcel consisting of twenty-five (25) foot lots of record and comprising not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet may be proposed as a planned residential development. 
b.  Within such modified PRD, all provisions and procedures of articles XV and XXXII shall apply except the minimum area required for a PRD may be reduced to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and the minimum area per dwelling unit within such development may be reduced from four thousand (4,000) square feet to two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
It is the intent of this provision to promote the construction of townhouses or other dwelling types within this district. The restriction of constructing each dwelling unit physically on an existing lot of record shall not apply in these situations provided the development is established under the requirements of a planned residential development, specifically with respect to the management of the land as common property by a homeowners association. 
(d)  Modifications to transitional buffer requirements. Transitional buffer areas as established in section 45-2802(e) of this article shall not be required within the neighborhood conservation district when multiple family zoning districts abut single family zoning districts and when P1 Park districts abut residential zoning districts. 
TABLE 31-1 
TABLE OF MODIFICATIONS TO
LOT AREA AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
FOR DWELLINGS IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD CONSERVATION DISTRICT 
Residential Use 	Minimum Lot Area Required 	Minimum Width of Corner Lots 	Minimum Width of Interior Lot 	Minimum Open Lot Area Per Dwelling 	Minimum Yard Front 	Minimum Yard Side 	Rear 	Minimum Number of Stories for Dwelling Buildings 
Detached single-family dwelling on single 25-foot lot where abutting lot on each side is in separate ownership 	2,500 square feet 	25 feet 	25 feet 	2/3 lot area 	10 feet 	5 feet 	20 feet 	2 
Detached single-family dwelling 	5,000square feet 	50 feet 	50 feet 	0 	10 feet 	5 feet 	20 feet 	1 
Two-family dwelling attached by common outside wall at property line 	10,000 square feet 	50 feet 	50 feet 	2/3 lot area 	10 feet 	5 feet 	20 feet 	2 
 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5272-99; Ord. No. 6571-09; Ord. No. 6721-10; Ord. No. 7024-14)  
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL HISTORIC ZONING REGULATIONS FOR HILTON VILLAGE 
 
Sec. 45-3129. - General. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect against destruction, degradation, and encroachment upon the areas, structures, and premises designated to be of substantial historic significance; to encourage uses which will lead to their continuance, conservation, and improvement in a manner appropriate to the preservation of the historic heritage of the City of Newport News and the Commonwealth of Virginia; to prevent creation of environmental influences adverse to such purposes; and to assure that new structures and uses within the Historic District created by this article will be in keeping with the character to be preserved and enhanced. To accomplish such purpose, this article provides for: 
(1)  The creation of the Hilton Village Historic District; 
(2)  Modifications to use and dimensional regulations within the Historic District; 
(3)  Architectural standards for the Historic District; 
(4)  The creation of an architectural review board; and 
(5)  A procedure for reviewing plans by the architectural review board. 
 
(b)  Creation of Hilton Village Historic District. A special zoning district is hereby created to be known as the Hilton Village Historic District and as shown on the Zoning District Map which is on file in the office of Codes Compliance and in the department of planning and development. The Hilton Village Historic District as shown on the zoning district map is bounded approximately by the east side of River Road, the rear property line of the lots facing south on the north side of Post Street, Municipal Lane extended from Post Street to Hopkins Street, the rear property line of three (3) parcels (1, 4, 5, block 30, Hilton Village Subdivision) on the southeast corner of Warwick Boulevard and Hopkins Street to the rear property line of the lots facing north on the south side of Hopkins Street and along such rear property line to River Road. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3130. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Uses permitted. In the Historic District, buildings or premises may be used as permitted in the underlying R5 or C1 zoning districts in accordance with Article IV, section 45-402 with the following modifications: 
(1)  R5 Low Density Residential Modifications: In the R5 Low Density Residential District the following uses are not permitted by right in the Hilton Village Historic District: 
a.  Multiple-family 
b.  Planned Residential Development 
c.  Public or Private Secondary School 
d.  Community Recreation Center 
e.  Fire Station 
f.  Library 
g.  Neighborhood Swimming Pool 
h.  Police Station 
i.  Public or Private Elementary School 
j.  Bus Stop, Bus Shelter or Taxi Stand. 
(2)  C1 Retail Commercial District Modifications: In the C1 Retail Commercial District the following uses are not permitted by right in the Hilton Village Historic District: 
a.  Hospital 
b.  Medical and Dental Laboratory 
c.  Nursing Home, Convalescent Home 
d.  Outpatient Care Clinic 
e.  Electrical Substation 
f.  Child Care Center 
g.  Vocational School 
h.  Funeral Home 
i.  Lodge, Fraternal or Social Organizations 
j.  Neighborhood Swimming Pool 
k.  Public or Private Golf Course 
l.  Parcel Distribution Center 
m.  Coin Operated Commercial Laundry 
n.  Country/Yacht Club 
o.  Health Club and Fitness Center 
p.  Cemetery Monument Sales 
q.  Convenience Store Without Gasoline 
r.  Department Store 
s.  Extended Stay Motel 
t.  Furniture and Upholstery Store 
u.  Golf Pro Shop/Clubhouse 
v.  Light Equipment Rental and Leasing 
w.  Liquor Store 
x.  Mall/Mall Building 
y.  Hotel/Motel 
z.  Pawn Shop 
aa.  Tennis Pro Shop/Clubhouse 
bb.  Auto Parts Store (no service) 
cc.  Boat Basin 
dd.  Drive-Up Windows and Drive-Through Lanes. 
Provided further that the following uses are permitted by right in the C1 Retail Commercial District in the Hilton Village Historic District: Dwelling unit above or adjacent to a commercial facility, bed and breakfast, single-family detached, duplex and single-family attached dwelling. 
(3)  Accessory uses: Any use customarily incidental or accessory to any other above uses is permitted in this district when clearly established as an accessory use to a permitted use. 
(4)  Signs: Signs permitted in the Hilton Village Historic District shall be those set forth in City Code section 45-33.01-4(e). In reviewing requests for such signs, the architectural review board shall consider whether each sign is compatible with the Hilton Village architecture and concept. 
(5)  Special exceptions: Special exceptions shall be permitted as allowed in the regular zoning district regulations; provided, however, that the review as otherwise required shall include review by the architectural review board. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 7466-18)  
Sec. 45-3131. - Architectural standards. 
New buildings in the Hilton Village Historic District shall be basically rectangular in plan and shall conform with the original design of the village in spacing, height, and setback. Materials and color shall be in conformity with the guidelines set by the architectural review board. Plans for all new buildings shall be approved by the board, unless otherwise provided. Additions and alterations to buildings shall also follow the guidelines set by the board, and plans shall be approved by the board. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3132. - Lot area and dimensional regulations. 
The lot area and dimensional regulations of the regular zoning districts shall apply unless otherwise modified below: 
(1)  Residential districts: Front and side yards shall conform to the pattern established by the original Hilton Village design. Accessory buildings shall be set back no less than three (3) feet from the side yard and five (5) feet from the rear yard. Notwithstanding the foregoing, accessory buildings may be reconstructed within the original footprint of prior or existing accessory buildings. 
(2)  Commercial districts: 
a.  Side and rear yards and height of buildings shall conform to regulations of the regular zoning district. 
b.  Front setbacks shall be no closer to the street than were the existing buildings on the date of passage of this chapter. However, the Hilton Village Architectural Review Board may approve front setbacks closer to the street when the building construction or addition meets the "Recommended Design Standards for the Hilton Village Commercial Area." 
c.  Building height shall not exceed forty (40) feet. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5332-99)  
Sec. 45-3133. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces and loading spaces shall be provided in conformity with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XXX. Plans for off-street parking shall be approved by the board. 
However, within the commercially zoned area of Historic Hilton Village public and private off-street parking spaces shall be provided in conformity with the adopted Hilton Area Neighborhood Plan. The number of off-street parking spaces required by Article XXX may be reduced provided that development plans for off-street parking shall be approved by the department of engineering. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3134. - Architectural review board. 
(a)  Creation of the architectural review board. The architectural review board shall be appointed by the Newport News City Council. Such board shall consist of seven (7) persons having the following qualifications: One (1) professionally licensed architect or engineer, one (1) landscape architect or artist, three (3) resident owners of Hilton Village, and two (2) owners or operators of businesses in Hilton Village. 
(b)  Term of office: The term of office is four (4) years for all members. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms, except that those members who initially fill unexpired terms less than four (4) years may be reappointed for two (2) full four-year terms. However, in no case shall any member serve more than ten (10) consecutive years. 
(c)  Organization and meetings: The board shall elect a chairman each year and other officers as necessary. The board shall meet at regularly scheduled times. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members, but a lesser number may conduct public hearings or meetings at which the principal purpose is collection of information, provided that no action binding on the board is taken at such hearings or meetings. All meetings and records of the board shall be public, and anyone present at the meetings shall be allowed to speak. Decisions by the board shall be made by a majority vote of those members present at any meeting where a quorum is present. 
(d)  Procedures and duties of the architectural review board: 
(1)  The architectural review board shall prepare guidelines for standards to be applicable to land and exterior buildings within the Hilton Village Historic District. 
a.  Such guidelines shall be in written form and shall become effective only upon a duly advertised hearing. 
b.  Said public hearing shall be advertised once in a local newspaper, not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of said hearing. 
c.  The board shall review the guidelines at least once each year at such public hearing and may make any changes necessary to protect the intent of the article. 
(2)  Plans to be submitted: 
a.  All plans for new buildings and additions and alterations to existing buildings in the Historic District shall be reviewed by the architectural review board, unless otherwise provided herein. The department of planning shall be responsible for receiving applications and providing technical assistance to the board. Whenever a permit for a building, a sign, or demolition is needed within an historic district, the applicant shall submit to the board plans showing sufficient detail for judgment to be made. The board shall review the application within thirty (30) days after it is filed. The board shall notify the applicant and the owners of the property adjacent to each side of the property in question of the time and place where a review is being held. Such notice shall arrive at least five (5) days before the review. 
b.  The board, when it deems it necessary in order to review a particular application, may require the submission of any or all of the following items: Architectural plans, plot plans, landscaping plans, plans for off-street parking, proposed signs, elevations of all portions of proposed structures facing streets, and elevation photographs or perspective drawings showing proposed structures and all such existing structures as are within one hundred (100) feet of the Historic District and are substantially related to it visually or by reason of function, traffic generation, or other characteristics. 
c.  In its review of the material submitted, the architectural review board shall examine the architectural design and the entire exterior surface, treatment of the structures within the area, and other pertinent factors affecting the appearance and efficient functioning of the Historic District. The board shall not consider any interior arrangement nor shall it make requirements except for the purpose of preventing development obviously incongruous to the historic aspects of the district. The board shall vote to approve or disapprove an application within sixty (60) days after the application is filed. 
(e)  Approval of application by architectural review board: When the board finds that the proposed building, alteration, repair, demolition, sign, or structure is within the intent of this article, the board shall issue a certificate of appropriateness and report its findings to the department of codes and compliance. A certificate of appropriateness is a written statement by the board indicating that the proposed building, use or structure fulfills the requirements of the Hilton Village District. 
(f)  Disapproval by the board: Should the board disapprove the application, it shall submit to the applicant a list of the reasons for disapproval and if possible suggestions for changing the application. The applicant may review and resubmit his application. 
(g)  Failure of the board to act: Should the board fail to approve or disapprove a complete application within sixty (60) days from the date of submission, the application shall be considered approved. 
(h)  Appeal: Decisions of the architectural review board may be appealed by any aggrieved party to the city council for review, setting forth in writing the alleged illegality of the action of the board, provided such petition is filed within thirty (30) days after the final decision rendered by the board. The filing of the petition of appeal shall stay the decision of the board pending the outcome of the appeal, except that the filing of the petition of appeal shall not stay the decision of the board if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. 
Any aggrieved party shall further have the right to appeal to the Circuit Court of the City of Newport News for review by filing a petition at law, setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of the council, provided that such petition is filed within thirty (30) days after the final decision is rendered by the council. The filing of the said petition of appeal shall stay the decision of the council pending the outcome of the appeal to the court, except that the filing of such petition of appeal shall not stay the decision of the council if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6221-06)  
Sec. 45-3135. - Administrative procedures. 
The city manager shall designate an agent of the city who shall be responsible for administration of these sections and shall handle the administrative approval of applications authorized herein. The administrator shall review such application for conformity with specific standards set forth by these sections and shall approve the same where appropriate by issuing a certificate of appropriateness for such activity when found in conformity with the guidelines and standards as set forth by the board and shall report in writing to the board the approval of the application and conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3136. - Administrative approval of routine activities. 
(a)  To facilitate the normal functioning of the village, the board shall identify and set forth in its guidelines those normal and routine exterior repairs and maintenance activities that may be performed without adverse influence or effect to the character of the village or intent of the Historic District regulations. 
(b)  The identification of these activities shall include specific details as to color, materials, dimensions and other information necessary to permit administrative review and approval of such activities. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3137. - Prohibition and standards. 
No building permit, sign permit, or other city permit shall be issued nor shall any individual undertake any of the activities listed below until the architectural review board or the designated administrator shall have certified that such activity is in conformance with the provisions of this section: 
(1)  New buildings: This shall include any new principal or accessory structure. 
(2)  Additions and/or alterations: This shall include any exterior modifications to existing structures. 
(3)  Fences: This shall include all new fences and any modification to existing fencing resulting in changes in height, material or location but shall exclude normal structural maintenance. 
(4)  Signs: See Chapter 33.01 of the City Code. 
(5)  Landscaping: This shall include any landscaping or yard decorations using structural or nonvegetative components when such landscaping components are twelve (12) inches above the average yard elevation and are visible from adjacent property. This board shall not consider or rule upon the appropriateness of any plant material. 
(6)  Painting: This shall include any colors utilized in the exterior finishes of structures in the village. 
(7)  Off-street parking: This shall include the construction of new driveway entrances or enlargements of existing entrances as well as the use of front yards for off-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
DIVISION 5. - SPECIAL ZONING REGULATIONS FOR THE OYSTER POINT URBAN CORE 
 
Sec. 45-3138. - General. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to provide for and encourage urban scale development in a portion of the City of Newport News known as the Oyster Point Urban Core. The area (henceforth referred to as the "Urban Core") is proposed for a concentration of uses such as professional and business offices, financial institutions, retail, municipal, cultural, transportation, entertainment and residential. To accomplish such purpose, this article provides for: 
(1)  The creation of the Urban Core Overlay District; 
(2)  Modifications to use and dimensional regulations within the Urban Core; 
(b)  Creation of the Urban Core. A special zoning district is hereby created to be known as the Urban Core and as shown on the zoning district map which is on file in the departments of codes compliance and planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5562-01)  
Sec. 45-3139. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the Urban Core, buildings or premises may be used for any use normally permitted in the underlying zoning district regulations set forth in article IV, section 45-402. The real estate in the Urban Core is all subject to covenants and restrictions, and no use may be made of such real estate that is inconsistent with or violates those covenants or restrictions. In addition to those covenants and restrictions and those uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, the following uses shall also be permitted by right within the Urban Core (section 45-402 matrix listing shown in parenthesis): 
Amusement establishment (I.5) 
Bicycle sales and service (J.5) 
Billiard parlor (I.2) 
Bowling alley (I.4) 
Car wash (K.8); provided that the building housing the car wash use shall be located wholly within a parking garage 
Coin-operated commercial laundry (H.4) as an accessory use to a multiple-family residential use 
Commercial parking lot or garage (L.3) 
Convenience store without gasoline (J.12); provided that the convenience store without gasoline use shall not be permitted in a separate freestanding building 
Food preparation, storage and distribution (M.5); provided that such use shall occupy less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 
Garden supply store (J.19); provided that such use shall occupy less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet 
Grocery store (J.21); provided that such use shall occupy less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet 
Hardware store (J.22); provided that such use shall occupy less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet 
Home accessory store (J.23) 
Medical center complex (C.2) 
Motel/hotel (J.32) 
Multiple-family (B.3); provided that the building housing this use shall be a minimum of four (4) stories in height 
Nightclub as defined in this chapter 
Off-site parking lot or garage (L.6) 
Off-premises sale of alcohol in an establishment of less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet in size (J.35) 
Other educational/group instruction (E.4) 
Skating rink (I.12) 
Theatre or stage (I.14) 
Toy or hobby store (J.45) 
Variety store (J.47) 
(b)  Accessory uses. Any use customarily incidental or accessory to any permitted use is permitted in this district when clearly established as an accessory use to a permitted use. 
(c)  Signs. Signs permitted in the Urban Core shall be those set forth in City Code Chapter 33.01, section 33.01-4(e). Such signs shall be compatible with the Urban Core architecture and concept. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5562-01; Ord. No. 7316-16, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3140. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
There shall be no minimum lot area, lot dimensions, yards regulations or height restrictions in this district. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3141. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  One (1) on-site parking space or garage space per dwelling unit shall be provided, except as provided for by Article XXVIII, section 45-2804. 
(b)  All off-street parking for commercial, community facilities and/or industrial uses shall be provided on-site or within a garage. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL HISTORIC ZONING REGULATIONS FOR NORTH END/HUNTINGTON HEIGHTS 
 
Sec. 45-3142. - General. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect against destruction, degradation, and encroachment upon the areas, structures, and premises designated to be of substantial historic significance; to encourage uses which will lead to their continuance, conservation, and improvement in a manner appropriate to the preservation of the historic heritage of the City of Newport News and the Commonwealth of Virginia; to prevent creation of environmental influences adverse to such purposes; and to assure that new structures and uses within the historic district created by this article will be in keeping with the character to be preserved and enhanced. To accomplish such purpose, this article provides for: 
 
(1)  The creation of the North End/Huntington Heights Historic District identified in this division of the City Code as the "Historic District"; 
(2)  Modifications to use and dimensional regulations within the Historic District; 
(3)  Architectural standards for the Historic District; 
(4)  The creation of an architectural review board for the Historic District identified in this division of the City Code as the "Architectural Review Board" or "Board"; and 
(5)  A procedure for reviewing plans by the Architectural Review Board. 
(b)  Creation of North End/Huntington Heights Historic District. A special zoning district is hereby created to be known as the North End/Huntington Heights Historic District and as shown on the Zoning District Map which is on file in the office of Codes Compliance and in the department of planning and development. The North End/Huntington Heights Historic District as shown on the zoning district map is bounded approximately by the south side of 72nd Street from Belvedere Drive to Warwick Boulevard, the west side of Warwick Boulevard from 72nd Street to 50th Street, the north side of 50th Street from Warwick Boulevard to Huntington Avenue, the east side of Huntington Avenue from 50th to 51st Street, the north side of 51st Street, in an westerly direction to the boundary of property belonging to Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company, on the east side of property belonging to Newport News Shipbuilding and Dry Dock Company north to a point on the south side of 57th Street extended, east on a line with the southerly line of 57th Street to Huntington Avenue, thence north on the east side of Huntington Avenue to its intersection with the northerly line of 68th Street, thence west along the easterly line of River Road to its intersection with 70th Street, thence east on 70th Street to Belvedere Drive including therein that parcel known as 7001 Belvedere Drive (Assessor's #282.0001-07), thence north on Belvedere Drive to its intersection with 72nd Street, excluding therefrom that parcel known as 310 73rd Street (Assessor's #282.0001-04). 
Existing community facilities and commercially zoned property within the boundary of the district are exempt from the provisions of the Historic District. 
(Ord. No. 5356-99)  
Sec. 45-3143. - Permitted uses. 
(1)  Uses permitted. In the Historic District, buildings or premises may be used as permitted in the underlying zoning districts in accordance with Article IV, section 45-402. 
(2)  Accessory uses: Any use customarily incidental or accessory to any other uses is permitted in this district when clearly established as an accessory use to a permitted use. 
(3)  Signs: Signs permitted in the Historic District shall be the same as those set forth in City Code section 33.01-4(e). In reviewing requests for such signs, the Architectural Review Board for the Historic District shall consider whether each sign is compatible with the architecture and concept of the Historic District. 
(4)  Special exceptions: Special exceptions shall be permitted as allowed in the regular zoning district regulations; provided, however, that the review as otherwise required shall include review by the Architectural Review Board. 
(Ord. No. 5356-99)  
Sec. 45-3144. - Architectural standards. 
The design, height, setback and spacing of new structures in the historic district shall be in conformity with the guidelines set by the architectural review board. Plans for all new structures shall be approved by the board, unless otherwise provided. Additions and alterations to structures shall also follow the guidelines set by the architectural review board, and plans shall be approved by the board. 
(Ord. No. 5356-99)  
Sec. 45-3145. - Lot area and dimensional regulations. 
The lot area and dimensional regulations of the applicable regular zoning districts shall apply, unless otherwise modified below: 
Residential districts: Front and side yards shall conform to the pattern established by the original North End/Huntington Heights design. Accessory buildings shall be set back no less than three (3) feet from the side yard and five (5) feet from the rear yard. Notwithstanding the foregoing, accessory buildings may be reconstructed within the original footprint of prior or existing accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 5356-99)  
Sec. 45-3146. - Off-street parking and loading regulations. 
Off-street parking spaces and loading spaces shall be provided in conformity with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Article XXX of this chapter. Plans for off-street parking shall be approved by the board. 
(Ord. No. 5356-99)  
Sec. 45-3147. - Architectural review board. 
(a)  Creation of the architectural review board. The architectural review board shall be appointed by the Newport News City Council. Such board shall consist of seven (7) persons having the following qualifications: One (1) professionally licensed architect or engineer, one (1) landscape architect or artist, and five (5) resident owners of real estate in the North End/Huntington Heights Historic District. 
(b)  Term of office: The term of office is four (4) years for all members. No member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms, except that those members who initially fill unexpired terms of less than four (4) years may be reappointed for two (2) full four-year terms. However, in no case shall any member serve more than ten (10) consecutive years. 
The initial board shall be appointed to serve the following terms: three (3) members for four (4) years; two (2) members for three (3) years; two (2) members for two (2) years. Reappointments of such members shall be for four (4) years. 
(c)  Organization and meetings: The board shall elect a chairman each year and other officers as necessary. The board shall meet at regularly scheduled times. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members, but a lesser number may conduct public hearings or meetings at which the principal purpose is collection of information, provided that no action binding on the board is taken at such hearings or meetings. All meetings and records of the board shall be public, and anyone present at the meetings shall be allowed to speak. 
(d)  Procedures and duties of the architectural review board: 
(1)  The architectural review board shall prepare guidelines for standards to be applicable to land and the exterior of buildings and structures within the North End/Huntington Heights Historic District. 
a.  Such guidelines shall be in written form and shall become effective only upon adoption after a duly advertised public hearing. 
b.  Said public hearing shall be advertised once in a local newspaper, not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of said hearing. 
c.  The board shall review the guidelines at least once each year at a public hearing and may make any changes necessary to protect the intent of this division of the City Code. 
(2)  Plans to be submitted: 
a.  On and after April 1, 2000, all plans for new buildings and structures and additions and alterations to existing buildings and structures, including the painting thereof, in the historic district shall be reviewed by the architectural review board, unless otherwise provided herein. The department of planning shall be responsible for receiving applications and providing technical assistance to the board. On and after April 1, 2000, whenever a permit for a building, structure, sign, or demolition is needed for work to be performed within the historic district, the applicant shall submit to the board plans showing sufficient detail prior to the issuance of any such permit; provided, however, that demolition required pursuant to city codes enforcement activity shall not be subject to board review and approval. The board shall review an application within thirty (30) days after it is filed. The board shall notify the applicant and the owners of the property adjacent to each side of the property in question of the time and place where a review is to be held. Such notice shall arrive at least five (5) days before the review. 
b.  The board, when it deems it necessary in order to review a particular application, may require the submission of any or all of the following items: Architectural plans, plot plans, landscaping plans, plans for off-street parking, proposed signs, elevations of all portions of proposed structures facing streets, and elevation photographs or perspective drawings showing proposed structures and all such existing structures that are within one hundred (100) feet of the historic district and are substantially related to it visually or by reason of function, traffic generation, or other characteristics. 
c.  In its review of the material submitted, the architectural review board shall examine the architectural design and the entire exterior surface, treatment of the buildings and structures within the area, and other pertinent factors affecting the appearance and efficient functioning of the historic district. The board shall not consider any interior arrangement nor shall it make requirements except for the purpose of preventing development obviously incongruous to the historic aspects of the district. The board shall vote to approve or disapprove an application within sixty (60) days after the application is filed. 
(e)  Approval of application by architectural review board: When the board finds that the proposed building, structure, alteration, repair, demolition, or sign is within the intent of this division of the City Code, the board shall issue a certificate of appropriateness and report its findings to the department of codes and compliance. A certificate of appropriateness is a written statement by the board indicating that the proposed building, use or structure fulfills the requirements of the North End/Huntington Heights District. 
(f)  Disapproval by the board: Should the board disapprove the application, it shall submit to the applicant a list of the reasons for disapproval and if possible suggestions for changing the application. The applicant may review and resubmit his application. 
(g)  Failure of the board to act: Should the board fail to approve or disapprove a complete application within sixty (60) days from the date of submission, the application shall be considered approved. 
(h)  Appeal: Decisions of the architectural review board may be appealed by any aggrieved party to the city council for review, setting forth in writing the alleged illegality of the action of the board, provided such petition is filed within thirty (30) days after the final decision rendered by the board. The filing of the petition of appeal shall stay the decision of the board pending the outcome of the appeal, except that the filing of the petition of appeal shall not stay the decision of the board if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. 
Any aggrieved party shall further have the right to appeal to the Circuit Court of the City of Newport News for review by filing a petition at law, setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of the council, provided that such petition of appeal is filed within thirty (30) days after the final decision is rendered by the council. The filing of the said petition of appeal shall stay the decision of the council pending the outcome of the appeal to the court, except that the filing of such petition of appeal shall not stay the decision of the council if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 5356-99; Ord. No. 6221-06)  
Sec. 45-3148. - Administrative procedures. 
The city manager shall designate an agent of the city who shall be responsible for administration of this division of the City Code and shall handle the administrative approval of applications authorized herein. The administrator shall review such application for conformity with specific standards set forth by these sections and shall approve the same where appropriate by issuing a certificate of appropriateness for such activity when found in conformity with the guidelines and standards as set forth by the architectural review board and shall report in writing to the architectural review board the approval of the application and conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 5356-99)  
Sec. 45-3149. - Administrative approval of routine activities. 
(a)  To facilitate the normal functioning of the historic district, the architectural review board shall identify and set forth in its guidelines those normal and routine exterior repairs and maintenance activities that may be performed without adverse influence or effect to the character of the historic district or intent of the historic district regulations. 
(b)  The identification of these activities shall include specific details as to color, materials, dimensions and other information necessary to permit administrative review and approval of such activities. 
(Ord. No. 5356-99)  
Sec. 45-3150. - Prohibition and standards. 
No building permit, sign permit, or other city permit shall be issued nor shall any individual undertake any of the activities listed below until the architectural review board or the designated administrator shall have certified that such activity is in conformance with the provisions of this division of the City Code: 
(1)  New buildings: This shall include any new principal or accessory structure. 
(2)  Additions and/or alterations: This shall include any exterior modifications to existing structures. 
(3)  Fences: This shall include all new fences and any modification to existing fencing resulting in changes in height, material or location but shall exclude normal structural maintenance. 
(4)  Signs: See Chapter 33.01 of the City Code. 
(5)  Landscaping: This shall include any landscaping or yard decorations using structural or nonvegetative components when such landscaping components are twelve (12) inches above the average yard elevation and are visible from adjacent property. The board shall not consider or rule upon the appropriateness of any plant material. 
(6)  Painting: This shall include any colors utilized in the exterior finishes of structures in the historic district. 
(7)  Off-street parking: This shall include the construction of new driveway entrances or enlargements of existing entrances as well as the use of front yards for off-street parking. 
(Ord. No. 5356-99)  
DIVISION 7. - NEOTRADITIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 45-3151. - General. 
Purpose and intent: The purpose and intent of this division is to promote well-planned and designed mixed-use pedestrian oriented development of property within Newport News, Virginia, and to incorporate the "Concepts of New Urbanism" (or, neotraditional communities) into the development of property in a Neotraditional Overlay District within the city. This division prescribes standards for the construction and reconstruction of structures within Neotraditional Overlay Districts approved in accordance with this division. Regulations in this division supplement and modify district regulations set forth in other articles of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5631-01)  
Sec. 45-3152. - Approval of neotraditional development proposals; modification of development regulations. 
The city manager or his designee may approve neotraditional development proposals subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  The property to be developed must contain no less than fifty (50) acres or, in the alternate, consist of no more than three (3) parcels containing a minimum combined total of three hundred (300) acres, each of which must be located no more than three-quarters (¾) [of a] mile apart and be developed as part of a conceptual master plan. No less than seventy-five (75) percent of the property to be developed shall be zoned R-9 and the remainder of which may be zoned C-1 or C-2. 
(2)  The property owner/developer shall submit ten (10) copies of a conceptual master plan for preliminary review by the director of planning prior to site plan review. Upon review by the city's site plan review committee, the conceptual master plan shall be sent to the city manager for consideration and approval. Once approved, a copy of the conceptual master plan shall be kept on file with the city's departments of planning and engineering. The conceptual master plan shall be drawn to a readable scale and show the location of all buildings, streets, parking, landscaping, and other physical improvements, including necessary public improvements. More specifically, the conceptual master plan shall include: 
a.  A traffic circulation plan, a utilities plan, and the location of all green areas or parks. The conceptual master plan shall also identify the location, type and number of proposed structures. The conceptual master plan may be implemented in phases, and the site plan submitted for approval before each phase is begun shall contain a detailed traffic circulation, utility, parking management and landscaping plans for the applicable phase; and 
b.  The location and area calculation of land that is intended for common, quasi-public or amenity use, but not proposed to be in public ownership, together with a description of the form of ownership and control upon the completion of the first phase of the development; and 
c.  A general description of the anticipated phases to be constructed; 
d.  A pattern book of architectural guidelines and design standards to implement the vision of the conceptual master plan. The pattern book shall include, but not be limited to: narrative, photos, architectural renderings, section elevations, site plans, and material lists. 
(Ord. No. 5631-01; Ord. No. 6221-06; Ord. No. 6662-10)  
Sec. 45-3153. - Permitted uses, signs. 
(a)  Permitted uses: In the Neotraditional Overlay District, buildings or premises may be used for any use normally permitted in the underlying zoning district regulations set forth in section 45-402 of this chapter. In addition, single-family, two-family, and single-family attached uses shall be permitted on properties zoned R-9. 
(b)  Accessory uses: Any use customarily incidental or accessory to any permitted use is permitted in this district when clearly established as an accessory use to a permitted use. 
(c)  Signs: Signs permitted in the Neotraditional Overlay District shall be those set forth in Chapter 33.01, Newport News City Code. Such signs shall be compatible with the neotraditional architecture and concept as set forth in the approved master plan. 
(Ord. No. 5631-01)  
Sec. 45-3154. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
There shall be no minimum lot area, lot dimensions, yard regulations, height regulations, or transitional area buffers. 
(Ord. No. 5631-01)  
Sec. 45-3155. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  The off-street parking requirements established in section 45-3004 of this chapter may be reduced by the zoning administrator through the approval of a parking management plan for the applicable phase to be implemented. 
(1)  Such parking plan shall include: 
a.  A scaled drawing of the development for such phase, showing and labeling all proposed structures, uses, parking spaces, sidewalks, pedestrian crossings, property lines, cross-access easements, and rights-of-way. 
b.  For each phase, a table containing the gross floor area, required number of off-street parking spaces, proposed number of off-street parking spaces, and proposed number of on-street parking spaces for each use. 
c.  As phases are developed, the total number of parking spaces provided and the total use permitted in all approved phases shall be calculated to determine permissible reductions in parking, if any. 
d.  Bus circulation routes to serve the development. 
(2)  In no case shall less than one (1) on-site parking space or garage space per dwelling unit be provided. 
(3)  Off-street parking for commercial and community facilities shall be provided either on-site or off-site. "Shared" parking for separate facilities may be permitted whether by cross-easements or other standard business practices. 
(Ord. No. 5631-01)  
DIVISION 8. - LOWER JEFFERSON AVENUE URBAN CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 45-3156. - Purpose. 
Purpose and intent: The purpose of this division is to establish an overlay district known as the Lower Jefferson Avenue Urban Corridor Overlay District. The intent of this division is to promote well-planned and designed mixed-use pedestrian oriented development of property along an older section of Jefferson Avenue. This division prescribes standards for construction and reconstruction of buildings and sites within the Overlay District. Regulations for the Lower Jefferson Avenue Urban Corridor Overlay District supplement and modify district regulations set forth in other articles. 
(Ord. No. 6052-04)  
Sec. 45-3157. - Established boundaries. 
Lower Jefferson Avenue Urban Corridor Overlay District (LJAUC): The district boundaries of the Lower Jefferson Avenue Urban Corridor Overlay District (LJAUC) are established on the Zoning District Map, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 6052-04)  
Sec. 45-3158. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Permitted uses. In the district, buildings or premises may be used for any use normally permitted in the underlying zoning district regulations set forth in Article IV, section 45-402. In addition, the following uses shall be permitted as a matter of right (section 45-402 matrix listing shown in parenthesis): 
Single-family attached (B.2.1) 
Housing for older persons—Single-family attached (B.2.2) 
Multiple-family (B.3) 
Housing for older persons—Multiple family (B.3.1) 
High rise apartment (B.4) 
Bed & breakfast (B.11) 
Mixed-use building with any combination of residential, commercial and/or office uses. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Any use customarily incidental or accessory to any permitted use is permitted in this district when clearly established as an accessory to a permitted use. However, certain accessory uses may have special requirements or require a special exception. Refer to Article V and Article XXXII to determine what special requirements may apply. 
(c)  Signs. Signs permitted in the district shall be those set forth in Chapter 33.01, Newport News City Code. Such signs permitted in the district shall be compatible with the architecture of the structures. 
(Ord. No. 6052-04)  
Sec. 45-3159. - Area and dimensional regulations. 
There shall be no minimum lot area, lot dimensions, yard regulations, height regulations, or transitional buffer areas. 
(Ord. No. 6052-04)  
Sec. 45-3160. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  On site parking shall not be required for office and commercial uses. 
(b)  Residential units require a minimum of one (1) parking space per dwelling unit located either on-site or on adjacent property. However, parking for housing for older persons may be reduced in accordance with Article XXX, section 45-3004.4. 
(c)  Parking for community facilities shall be located off-street. 
(d)  Any public parking lot, no more than four hundred (400) feet from the use it serves, may be counted towards the parking requirement for community facility uses. 
(e)  All off-street parking shall be located behind buildings or within structures. 
(Ord. No. 6052-04)  
Sec. 45-3161. - Requirements. 
The development of any site within the Overlay District shall be in accordance with the Jefferson Avenue Corridor Study, as adopted by city council on September 8, 2009, and an approved master plan and/or site plan. 
(a)  Development or redevelopment of a block or part thereof shall require the submittal of a master plan approved by the director of planning. 
(1)  The master plan shall be drawn to a readable scale and show the location of all buildings, streets, light fixtures, parking, landscaping, sidewalks or pedestrian ways or other public spaces and other physical improvements, including but not limited to, location and screening of dumpsters, building elevations, floor area of non-residential space, sign design and materials. 
(2)  The master plan shall include a landscape plan drawn to scale, which shall show the location of all landscaping materials. Landscaping materials shall be used from an approved list compiled by the director of planning. 
(3)  The master plan shall include a development program indicating the sequence in which all structures, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems are to be developed, and a schedule of construction dates indicating the anticipated date of commencement and completion of the project and any phasing of the project, to include a plan for stormwater management on the site. 
(4)  For any residential or mixed use development that includes residential, the master plan shall indicate the use and number of dwelling units proposed. The master plan shall indicate the use and square footage of any non-residential use. 
(5)  The master plan submittal shall include all building elevations, to include materials, color, and style. 
(6)  Mechanical equipment shall not be visible from city rights-of-way. 
(7)  All utilities, including but not limited to, all wires, cables, pipes, conduits and appurtenant equipment, carrying or used in connection with the furnishing of electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable televisions, petroleum, gas, steam, water, or sewer systems, shall be installed underground notwithstanding any provisions of City Code section [Chapter] 40.1 to the contrary. 
(8)  Sustainable building practices shall be encouraged. 
(9)  Curb-cuts shall not be permitted on Jefferson Avenue. 
(b)  Development of a single lot shall require the submittal of a site plan in accordance with the site regulations, after or concurrent with review by the director of planning for compliance with the Jefferson Avenue Corridor study and, if applicable, with the approved master plan. 
(Ord. No. 6052-04; Ord. No. 6673-10)  
Sec. 45-3161.1. - Signs. 
(a)  Prior to review and the issuance of a sign permit by the director of codes compliance, all signs shall be submitted to and approved by the director of planning. The submission shall include: Sign design, location, dimensions of the proposed signs, a drawing to a readable scale, colors, and a description of the sign materials and method of illumination. 
(b)  Signs permitted in the district shall be those set forth in chapter 33.01, Newport News City Code, except those specifically prohibited by this chapter. 
(c)  Portable and freestanding signs are prohibited, except as provided in (d) below. 
(d)  A shopping center of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater of gross leasable area developed in the Lower Jefferson Avenue Urban Corridor Overlay District without frontage on Jefferson Avenue and developed pursuant to an approved master plan as required in section 45-3161, shall be allowed one (1) freestanding sign on a sign parcel adjacent to Jefferson Avenue. Such sign shall be no more than ten (10) feet in height and eighty (80) square feet in area. 
(e)  For the purposes of this article, a sign parcel shall be defined as an individually, legally created parcel in the Lower Jefferson Avenue Urban Corridor Overlay District designed to be used exclusively for construction of a freestanding sign. 
(Ord. No. 6673-10; Ord. No. 7303-16)  
DIVISION 9. - LEE HALL CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 45-3162. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to improve the unique and architectural value and character of the Lee Hall area of the City of Newport News contiguous to major corridors, as defined herein, and to provide for and promote its orderly development and redevelopment by creating an overlay district. The overlay district recognizes the significant routes of tourist access of the major corridors, which serve as the gateways to the Lee Hall area and its historic destinations. 
This overlay district is also intended to encourage appropriate renovations to existing mixed-use, commercial and industrial structures and compatible new construction by promoting the use of building forms, materials and site design that will improve the architectural and visual character of these major corridors, and to encourage a diversity of architectural style that is compatible with the character of the area's historic resources. 
(Ord. No. 6294-06)  
Sec. 45-3163. - Established boundaries. 
The Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District regulations shall apply to all non-residentially used or zoned parcels of land contiguous to the right-of-way of the following major corridors as of the effective date of this ordinance, but shall not extend beyond five hundred (500) feet of the adjacent side of the corridors. Also, individual single-family parcels of land not subject to the provisions of the site regulations are not controlled by the regulations of this overlay district division. However, any single-family subdivision submitted for final plat approval after the effective date of this ordinance is subject to the provisions of this division. The Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District corridors are defined as follows: 
(a)  Jefferson Avenue from Ft. Eustis Boulevard to the James City County line. 
(b)  Yorktown Road from the York County line to the intersection of Warwick Boulevard. 
(c)  Crafford (Crawford) Road from the York County line to Yorktown Road. 
(d)  Interstate 64 from the northern boundary of Newport News Reservoir (Campsite Drive) to the James City County and York County lines. 
(Ord. No. 6294-06)  
Sec. 45-3164. - Permitted uses, uses that are not permitted, uses requiring conditional use permits and accessory structures. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Permitted uses in the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District shall be as established by the underlying zoning district as set forth in Article IV, Section 45-402, of the City Code, subject to the following limitations: 
Permitted with a conditional use permit: 
1.  All uses with drive through service. 
2.  Any commercial, office or industrial buildings greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in area. 
Not permitted: The following uses are not permitted in the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District: 
(1)  Amateur radio tower greater than seventy (70) feet in height. 
(2)  Automobile sales/used car dealership. 
(3)  Commercial radio or TV station. 
(4)  Communication tower/antenna. 
(5)  Extended stay motel. 
(6)  Mini-storage warehouse. 
(7)  Mini-storage warehouse—Single entrance interior storage. 
(8)  Outside storage as main use. 
(9)  Pawn shop. 
(10)  Automobile, limousine, van, motorcycle leasing/rental. 
(b)  Accessory uses. Any use customarily incidental or accessory to any permitted use is permitted in this district when clearly established as an accessory to a permitted use. 
(Ord. No. 6294-06)  
Sec. 45-3165. - Affected development. 
(a)  Review required: Review and approval as identified in this division shall be required for all new subdivisions, multiple-family, mixed-use, commercial and industrial development, as well as for additions, alterations and improvements to existing mixed use, multiple-family, commercial and industrial buildings, structures, signs and sites located within the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District. Ordinary repair and maintenance to existing mixed use, multiple-family, commercial and industrial buildings, structures, signs and sites located within the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District are exempt from the review and approval process. Existing structures destroyed by fire or act of God may be replaced as provided in section 45-2902 of the City Code. 
(b)  Ordinary repair or maintenance activity permitted without review: Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of any building, structure, sign or exterior architectural feature described in this division. "Ordinary repair and maintenance" means work done to prevent deterioration or to replace parts of a building, structure, sign or exterior architectural feature with equivalent materials in order to correct any deterioration, decay of or damage to any such building, structure, sign or exterior architectural feature, the total cost of which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the structure's assessed value in any twenty-four (24) consecutive month period. 
(Ord. No. 6294-06)  
Sec. 45-3166. - Guidelines and development standards. 
Purpose and intent: The following guidelines and development standards are intended to protect and enhance the visual experience from the established entrance corridors and to reduce incompatible and adverse impacts on scenic and historic sites. 
(a)  Guidelines. The development of any site within the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District shall be in accordance with an approved master plan or site plan. Design and architectural features shall be consistent with the following provisions: 
(1)  Large work area doors or open bays of mixed use, commercial and industrial buildings shall not open toward or face the corridors. 
(2)  Active building elevations shall face public streets. Blank walls or loading areas shall not face public streets. 
(3)  Mechanical equipment, whether ground level or roof top, shall be either screened from view or located so that such mechanical equipment is not visible from the corridors identified in section 45-3163 of the City Code or adjacent properties. Large trash receptacles, dumpsters, utility meters, aboveground tanks, satellite dishes, antennas, etc., shall be similarly treated. Mechanical equipment on rooftops shall, to the extent possible, be hidden by building elements designed for that purpose as an integral part of the building design. 
(4)  Loading spaces for commercial and industrial sites shall be located only at the rear of buildings and should be out of view of the corridors identified in section 45-3163 of the City Code. Views from adjacent properties or uses must be minimized through site design, architectural design, topography, landscaping, setbacks or other features. 
(5)  Required parking areas should be located to the rear or side of main buildings or developed areas. 
(6)  Fencing along the corridor right-of-way should be of decorative (ornamental) style and located behind the landscape strip as required by the city's site regulations. 
(7)  Blank, solid walls should be avoided. 
(8)  Stucco, natural wood siding, brick, or other materials with similar texture and appearance shall be compatible with the area's character. Materials and colors should be varied where appropriate to provide architectural interest. 
(9)  Color schemes should be kept simple in character and harmonious in keeping with the period architecture. 
(10)  No building facade (whether front, side or rear) should consist of architectural materials inferior in quality, appearance, or detail to any other facade of the same building. The intent of this requirement is not to preclude the use of different materials on different buildings' facades (which would be acceptable if representative of good architectural design), but rather to preclude the use of inferior materials on sides that face adjoining property and thus, might adversely impact existing or future development. 
(11)  No visible portion of a building wall shall be constructed of corrugated material, sheet metal, or barren and unfinished cinder block. Standing seam metal roofs are acceptable. 
(12)  New architecture should be compatible with the area's design traditions, forms and materials. Generic franchise design is strongly discouraged. 
(13)  Buildings on the same site should have a strong spatial and functional relationship to each other and shall be varied in size and mass. 
(b)  Development standards. New subdivision, mixed-use, commercial and industrial development within this Lee Hall Overlay District should provide for visual compatibility and harmony with surrounding natural landforms and vegetation; be protective of views and vistas from the corridors identified in section 45-3163 of the City Code; and provide continuity of site design within the proposed development. These objectives include the following standards, in addition to the development standards specified for the underlying zones in the Zoning Ordinance: 
(1)  General. 
a.  Structures should not dominate, by excessive or inappropriate height or mass, any general development, adjacent building, or natural landscape. 
b.  Natural amenities such as views, trees, water courses, and other natural features should be preserved and incorporated into the site design. 
c.  Impervious surface areas should be minimized and landscaped areas should be maximized. 
d.  The maximum height of all structures shall be as permitted by the development standards for the underlying zoning district. 
e.  Outdoor storage as an accessory use shall be as permitted, provided that all outdoor storage areas are visually screened from public rights-of-way, internal roadways, and adjacent property. Screening shall consist of either a masonry wall, dense evergreen plants, or such other materials as may be found compatible and approved by the director of planning. All such screening shall be of sufficient height to screen storage areas from public view and shall be appropriately landscaped in accordance with the standards set forth in section 45-512 of the City Code. All company owned and operated vehicles, with the exception of passenger vehicles, are subject to this provision. 
f.  Site development should include streetscape improvements. These improvements are considered as those architectural or functional facilities or structures that occur on site but are not part of the building and that encourage and facilitate human interaction with the built environment. Examples include, but are not limited to the following: decorative light fixtures, fountains, sculptures, benches and tables, planters, retaining walls, pedestrian and bicycle paths, bicycle parking structures, driveways and parking areas except in historic places where these materials are incompatible with the character of the historic place. 
(c)  Grading and drainage. 
(1)  Development activities should avoid excessive or unsightly grading, indiscriminate earth moving or clearing of property, and removal of trees and vegetation that could cause disruption of natural water courses or disfigure natural land forms. 
(2)  Grading for new development shall not adversely affect adjacent property. 
(3)  Grading should not occur within the dripline of any tree(s) being preserved. 
(4)  Drainage shall be designed so as not to interfere with pedestrian traffic. 
(d)  Parking and circulation. 
(1)  Parking lot, traffic areas, and loading and unloading area requirements shall be as established by City Code Chapter 33.02-52, Site Regulations. In addition, the following shall apply: 
a.  Vehicular movement and parking areas shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, exposed aggregate, or pavers. Vehicular movement and parking areas surfaced with gravel or other similar material are prohibited except in historic places where these materials are compatible with the character of the historic place. Concrete curb and gutter or other stormwater management structure as approved by the director of engineering shall be installed around the perimeter of all parking areas. 
b.  All vehicle parking areas shall, whenever practicable, be located to the side or rear of the primary structure and screened with landscaping to soften the view from any public right-of-way. When vehicle parking areas must be located in front of the principal structure, a continuous hedge or landscaped berm or decorative wall of at least three (3) feet in height must be constructed to screen the parking area from any public right-of-way. 
c.  On large commercial sites, parking areas between outparcel buildings and the adjacent street are discouraged. 
(e)  Lighting. 
(1)  The proper layout, height, fixture selection and lighting level shall be incorporated into the site design to create a safe and secure environment. 
(2)  Fixtures used to accent architectural features, landscaping or art shall be located, aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the night sky. 
(3)  Architectural lighting shall be recessed under roof overhangs or generated from concealed source, low-level light fixtures. Roof lights, wall washes, lighted roof panels, and other methods of illuminating buildings are not allowed. 
(4)  Site lighting shall be of low-intensity from a concealed source, shall be of a clear white or amber light that does not distort colors, and shall not spill over onto adjoining properties, highways, or in any way interfere with the vision of on-coming motorists. Such lighting fixtures or devices shall be of a directional type capable of shielding the light source from direct view. The development plan or site plan must show the relationship of fixtures and the light patterns to each other, to the project site, to the unit development, and to the corridors identified in section 45-3163 of the City Code. 
(5)  Decorative, low-level intensity, non-concealed source lighting that defines vehicular and/or pedestrian ways is acceptable. 
(6)  The lighting plan shall not conflict with the landscape plan, and the two (2) shall be submitted simultaneously for review. 
(f)  Stormwater and BMP. All new development shall be in conformance with City Code Chapter 37.1, Stormwater Management. 
(g)  Utilities. All new utilities, including but not limited to all wires, cables, pipes, conduits and appurtenant equipment, carrying or used in connection with the furnishing of electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television, petroleum, gas steam, water or sewer systems, shall, after adoption of this division be placed below the surface of the ground; provided that: 
(1)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals and telephone pedestals, which are normally installed above ground may be so installed. 
(2)  Meters, service connections and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the premises they serve are acceptable. 
(3)  All equipment that is permitted to be installed above ground shall be screened with landscaping and/or fencing. Consideration should be given to placement of such equipment in order to minimize the view from the corridor. 
(h)  Landscaping requirements and tree protection. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of such landscaping requirements are to reduce the visibility of paved areas from adjacent properties and streets; moderate climatic effects; minimize noise and glare; and, to enhance public safety by defining spaces so as to influence traffic movement. Landscaping will also reduce the amount of storm water runoff, provide transition between neighboring properties, and frame and soften structures. Every effort shall be made through the design, layout, and construction of development projects to incorporate and preserve as many trees as possible. 
(2)  General. Landscaping and green area requirements shall be as established by City Code Chapter 33.02-51, Site Regulations. In addition, the following requirements shall apply to all landscape plans: 
a.  A landscaping plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the development or site plan submittal. 
b.  Such landscaping plan shall be drawn to scale, include dimensions and distances, and clearly delineate all existing and proposed vehicular movement and parking, and the location, size and description of all landscaping materials. All easements, transitional buffer areas and setback areas shall be labeled and dimensioned. 
c.  All plant materials shall be maintained in perpetuity in a healthy condition. The property owner or designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping materials as may be required by the provisions of this subsection. All plant material and landscaped bed areas shall be tended and maintained in a healthy growing condition, free from refuse, debris and weeds at all times. 
(3)  Parking area landscaping. In addition to the requirements of section 33.02-51(12) of the City Code, the following shall apply: 
a.  Masonry walls, fences, hedges or berms three (3) to four (4) feet in height in combination with required landscaping are required to screen parking areas with ten (10) spaces or more. 
b.  Pedestrian walkways between sites, parking areas and buildings are required to promote and enhance safe pedestrian circulation. 
(4)  Buffers and screening. Transitional buffer areas shall be provided as required by section 45-2802(e) of the City Code. Screening shall include a wall or fence designed to block visual and noise impacts to ensure compatibility between adjacent uses. 
(5)  Requirements for landscape plans. Outdoor furniture and fixtures for commercial and mixed-use development are elements of building and landscape design, and shall be identified on the landscape plan. 
(6)  Tree protection. 
a.  No person shall cut down, destroy, move, or remove or cause to be cut down, destroyed, moved or removed any living, disease-free tree of any species having a trunk six (6) inches in caliper or larger, measured four and one-half (4½) feet from the base, in conjunction with any development of land governed by this division until such activity has been approved under the provisions of this division. 
b.  No land shall be cleared or altered prior to approval of a development or site plan. 
c.  A survey of all trees six (6) inches in caliper or larger within the development area shall be made and submitted in conjunction with the development plan. All trees proposed for removal shall be clearly noted. The tree survey shall be certified either by a licensed land surveyor, registered engineer, or landscape architect. 
d.  When preliminary site evaluation by the applicant reveals the ability to accomplish the proposed project without removal of any trees six (6) inches in caliper or larger, the applicant shall submit a written statement that no trees will be removed and the development plan or site plan will indicate "No Large Caliper Tree Removal" as a condition thereof. 
e.  Those trees designated for preservation in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance as shown on the approved landscaping plan shall be protected in accordance with section 33.02-51.(c) of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 6294-06)  
Sec. 45-3167. - Reserved.  
Sec. 45-3168. - Signs. 
Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section are to regulate the use of signage within the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District; to protect and enhance the visual character of these entrance corridors and surrounding historic sites; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; and, to minimize visual clutter that is potentially harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property val ues, and community appearance. Signs permitted in the district shall be those set forth in City Code Chapter 33.01, except the following: 
(a)  No portable signs are permitted; 
(b)  Freestanding signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and shall be no more than one hundred (100) square feet in sign area. 
(Ord. No. 6294-06)  
Sec. 45-3169. - Plan review and approval. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Preliminary review is required for all new subdivision, mixed use, commercial and industrial development, additions and major improvements to existing mixed use, multiple-family commercial and industrial buildings, structures and sites in the Corridor Overlay District prior to development or site plan submittal. All proposals shall be submitted to the department of planning for preliminary review. 
(2)  Upon completion of preliminary review, but in no event more than thirty (30) working days after the preliminary plan submittal, staff will provide the developer a formal application form and identify the submittal requirements; provided, however, that no statement or omission in the staff's declaration of submittal requirements shall relieve any developer from the obligation to fully comply with all city requirements. 
(3)  After preliminary review, all developers of new residential projects (excepting only individual single-family homes), additions and major improvements to existing buildings, structures and sites proposed in the Corridor Overlay District shall submit a formal application to the director of planning for committee review and approval. To be valid, a final submittal by the developer must be made no less than ten (10) days prior to the next scheduled committee meeting. The committee, as established under subsection (b), shall review the proposal only for conformance to the guidelines and development standards established in sections 45-3166 through 45-3168. 
(4)  The committee shall complete its review and file its findings in writing no less than thirty (30) days from final submission. When disapproving a plan or approving a plan with conditions, the committee shall specify the reasons for disapproval or conditional approval and cite those provisions of this chapter, the comprehensive plan, and/or the site plan ordinance that have not been met. Decisions by the review committee may be appealed by any aggrieved party within thirty (30) days to the city council. 
(5)  Upon final approval from the committee, the developer shall submit a development or site plan to the director of engineering in accordance with Chapter 33.02, Site Regulations, of the City Code, as amended. 
(b)  Submittal requirements for committee review. 
(1)  Within the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District, all development proposals will be reviewed by a review committee, which shall be comprised of the following members or, in the case of city officials, their designees: 
a.  Newport News City Manager. 
b.  Newport News Director of Planning. 
c.  Newport News Director of Development. 
d.  Newport News Director of Codes Compliance. 
e.  Newport News Museum and Historic Services Administrator. 
f.  A member of the city planning commission appointed by the planning commission chairman who will serve as the review committee chairman. 
g.  Two (2) citizen members, preferably from the Greater Lee Hall Area, who are residents, business or property owners appointed by the city planning commission. 
(2)  A quorum shall consist of five (5) members of the committee. 
(3)  All proposals must conform to the guidelines and development standards of the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District to the maximum extent possible, and to the zoning requirements of the underlying district. No clearing or building permits shall be issued until final project approval by the Lee Hall Corridor Overlay District review committee has been granted. 
(4)  The review committee shall meet at least once every month, except when there are no pending applications. Submittals shall include at a minimum an application, site development plan, and a written project description. The site development plan shall be prepared in accordance with City Code Chapter 33.02 Site Regulations. 
(b)  Failure of the review committee to act. Should the review committee fail to approve or disapprove the proposed development or site plan within thirty (30) working days from the date of the final plan submission, the application shall be considered to be approved. 
(c)  Time requirements. After final approval by the review committee, all approved plans will be effective for a two-year time period and may be renewed for additional one-year increments upon written request to and approval by the review committee. 
(d)  Filing fees. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) non-refundable filing fee shall be paid to the city and submitted to the director of planning upon filing of the formal application. 
(Ord. No. 6294-06)  
Secs. 45-3170—45-3200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXII. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 
 
Sec. 45-3201. - Powers and duties. 
The board of zoning appeals, hereafter called the board, shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Alleged administrative errors: The board is empowered to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. In deciding such appeals, the determination of the administrative office shall be presumed to be correct. At a hearing or an appeal, the administrative officer shall explain the basis for his determination after which the appellant has the burden of proof to rebut such presumption of correctness by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(2)  Variances: The board is empowered to authorize on appeal or original application in specific cases a variance from the terms of this chapter provided that the burden of proof shall be on the applicant for a variance to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that his application meets the standard for a variance and the criteria set out in section 45-3203. 
(3)  Special exceptions: The board is empowered to hear and decide upon applications for such special exceptions as are authorized in this chapter. 
(4)  Interpretation of zoning district boundary lines: The board is empowered to hear and decide applications for interpretation of the zoning district map where there is any uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. 
(5)  Exceptions to Chesapeake Bay preservation requirements: The board is empowered to hear and decide applications for exceptions to the Chesapeake Bay preservation requirements as specified in section 37.1-55. 
(6)  No power to rezone: No provision of this chapter shall be construed as granting the board the power to rezone property or to base board decisions on the merits of the purpose and intent of any ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5484-00, § 1; Ord. No. 5992-03, § 1; Ord. No. 7193-15)  
Sec. 45-3202. - Procedure for appeal of alleged administrative errors. 
(a)  An appeal to the board for an alleged administrative error may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator. 
(b)  An appeal must be taken within thirty (30) days after the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals for a notice of violation involving temporary or seasonal commercial uses, parking of commercial vehicles in residential zoning districts, or similar short term, recurring violations must be taken within ten (10) days after notice of the violation is provided. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Such papers shall also be made available without cost to the appellant within three business days of providing such materials to the board. 
(d)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and with notice to the zoning administrator, and for good cause shown. 
(e)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public notice once a week for two (2) successive weeks in some newspaper published, or having general circulation in the City of Newport News, as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within ninety (90) days of the filing of the appeal. The public notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing and final notice shall appear not less than six (6) nor more than twenty-one (21) days before the date of the public hearing. The term two (2) successive weeks shall mean that such notice shall be published at least twice in a newspaper with not less than six (6) days elapsing between the first and second publication. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination from which appealed. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5484-00, § 1; Ord. No. 6713-10; Ord. No. 7193-15)  
Sec. 45-3203. - Procedure for review and approval of variances. 
(a)  An application for a variance may be made by any property owner, tenant, government official, department, board or bureau and shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Applications shall not be processed unless the applicant provides satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city which have been properly assessed against the subject property have been paid. 
(b)  Such application shall completely disclose the equitable ownership of the real estate to be affected including, in the case of corporate ownership, the names of stockholders, officers and directors and in any case the names and addresses of all of the real parties of interest. However, the requirement of listing names of stockholders, officers and directors shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is traded on a national or local stock exchange and having more than five hundred (500) shareholders. In the case of a condominium, the requirement shall apply only to the title owner, contract purchaser, or lessee if they own ten (10) percent or more of the units in the condominium. 
(c)  The board shall conduct a hearing on said application subsequent to the notice requirements contained in subsection 45-3202(e). 
(d)  "Variance" means, in the application of this chapter, a reasonable deviation from those provisions regulating the shape, size, or area of a lot or parcel of land; or the size, height, area, bulk, or location of a building or structure when the strict application of the ordinance would unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property, and such need for a variance would not be shared generally by other properties, and provided such variance is not contrary to the purpose of the ordinance. It shall not include a change in use, which change shall be accomplished by a rezoning or by a conditional zoning. 
(1)  The board shall not authorize a variance unless it finds: 
a.  That the strict application of this ordinance would unreasonably restrict utilization of the property or the granting of the variance would alleviate a hardship due to a physical condition relating to the property or improvements thereon at the time of the effective date of the ordinance or alleviate a hardship by granting a reasonable modification to a property or improvements thereon requested by, or on behalf of, a person with a disability, and the property interest for which the variance is being requested was acquired in good faith and any hardship was not created by the applicant for the variance. 
b.  That the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and nearby properties in the proximity of that geographical area. 
c.  That the condition or situation of the property concerned is not so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this chapter. 
d.  That the granting of the variance does not result in a use that is not otherwise permitted on such property or a change in the zoning classification of the property. 
e.  That the relief or remedy sought by the variance application is not available through a special exception process or through modification of a zoning ordinance, both of which are authorized in this chapter. 
(e)  Any variance granted to provide a reasonable modification to a property or improvements thereon requested by, or on behalf of, a person with a disability may expire when the person benefitted by it is no longer in need of the modification to such property or improvements provided by the variance, subject to the provisions of state and federal fair housing laws, or the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. §12131 et seq.) as applicable. 
(f)  In authorizing a variance, the board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or bond to insure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the property upon which a property owner has been granted a variance shall be treated as conforming for all purposes under state law and local ordinances. The use or the structure permitted by the variance may not be expanded, unless the expansion is within an area of the site or part of the structure for which no variance is required. Where expansion is proposed within an area of the site or part of the structure for which a variance is required, the expansion may not occur unless an additional variance is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5867-02; Ord. No. 5873-02; Ord. No. 6276-06, § 1; Ord. No. 6541-08, § 1; Ord. No. 6619-09; Ord. No. 7193-15; Ord. No. 7315-16; Ord. No. 7476-18, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3204. - Procedure for review and approval of special exceptions. 
(a)  Applications for special exceptions may be made by any property owner, tenant, government official, department, board or bureau and shall be filed with the director of planning or his authorized representative. Applications shall not be processed unless the applicant provides satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city which have been properly assessed against the subject property have been paid. 
(b)  The board shall refer all special exception applications to the city planning commission for its recommendation. The city planning commission shall review the referred application and submit its recommendation to the board within sixty (60) days of the first meeting of the planning commission subsequent to referral. The planning commission report shall state whether the proposed special exception is in harmony with the intent of the applicable regulations in this zoning ordinance. In making its report, the planning commission may recommend to the board any conditions which should be attached to the special exception as to make it compatible with surrounding development. Failure of the planning commission to report within the prescribed sixty-day period shall be construed as an affirmative recommendation. 
(c)  Prior to action by the planning commission on any special exception, the applicant must meet with the director of planning, or his representative, to determine the appropriateness of the application and who may require such supporting information as he may deem to be necessary, including: 
(1)  A legal description of the property for which the special exception is requested. 
(2)  Complete disclosure of the equitable ownership of the real estate to be affected including, in the case of corporate ownership, the names of stockholders, officers and directors and in any case the names and addresses of all of the real parties of interest. However, the requirement of listing names of stockholders, officers and directors shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is traded on a national or local stock exchange and having more than five hundred (500) shareholders. In the case of a condominium, the requirement shall apply only to the title owner, contract purchaser, or lessee if they own ten (10) percent or more of the units in the condominium. 
(3)  Ten (10) copies and one (1) eight and one-half (8 ½) inch by eleven (11) inch reproducible copy of a plan, including a drawing or drawings of the proposed special exception. Such drawing shall be drawn to scale in such manner as to show clearly the following information: 
a.  The actual dimensions and shape of the property. 
b.  The exact size and location on the property of existing and proposed structures. 
c.  The existing and proposed uses of all structures and open areas. 
d.  The name of the owner, as well as the name of any other person preparing the plan, together with the north point, scale and number of sheets of the plan. 
e.  Such additional supporting information as may be deemed necessary by the director of planning to perform the evaluations required herein, including, but not limited to, topography, ingress and egress, vegetation, surrounding land use, proposed connections to existing or proposed water, sewer and drainage facilities. 
(d)  After notice as specified in section 45-3202(e), the board shall conduct a hearing on the application. The board may approve or deny the application and may impose such conditions relating to the use for which a special exception is granted as it may deem necessary in the public interest and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(e)  The board shall be authorized to hear and decide only those special exceptions listed below: 
(1)  The board may grant a special exception increasing the height and or floor area of accessory buildings and structures provided that: 
a.  The height or floor area increase is in harmony with the appearance of surrounding properties and does not create a harmful effect to the neighborhood; and 
b.  The accessory building and structure shall have at least the same required rear and side yard setbacks as the main building. 
c.  The board, as a condition of approval, may require additional side and rear yard setbacks for the accessory building and structure to be heightened or enlarged. 
(2)  A nonconforming lot of record having less than fifty (50) feet of frontage may be improved with a single-family detached dwelling provided that: 
a.  The single-family dwelling shall be two (2) stories or of similar design to abutting structures. 
b.  The front yard setback of the single-family dwelling shall be the average of the setbacks of existing buildings on the block, but not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
c.  The minimum side yard setback shall be five (5) feet. 
d.  An attached or detached garage shall be provided. However, if the garage is attached, it shall be attached on the side of the dwelling and recessed eighteen (18) feet from the front of the dwelling or attached in the rear of the dwelling. 
e.  The proposed dwelling is in harmony with the appearance of surrounding properties and does not create a harmful effect to the neighborhood. 
(3)  The board may grant as a special exception in the C1, C2 or C3 zoning districts the construction of a driveway for ingress and egress to any use permitted in the C2, C3, M1 or M2 zoning districts subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Access to the site does not otherwise exist over a public street. 
b.  A report is obtained from the director of planning to the effect that a public street is not essential to serve the special use being developed or other lands in the same proximity. 
c.  It is the judgment of the board that the proposed use and the potential vehicular traffic produced will not adversely affect the general character and development of the immediate area. 
(4)  The board may grant as a special exception a reduction of the required number of offstreet parking spaces provided that: 
a.  Any such reduction is limited to: 
1.  Community facilities, recreational services, utilities, educational services, transportation, wholesaling and warehousing, open industrial, limited industrial, and heavy industrial uses as specified in Article IV, section 45-402 Summary of Uses by District; 
2.  Commercial and related uses listed in section 45-3004(d); 
3.  Uses authorized by and located within the Neighborhood Conservation District as defined by Article XXXI; 
4.  Multiple-family housing for disabled persons or the elderly. 
b.  Applications for parking space reductions using off-site parking plans shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  The proposed development of the premises shall be for the following uses: 
a.  Commercial and related uses listed in section 45-3004(d). 
b.  Community facilities, recreational services, utilities, educational services, transportation, wholesaling and warehousing, open industrial, limited industrial and heavy industrial uses as specified in Article IV, Section 45-402, Summary of Uses by District 
2.  Off-site parking plans shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  The applicant shall demonstrate that off-site spaces are available to serve the uses proposed for the premises and such off-site spaces are within eight hundred (800) feet walking distance of a building entrance or use on the premises proposed for the parking reduction. The applicant shall demonstrate that safe and convenient pedestrian access is provided from the designated use to the off-site parking facility or that transportation is available from the off-site parking site to the premises. 
b.  The applicant shall demonstrate that the off-site parking spaces are available on a long-term basis of not less than twenty (20) years. 
c.  After approval of an off-site parking plan, the city zoning administrator shall approve no changes which would increase the parking needs of the affected premises served by that plan unless additional parking spaces are made available to serve the premises and the new off-site parking plan is approved by the zoning administrator. 
3.  A parking reduction which was granted based on an off-site parking plan shall be void in the event that said off-site parking plan is terminated in whole or in part. 
4.  This ordinance shall not be interpreted to prevent parking reductions employing both on-premises shared parking plans and off-site parking plans in appropriate circumstances. 
c.  The applicant proposing an on-site parking reduction for uses of community facilities, recreational services, utilities, educational services, transportation, wholesaling and warehousing, open industrial, limited industrial, and heavy industrial uses as specified in Article IV, section 45-402, Summary of Uses by District, or for any use in a neighborhood conservation district, shall clearly show that the proposed use: 
1.  Requires a lesser amount of parking than specified in this chapter; and 
2.  Provides an adequate amount of parking to accommodate employee and customer needs. 
d.  The applicant proposing on-site parking reductions for multiple-family housing for disabled persons or the elderly shall show that the proposed use: 
1.  Requires a lesser amount of parking than specified in this chapter; and 
2.  Provides an adequate amount of parking to accommodate employee and customer needs. 
3.  Provided that the reduction shall not be to less than seventy-five (75) percent of a space per unit. 
e.  The authorization of parking space reductions shall be limited to the specified use or uses for which the special exception is requested. Any enlargement of a building or change in use or uses shall be subject to the parking requirement as specified in this ordinance or as otherwise approved for increase or reduction as provided in this ordinance. 
(5)  The board may grant as a special exception, in any district where such use is not permitted as a matter of right, facilities for the keeping of horses, ponies, or similar animals provided that: 
a.  Such animals are exclusively kept for the recreational purposes of the family living on the premises. 
b.  The minimum area of any parcel used for the keeping of not more than two (2) such animals shall be five (5) acres. One-half (½) acre addition to the minimum lot area shall be required for each additional animal kept thereon. 
c.  Any building, structure or animal yard used for the housing of such animals shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from any property line and not less than one hundred seventy-five (175) feet from any adjacent dwelling. 
d.  Such use will not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood and provided further that other conditions which are imposed to protect the character of the neighborhood shall be observed. 
(6)  The board may grant an enlargement of nonconforming uses; provided that: 
a.  All yards, height, and other applicable dimensional regulations of the district in which the use is located shall be observed. 
b.  Any enlargement of a use shall be made in conformity with the regulations of the most restrictive district in which such use would ordinarily be permitted. 
c.  Any enlargement shall be limited to the same premises on which the use existed at the time it became nonconforming; provided, that in no case shall the nonconforming use be expanded across a zoning district boundary into a more restrictive district. 
d.  No enlargement of a building or use shall be made to create an entirely new use or to occupy more than one hundred (100) percent additional land area or floor space that was used at the time the use became nonconforming. 
e.  Such enlargement is in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood and such reconstruction or enlargement is in the general welfare of the public. 
(7)  The board may authorize the outdoor storage of goods and materials when located in the C2 district; provided, that: 
a.  Such storage is established as an accessory to a permitted use in the C2 district. 
b.  Materials so stored shall not be visible from any public right-of-way. 
c.  The storage of such goods or materials is screened or fenced in such manner so as not to detract from the character of the neighborhood. 
d.  Appropriate conditions in the form of screening and/or buffer area requirements shall be included to assure the protection of any adjacent residential district or development. 
(8)  The board shall authorize as a special exception the use and/or reduction of any buffer area for uses associated with the higher intensity district and not otherwise permitted within the buffer area whenever the board finds the buffer area is screened or fenced in a manner that insures that any authorized concentration of people, cars, noise or associated activities will not adversely affect any use permitted in the abutting lower intensity district and the granting of such special exception is: 
a.  Necessary for the reasonable use of the property; 
b.  Not detrimental to uses in or permitted in the abutting lower intensity district; and, 
c.  Any reduction shall not reduce the required number of trees for the remaining buffer area. 
The board in authorizing such special exceptions may impose reasonable conditions as may be required to insure compliance with this provision. 
(9)  The board may grant a special exception for a kennel to be located in any residential district for no more than six (6) domesticated animals; provided; 
a.  All animals shall be maintained in a healthy condition or, if ill, shall be given appropriate treatment immediately. 
b.  Animal pens shall be large enough (within recognized standards) to provide freedom of movement for each animal contained therein. 
c.  Any animal pen must be located in the rear yard and at least ten (10) feet away from any property line. 
d.  Litter and bedding material shall be changed to prevent odor that could adversely affect or impact neighboring properties. 
e.  No person shall utilize any space for the keeping of animals in any manner that is detrimental to the use of the adjacent property or that, because of odor, noise or attraction of flies or other pests, reduces or otherwise unreasonably restrict the rights of adjacent property owners to enjoy the use of their property. 
f.  No person shall permit the drainage from any space devoted to animals to contaminate or pollute any stream, watercourse or drainageway, natural or manmade. 
g.  No person shall store, stockpile or permit any accumulation of animal waste in any manner whatsoever that, due to odor, attraction of flies or other pests or for any other reason, diminishes the rights of adjacent property owners to enjoy reasonable use of their property. 
h.  Such kennel will not adversely affect or impact neighboring properties. 
(10)  The board may grant a special exception reducing or eliminating privacy fencing or treed buffers provided all of the following are met: 
a.  Any such reduction or elimination is limited to: 
1.  Community facilities as specified in Article IV., section 45-402, Summary of Uses by District. 
2.  Uses authorized by and located within the Neighborhood Conservation district as defined by Article XXXI. 
b.  That the applicant shall clearly show that the proposed surface lot: 
1.  Requires a lesser amount of fencing or tree screening or no fencing or tree screening; and 
2.  The applicant shall clearly demonstrate that the reduction or elimination of the fencing or tree screening is necessary by reason of surface lot location, location of existing fencing, location of adjacent residences and other special circumstances as may warrant such reduction or elimination. 
(11)  The board may grant as a special exception an increase to the maximum required number of off street parking spaces permitted for a retail store or personal service establishment, a furniture or appliance store, wholesale establishment or service shop and an enclosed mall building, provided that: 
a.  Such increase will not be detrimental to the general character and development of the immediate area. 
b.  Satisfactory evidence is provided that additional parking cannot be provided through sharing arrangements with adjoining properties. 
c.  Any such increase in parking also shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  If the site is wooded, a tree survey shall be conducted on the site prior to land clearance or work being conducted on the site and all trees of six (6) inch caliper or greater shall be saved within all green areas; 
2.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the total site shall be landscaped in accord with a plan developed by the applicant for the special exception and approved by the director of planning. The approved landscaping shall be installed and maintained by said applicant; 
3.  A twenty-five-foot landscape strip shall be installed and maintained along the site's existing or planned street frontage; 
4.  Notwithstanding any other provision in the City Code, the only freestanding sign on an undeveloped site shall be a ground sign; and 
5.  Notwithstanding any other provision in the City Code, if the site is already developed, any existing freestanding signs on site shall be removed and replaced with ground signs. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5048-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5205-98; Ord. No. 5752-02; Ord. No. 5867-02; Ord. No. 5873-02; Ord. No. 6445-08; Ord. No. 7315-16)  
Sec. 45-3205. - Procedure for interpretation of zoning district boundary. 
(a)  An application to the board to interpret the zoning district map where there is uncertainty as to the location of a zoning district boundary may be made by any property owner, government official, department, board or bureau and shall be filed with the zoning administrator. 
(b)  After notice to the owners of property affected by any such question and after public hearing with notice as required by section 45-3202(e), the board may interpret the map in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter for the particular section or district in question. 
(c)  The board shall not have the power to change substantially the locations of district boundaries as established by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3205.1. - Procedure for review and approval of exceptions to Chesapeake Bay preservation provisions. 
(a)  An application to the board for an exception to the provisions of Chapter 37.1, Article V, Chesapeake Bay Preservation, of the City Code, as amended, and Sections 37.1-51(b)(1)b., 37.1-51(b)(1)c., 37.1-51(b)(1)d., 37.1-51(b)(1)m., and 37.1-51(b)(2) thereof, may be made by any property owner, government official, department, board or bureau and shall be filed with the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(b)  No exception shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as required by § 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, except that only one (1) hearing shall be required before the board. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the notice may be given by first class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. 
(c)  The board may grant exceptions to the provisions of sections 37.1-51(b)(1)b., 37.1-51(b)(1)c., 37.1-51(b)(1)d., 37.1-51(b)(1)m, and 37.1-51(b)(2) upon its making the following findings: 
(1)  The requested exception to the criteria is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
(2)  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by Chapter 37.1 to other property owners who are subject to its provisions and who are similarly situated; 
(3)  The exception is in harmony with the purpose and intent of Chapter 37.1, Article V and is not of substantial detriment to water quality; 
(4)  The exception request is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed; 
(5)  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed as warranted that will prevent the allowed activity from causing a degradation of water quality; and 
(6)  Other conditions required by the board are met. 
(Ord. No. 5992-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6098-05, § 1; Ord. No. 7503-18, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3206. - Proceedings to prevent construction of a building in violation of zoning ordinance. 
Where a building permit has been issued and the construction of the building for which such permit was issued is subsequently sought to be prevented, restrained, corrected or abated as a violation of this zoning ordinance by suit filed within fifteen (15) days after the start of construction by a person who had no actual notice of the issuance of the permit, the Newport News Circuit Court may hear and determine the issues raised in the litigation even though no appeal was taken from the decision to the board of zoning appeals. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3207. - Appeals to court of record. 
(a)  Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board or any taxpayer or any administrative official, department, board or bureau of the city, may file with the clerk of the circuit court of the city a petition specifying the grounds upon which aggrieved within thirty (30) days after the final decision of the board. 
(b)  Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ of certiorari to review the decision of the board and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return must be made and served upon the appellant's attorney. Such time shall not be less than ten (10) days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings from which the decision appealed. The court may grant a restraining order subject to proper application, notice to the board, all based on due cause. 
(c)  The board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. 
(d)  If, upon hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a commissioner to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(e)  In the case of an appeal from the board to the circuit court of an order, requirement, decision or determination of a zoning administrator or other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of any ordinance or provision of state law, the findings and conclusions of the board on questions of fact shall be presumed to be correct. The appealing party may rebut that presumption by proving by a preponderance of the evidence, including the record before the board, that the board erred in its decision. Any party may introduce evidence in the proceedings in the court. The court shall hear any argument on questions of law de novo. 
(f)  In the case of an appeal by a person of any decision of the board that denied or granted an application for a variance, exception to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation requirements, or application for a special exception, the decision of the board shall be presumed to be correct. The petitioner may rebut that presumption by showing to the satisfaction of the court that the board applied erroneous principles of law, or where the discretion of the board is involved, the decision of the board was plainly wrong and in violation of the purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance, or Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance, where applicable. 
(g)  Costs shall not be allowed against the board, unless it shall appear to the court that it acted in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. In the event the decision of the board is affirmed and the court finds that the appeal was frivolous, the court may order the person or persons who requested the issuance of the writ of certiorari to pay the costs incurred in making the return of the record pursuant to the writ of certiorari. If the petition is withdrawn subsequent to the filing of the return, the board may request that the court hear the matter on the question of whether the appeal was frivolous. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5668-01, § 1; Ord. No. 5955-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6276-06, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3208. - Filing fee. 
(a)  No action shall be taken by the board on any petition for an appeal, an interpretation of the zoning district map, a variance as provided in this article or an exception to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation requirements until the petitioner shall have paid a filing fee to the City of Newport News in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) which shall not be refundable. 
(b)  No action shall be taken on any petition for a special exception as provided in this article by the board until the petitioner shall have paid a filing fee to the City of Newport News in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) which shall not be refundable. 
(c)  No application for action by the board shall be processed unless the applicant provides satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city which have been properly assessed against the subject property have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5992-03, § 1; Ord. No. 6418-07, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3209. - Rehearing for application for variance or special exception. 
(a)  Deferral of an application: An applicant may request the planning commission or board of zoning appeals to defer action on an application for a special exception, variance or exception to the Chesapeake Bay preservation requirements prior to a public hearing. When such request is granted, the applicant shall pay a reprocessing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) before the application is considered by the planning commission or board of zoning appeals. The fee shall not be required for an administrative deferral. 
(b)  Withdrawal of an application: An application for a variance, exception to the Chesapeake Bay preservation requirements or special exception may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to a public hearing; provided, such request is filed by 5:00 p.m. on the Thursday prior to the public hearing; however, any re-submittal shall be deemed a new application. 
(c)  Denial of application: If the application is denied by the board, substantially the same application shall not be reconsidered within one (1) year of denial. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5247-99; Ord. No. 5992-03, § 1)  
Secs. 45-3210—45-3300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXIII. - CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 45-3301. - Uses affected. 
A certificate of use and occupancy shall be required in the following cases: 
(1)  Any land or building which is erected, occupied or used after the effective date of this chapter or any change of use thereof. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use resulting from the adoption of this chapter or any subsequent amendment hereto. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3302. - Time required for conformity with regulations. 
A certificate of use and occupancy, when required, shall be obtained from the department of codes compliance as follows: 
(1)  A certificate of use and occupancy shall be obtained with respect to new buildings and uses, prior to the occupancy or use of any building or premises erected, established or used after the effective date of this chapter. 
(2)  With respect to existing nonconforming buildings or uses, a certificate of use and occupancy shall be obtained within sixty (60) days of notification of the owner or occupancy in writing by the department of codes compliance that a building or premises is a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-3303—45-3400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXIV. - CHANGE OF REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-3401. - Initiation of amendment of regulation or zoning district maps. 
Whenever the public necessity or convenience, or general welfare, and good zoning practice requires, the city council may, by ordinance, amend, supplement or change the regulations, zoning district boundaries or classifications of property. Any such amendment may be initiated by 1) resolution of the city council; 2) motion of the planning commission; or 3) petition submitted to the director of planning and development by the property owners or their agents addressed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3402. - Requirements. 
(a)  Any resolution or motion by the city council or the planning commission shall state the public purposes of the proposed rezoning. 
(b)  No amendment or re-enactment shall be made unless, within the time frame specified by Section 15.2-2285.B. of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the city council has referred the proposed amendment or re-enactment to the city planning commission for its recommendations and the commission shall communicate its findings to the city council, indicating approval or disapproval with written reasons thereof. Failure of the planning commission to report after the first meeting of the commission after the proposed amendment or re-enactment has been referred to the commission, or such shorter period as may be prescribed by the governing body, shall be deemed approval, unless such proposed amendment or re-enactment has been withdrawn by the applicant prior to the expiration of such time period. In the event of and upon such withdrawal, processing of the proposed amendment or re-enactment shall cease without further action as otherwise would be required by this subsection. 
(c)  The city planning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on such proposed amendment or re-enactment prior to making its recommendations. 
(d)  The city council shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on such proposed amendment or re-enactment prior to the approval and adoption thereof. 
(e)  Substantially the same petition for a proposed amendment to this chapter map or text will not be reconsidered for a period of one (1) year from the date of final council action on the initial petition. 
(f)  An affirmative vote of at least a majority of the members of the governing body shall be required to amend or re-enact this chapter. 
(g)  Where public hearings are required on a proposed amendment or re-enactment of this chapter, notice of such amendment or re-enactment shall be given in accordance with Section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
(h)  No action shall be taken on any petition herein until the petitioner shall have provided satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city which have been properly assessed against the subject property have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5269-99; Ord. No. 5866-02)  
Sec. 45-3403. - Procedure. 
(a)  The petition for an amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be filed with the director of planning, who shall transmit one (1) copy to the director of codes compliance. At the time of such filing, the director of planning shall be consulted as to the appropriateness of the proposed amendments. Such petition shall include: 
(1)  For a proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance text: 
a.  A suggested wording of the proposed revision properly referenced to the existing ordinance by article and section number; 
b.  The nature and extent of the amendment desired, together with an explanation of the reasons for seeking such change. 
(2)  For a proposed amendment to the zoning map: 
a.  A legal description of the property for which the change of zoning is requested. 
b.  Three (3) plats showing the property drawn at a scale with sufficient references to existing streets and subdivisions to enable said property to be located on city maps, along with the area of proposed zoning change, in square feet or acres. 
c.  Complete disclosure of the equitable ownership of the real estate to be affected including, in the case of corporate ownership, the names of stockholders, officers and directors and in any case the names and addresses of all of the real parties of interest. However, the requirement of listing names of stockholders, officers and directors shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is traded on a national or local stock exchange and having more than five hundred (500) shareholders. In the case of a condominium, the requirement shall apply only to the title owner, contract purchaser, or lessee if they own ten (10) percent or more of the units in the condominium. 
d.  The names and addresses as far as practicable of property owners abutting the property of which said change is requested. For this purpose, property separated from the petitioned property by a street shall be considered to abut said property. 
e.  A statement indicating the intended use of the property under the proposed zoning classification. 
f.  A statement signed by the property owner giving consent to the submission of the application when the property owner is not the applicant. 
g.  A conditioned or unconditioned proffer statement. 
h.  Ten (10) copies and one eight and one-half (8½) inch by eleven (11) inch reproducible copy of a more detailed plan as may be deemed necessary by the director of planning to perform the required evaluation. Such additional information may include, but need not be limited to: Topography, ingress and egress, location of buildings and improvements, vegetations, surrounding land use, proposed connections to existing or proposed water, sewer and drainage facilities. 
(b)  All applications shall be annotated with either of the following statements: 
(1)  "I hereby proffer that the development of the subject property of this application shall be in accordance with the conditions set forth in this submission." or 
(2)  "I hereby proffer that the development of the subject property of this application shall not be subject to any additional conditions not otherwise provided for the requested zoning district by ordinance." 
(c)  The director of planning shall place the proposed amendment on the agenda of the planning commission for public hearing at a regular meeting to be held no later than sixty (60) days after the proposed amendment is filed. When the property under consideration drains into any of the city's reservoirs, comments from the director of waterworks shall be solicited prior to planning commission action. The planning commission shall transmit its report and recommendation to the city council within one hundred (100) days from the date of the first meeting of the planning commission at which the proposed amendment first appears on the agenda for consideration. After such time, the council shall conduct its public hearing and take final action upon the petition. For the purpose of this article, the proposed amendment is deemed to be referred to the planning commission on the date the matter is to be first considered at a meeting by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6419-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7315-16)  
Sec. 45-3404. - Filing fee; continuance fee. 
(a)  No action shall be taken on any petition herein until the petitioner shall have paid a filing fee to the City of Newport News in the amount specified in this section. The base application fee shall be six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00). To this amount shall be added an acreage fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per acre for each acre subject to the petition; provided, however, that a minimum per acre fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be assessed and that a maximum per acre fee based upon one hundred (100) acres shall be assessed. The aforesaid fees are non-refundable. 
(b)  An additional non-refundable fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be paid by the petitioner for each continuance requested by the petitioner or his agent. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 6419-07, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3405. - Proffering of application. 
(a)  A petition may include and provide for the voluntary proffering in writing, by the owner, of reasonable conditions, prior to a public hearing before the city planning commission and/or the city council, in addition to the regulations provided for the zoning district or zone by this chapter, as a part of a rezoning or amendment to a zoning map, provided that (1) the rezoning itself gives rise to the need for the conditions; (2) such conditions have a reasonable relation to the rezoning; and (3) all such conditions are in conformity with the comprehensive plan as defined in Section 15.2-2223 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. Reasonable conditions shall not include, however, conditions that impose upon the applicant the requirement to create a property owner's association under Chapter 26 (Section 55-508 et seq.) of Title 55 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, which includes an express further condition that members of a property association pay an assessment for the maintenance of public facilities owned in fee by a public entity, including open space, parks, schools, fire departments, and other public facilities not otherwise provided for in Section 15.2-2241 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended; however, such excluded facilities shall not include sidewalks, special street signs or markers, or special street lighting in public rights-of-way not maintained by the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Once proffered and accepted as part of an amendment to the zoning ordinance, such conditions shall continue in effect until a subsequent amendment changes the zoning on the property covered by such conditions; however, such conditions shall continue if the subsequent amendment is part of a comprehensive implementation of a new or substantially revised zoning ordinance. 
(c)  No proffer shall be accepted by the city unless it has adopted a capital improvement program pursuant to Section 15.2-2239 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. In the event proffered conditions include the dedication of real property or payment of cash, such property shall not transfer and such payment of cash shall not be made until the facilities for which such property is dedicated or cash is tendered are included in the capital improvement program, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the city from accepting proffered conditions which are not normally included in such capital improvement program. If proffered conditions include the dedication of real property or the payment of cash, the proffered conditions shall provide for the disposition of such property or cash payment in the event the property or cash payment is not used for the purpose for which proffered. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5269-99; Ord. No. 5669-01, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3406. - Action by planning commission. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements set forth in section 45-3402, the city planning commission may recommend a change to the proposed rezoning in the following areas: 
(1)  It may recommend to reduce or enlarge the extent of land under consideration; 
(2)  It may recommend that the land be rezoned to a different zoning classification. 
Before recommending a larger extent of land or rezoning to a less restrictive use, the commission shall hold a further public hearing on the matter, of which proper notice shall be given according to section 45-3402. 
(b)  After approval of the application by the planning commission, any change made in the materials submitted as a part of the original application, when determined by the city council to be of significance, may necessitate the return of the application to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3407. - Action by city council. 
In addition to the requirements set forth in section 45-3402 above, any amendment adopted by the city council may be modified from the original text, provided that before approving the rezoning of a larger extent of land or a change to a less restrictive use, the council shall refer the application back to the planning commission for public hearing on the matter, of which proper notices shall be given according to section 45-3402. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3408. - Withdrawal of application and reconsideration. 
Withdrawal of an application for a change of zoning map or text may be requested prior to a public hearing provided such request is filed in writing to the director of planning and development three (3) days prior to the public hearing; however, if the application is denied by the city council, substantially the same application shall not be reconsidered within one (1) year of denial. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3409. - Action after approval by city. 
(a)  Upon adoption of the rezoning petition, the subject property shall be appropriately annotated on the zoning map, referencing the conditions, if applicable. The city zoning administrator shall keep a conditional zoning index on file for public inspection. The index shall contain the ordinance setting forth the conditions attached to each special annotation on the zoning map. Such conditions shall become a part of the zoning regulations applicable to the subject property and in addition to the specific district regulations. 
(b)  Upon approval of conditional zoning petitions, any site plan, subdivision plat or development plan thereafter submitted for the development of the subject property shall be in substantial conformity with all proffered statements, plans, profiles, elevations or other submissions; and no development plan shall be approved until compliance with conditions has been met. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3410. - Enforcement of approved conditional zoning amendments. 
(a)  In accordance with Section 15.2-2299 of the Code of Virginia, the zoning administrator shall be vested with all necessary authority on behalf of the city council to administer and enforce conditions attached to a rezoning or amendment to the zoning map, including: 
(1)  The ordering in writing of the remedy of any noncompliance with such conditions: 
(2)  The bringing of legal action to insure compliance with such conditions, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceedings; and 
(3)  Requiring a guarantee, satisfactory to the city council, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements required by the conditions, or a contract for the construction of such improvements and the contractor's guarantee, in like amount and so conditioned, which guarantee shall be reduced or released by the city council, or agent thereof, upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that construction of such improvements has been completed in while or in part. 
(b)  Failure to meet all conditions of an approved conditional zoning petition shall constitute cause to deny the issuance of any of the required use, occupancy, or building permits, as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5269-99)  
Sec. 45-3411. - Petition for review of decision regarding conditional zoning. 
Any zoning applicant or any other person who is aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator relating to an approved conditional zoning amendment may petition the city council for review of the decision of the zoning administrator. 
All such petitions for review shall be filed with the clerk of the city council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision for which review is sought, and such petition shall specify the grounds upon which the petitioner is aggrieved. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3412. - Amendments and variations of conditions. 
There shall be no amendment or variation of conditions created pursuant to the provisions of section 45-3405 until after public hearing before the city planning commission and/or city council advertised in accordance with the provisions of section 45-3402. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3413. - Appeals of city council decisions. 
Every action contesting a decision of the city council adopting or failing to adopt a proposed zoning ordinance or amendment thereto shall be filed within thirty (30) days of such decision with the circuit court having jurisdiction of the land affected by the decision. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to create any new right to contest the action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-3414—45-3500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXV. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION, PENALTY AND REMEDY 
 
Sec. 45-3501. - General. 
(a)  A zoning administrator shall be appointed by the director of codes compliance to enforce this chapter by receiving applications, issuing permits and certificates where applicable, as required by this chapter, and by making inspections to insure compliance with this chapter. The zoning administrator shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the governing body to administer and enforce this chapter, including the ordering in writing of the remedying of any condition found in violation of this chapter, and bringing a legal action to insure compliance with this chapter, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding. 
(b)  The zoning administrator may revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter for reasons of misrepresentation or false statement as to a material and relevant fact as to the plans or the premises upon which a permit was based. 
(c)  Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If the violation is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with the zoning ordinance, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a zoning violation within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); any such failure during any succeeding ten-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten-day period punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(d)  Any person who, having been served with an order by the zoning administrator to abate or remedy a violation of this chapter, shall fail to comply with such order within ten (10) days after such service or shall continue to violate this chapter in the respect named in such order shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial summons and not more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each additional summons. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. However, specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, and a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). Utilization of the civil penalty provided by this subsection shall preclude criminal sanctions for the same offense. 
(e)  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, in addition to other remedies, the zoning administrator may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation to prevent the occupancy of the buildings, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1; Ord. No. 5355-99; Ord. No. 7477-18, § 1)  
Secs. 45-3502—45-3600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXVI. - SEPARABILITY 
 
Sec. 45-3601. - General. 
If any part or parts, section or subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-3602—45-3700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXVII. - REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES 
 
Sec. 45-3701. - General. 
Any ordinance or any part of any ordinance in conflict with this chapter is hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Secs. 45-3702—45-3800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXXVIII. - INTENT OF REGULATIONS AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 45-3801. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this zoning ordinance to establish minimum requirements to and for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3802. - Conflict with local ordinances, statutes or regulations. 
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards, court or other open spaces, a lower height of buildings or less number of stories, or a greater percentage of lot to be unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required in any other statute, local ordinance, or regulation, the provisions of the regulations in this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, local ordinance or regulation require a greater width or size of yards, courts or other open spaces, a lower height of buildings or less number of stories, or a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required by the regulations made in this chapter, the provisions of such statute, local ordinance or regulation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3803. - Conflict with private agreements. 
It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate or annul any contracts, easements, covenants or other agreements between private parties; provided, however, that in all cases where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than any private agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall be observed. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
Sec. 45-3804. - Conflict with Chesapeake Bay Preservation Chapter. 
Whenever any provision of this zoning ordinance imposes less restrictive standards than those imposed by Chapter 37.1, Article V. Chesapeake Bay Preservation, the requirements of Article V shall have precedence. 
(Ord. No. 5028-97, § 1)  
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 3421-86 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REORDAINING APPENDIX B—SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS, OF THE CODE OF THE CITY OF NEWPORT NEWS, VIRGINIA. 
WHEREAS, Title 15.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, requires that the city shall adopt an ordinance to assure the orderly subdivision of land and its development; and 
WHEREAS, revised subdivision regulations have been considered by the Planning Commission of the City of Newport News for recommendation, the regulations have been advertised as required by law, and the said Planning Commission has made its recommendation. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the City of Newport News that Appendix B—Subdivision Regulations, of the Code of the City of Newport News, Virginia, be, and the same hereby is amended and reordained to read as follows: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This appendix consists of Ordinance No. 3421-86, as adopted on Jan. 28, 1986, superseding Ord. No. 1020, as amended. Amendments to the original ordinance are indicated by a history note appearing in parentheses ( ) at the end of the amended section. The absence of such a note indicates that it is derived, unamended, from Ordinance No. 3421-86. Any words appearing in brackets [ ] were added by the editor for clarity. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without comment. 
Section 2 of Ord. No. 3111-83, adopted Dec. 12, 1983, reads as follows: 
"That until such time as Appendix A, Zoning Ordinance, Appendix B, Subdivision Regulations, and Appendix C, Site Plan Ordinance are amended by deleting therefrom all references to `Director of Public Works,' `Department of Public Works,' `Division of Engineering' and `Public Works Office,' and substituting therefore [therefor] `Director of Engineering' for `Director of Public Works' and `Department of Engineering' for the remaining aforementioned designations, and for the purposes of administering the aforementioned appendices in an orderly and efficient manner during this transition period, the Director of Engineering is hereby appointed as and shall act in the stead of the Director of Public Works for the said purposes of administering the aforementioned appendices only." 
Cross reference— Subdivision ordinance not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-5(8); planning commission, § 2-462 et seq.; building regulations, Ch. 13; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16; health and sanitation, Ch. 20; mobile home parks, Ch. 25; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 26; parks, squares and recreational facilities, Ch. 29; sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33; soil removal and other land-disturbing activities, Ch. 35; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 38; swimming pools, Ch. 39; water supply, Ch. 42; zoning ordinance, Ch. 45. 
State Law reference— Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq.; requirement that municipalities adopt ordinances to assure the orderly subdivision of land and its development, § 15.2-2240; provisions to be included in subdivision ordinance, § 15.2-2241 et seq.; Subdivided Land Sale Act of 1978, Code of Virginia, § 55-336 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE 
 
Sec. 1-01. - Short title. 
This ordinance is known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of Newport News, Virginia."  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 2-01. - Words and terms. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words and terms used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: 
Words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the singular number include the plural, and the plural the singular unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise; the word "lot" includes the word "parcel"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "approve" shall be considered to be followed by the words "or disapprove"; any reference to this ordinance includes all ordinances amending or supplementing the same; all distances and area refer to measurement in a horizontal plane. 
2-01.1.  Agent. The city manager, a representative of the governing body, who has been appointed to serve as the agent of the city council in the approving of subdivision plats. 
2-01.2.  Alley. A permanent service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
2-01.3.  Building setback. The minimum distance that a building must be set back from the front property line or front boundary line. 
2-01.4.  City. Corporation of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
2-01.5.  Commission (or planning commission). The city planning commission of Newport News, Virginia. [2] 
2-01.6.  Comprehensive city plan. Any plat or part thereof officially adopted pursuant to Virginia Law for the physical development of the City of Newport News or any territory within its jurisdiction showing the long-range proposals for the general development of the city and including but not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  A land use plan designating area for various types of public and private development and use; 
(2)  A major thoroughfare and transportation plan designating a comprehensive system of transportation facilities; 
(3)  A community facilities plan designating a comprehensive system of community facilities such as parks and recreational areas, schools, public buildings, community centers, waterworks, sewage disposal, refuse disposal and the like; 
(4)  A plan for designating areas for urban renewal and neighborhood rehabilitation. 
2-01.7.  Cul-de-sac. A singular public street with no adjoining public streets along its length, terminating in an appropriate turnaround for a safe and convenient reverse traffic movement. 
2-01.8.  Design Criteria Manual, City of Newport News. A statement of the minimum acceptable criteria and guidelines that will be used in the design and review of all public facilities and also in the review and approval of site and subdivision plans. 
2-01.9.  Developer. An owner of property being subdivided, whether or not represented by an agent. 
2-01.10.  Development plans. Plans and specifications for the construction of the physical improvements required in this ordinance. 
2-01.11. Director. The director in charge of the department of planning for the City of Newport News. 
2-01.12.  Easement. A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes. 
2-01.13.  Engineer or land surveyor. A certified professional engineer or land surveyor licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
2-01.14.  Final plat. A plat prepared in conformity with this ordinance showing metes and bounds of all lots and land within a subdivision to be recorded at the clerk's office as a permanent record of the property so subdivided. 
2-01.15.  Governing body. The city council of Newport News, Virginia. 
2-01.16.  Jurisdiction. The area or territory subject to the legislative control of the governing body. 
2-01.17.  Lot. Any piece, parcel, or portion of property created in a subdivision. 
2-01.18.  Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. The shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot. 
2-01.19.  Lot, depth of. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
2-01.20.  Lot, double frontage. An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. 
2-01.21.  Lot, front. That part of a lot which abuts any vehicular right-of-way, except as provided in section 2-01.18. 
2-01.22.  Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
2-01.23.  Lot of record. A numbered and recorded portion of a subdivision intended for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court's office. 
2-01.24.  Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot at the minimum building setback line established by front yard setback requirements of the zoning ordinance [Appendix A] and/or by a recorded subdivision plat. 
2-01.25.  Outlots. Lots that do not meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance [Appendix A] as to minimum width and depth. 
2-01.26.  Plat. [Repealed by Ord. No. 3479-86.] 
2-01.27.  Property. Any tract, lot, parcel of land or several of the same, collected together for the purpose of subdividing. 
2-01.28.  Standard Specification Manual. A city document that specifies acceptable construction materials, methods, techniques, testing procedures and general contract conditions for construction of public improvements to be accepted into the city system. 
2-01.29.  Street. The principal means of access to properties having frontage on same. 
2-01.30.  Street, collector (secondary thoroughfares). A street that conducts traffic or is intended to conduct traffic between major and local streets and/or provides for the collection of traffic, or is intended to provide for the collection of traffic, as a principal entrance into, or a principal means of circulation within one (1) or more subdivisions. 
2-01.31.  Street frontage. All the property abutting one (1) side of a street between two (2) crossing or terminating intersecting streets measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street. On the turnaround portion of a cul-de-sac, the frontage is that portion of the property abutting upon the turnaround as measured along the circumference of the circular right-of-way. 
2-01.32.  Street, local or minor service. A street that is used primarily as a means of public access to the abutting properties but is not a collector street or major street as defined herein. 
2-01.33.  Street, major. A heavily traveled thoroughfare or highway that carries or is intended to carry a large volume of through traffic. The term "major street" is synonymous with the term "major thoroughfare" or "arterial thoroughfare." 
2-01.34.  Street, service drive. A public right-of-way generally parallel and contiguous to a major highway, primarily designed to promote safety by eliminating promiscuous ingress and egress to the right-of-way by providing safe and orderly points of access to the highway. 
2-01.35.  Street width. The total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel, including the roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and planting strips. 
2-01.36.  Subdivide. To subdivide shall mean the division of a parcel of land by the owner thereof into lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development and shall specifically include the division of a lot or parcel of land by an owner in order to create within, on, or through that lot or parcel of land a street meeting the specifications of this ordinance to be dedicated to the public. 
2-01.37.  Subdivision. The land subdivided as defined herein; and, when appropriate to the context, the process of subdividing or resubdividing. 
2-01.38.  Subdivider. An individual, corporation or partnership, owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided, or a group of two (2) or more persons owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided, who have given their power of attorney to one (1) of their group or to another individual to act on their behalf in planning, negotiating, in representing or executing the legal requirements of the subdivision. 
2-01.39.  Concept plat. A plat prepared in conformity with city policy showing metes and bounds of all lots and land within a subdivision and on record in the department of engineering. 
2-01.40.  Certificate. A document to be recorded in the clerk of the court's office prepared in conformity with city policy describing metes and bounds of all lots and land within a subdivision to be recorded at the clerk's office as a permanent record of the property so subdivided. 
2-01.41.  Legal plat. A plat prepared in conformity with this ordinance showing metes and bounds of all lots created in a subdivision for the purposes of public streets and/or public improvements. 
2-01.42.  Neotraditional Overlay District. Neotraditional Overlay District is defined as that overlay district established in the Zoning Ordinance of the City Code which regulates that development of property defined as "neotraditional" in Section 45-201 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
2-01.43.  Appendix A. Appendix A is defined as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Newport News, Virginia, and designated as Chapter 45, Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3479-86; Ord. No. 5634-01, § 1; Ord. No. 7501-18) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-462 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 3-01. - Agent and administration. 
The city manager is hereby designated and appointed the agent for the city council for the approval or the disapproval of the subdivision plats. The director, under the direction of the city manager shall administer this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 7501-18)  
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 4-01. - Compliance with regulations. 
From and after the effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereof, the following provisions shall be effective within the City of Newport News and shall not negate the requirements of the city zoning ordinance [Chapter 45]: 
(a)  For every subdivision lot of five (5) acres or more, the following sections and articles of this ordinance shall apply: 
1.  Section 4-01.8. Court partition. 
2.  Section 4-01.10. Conflict with other ordinances. 
3.  Section 5-01. General requirements. 
4.  Section 5-02. Preliminary development plan. 
5.  Section 5-05. Filing of final plat. 
6.  Section 5-06. Recordation of final plat. 
7.  Section 5-07. Appeals. 
8.  Section 5-08. Filing and recording fees. 
9.  Article VI. Requirements of Preliminary Development Plans. 
10.  Article VII. Requirements of Final Plat. 
11.  Section 8-01.1. Lots [Shape]. 
12.  Section 8-01.2. Size. 
13.  Section 8-01.9. Usable land area. 
14.  Section 8-05. Easements. 
15.  Section 8-06. Easements along streams. 
16.  Section 8-07. Land inadequately drained. 
17.  Article XIII. Violations and penalties. 
18.  Article XIV. Separability clause. 
19.  Article XV. Amendments. 
20.  Article XVI. Repeal. 
(b)  For every subdivision lot of five (5) acres or more that has existing public street frontage or would front on a proposed public street, the following sections and articles of this ordinance shall apply: 
1.  All articles and sections as listed in subsection (a) therein. 
2.  Article IV. General regulations. 
3.  Section 8-01.1. Location. 
4.  Section 8-01.10. Access to major thoroughfares. 
5.  Section 8-03.7. Private streets. 
6.  Section 8-04. Building setback lines. 
(c)  For every subdivision lot of less than five (5) acres, all sections of the Subdivision Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as "this ordinance") shall apply. 
(d)  For every subdivision lot, irrespective of size, created for the purposes of public streets and/or public improvements, the requirements of this ordinance for such public streets and/or public improvements shall apply. A final plat or legal plat, as determined by the department of planning, shall be required whenever a street to be dedicated to the city is created. 
(e)  For every Neotraditional Overlay District, the following shall apply. 
1.  All articles and sections as listed in (a) and (b) herein above, but excluding subsections (a)5. and (a)10. 
2.  All pertinent articles and sections of Chapter 33.02, Site Regulations, of the City Code, as set forth therein. 
3.  The director shall resolve any conflicts which may exist among city ordinances and regulations associated with development proposals within Neotraditional Overlay Districts. 
4-01.1.  Plat required. No person shall subdivide land without making and recording a plat of such subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
4-01.2.  Approval before recording. No such plat of any subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the duly authorized agent of the city council as provided herein. No clerk of any court shall file or record a plat of a subdivision required by this ordinance to be recorded until such plat has been approved as required herein. 
4-01.3.  Sale of lots in unrecorded subdivision prohibited. No person shall sell or transfer any such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of a subdivision, before such plat has been duly recorded as provided herein, unless such subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of this ordinance, provided nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the recordation of the instrument by which such land is transferred or the passage of title as between the parties to the instrument. 
4-01.4.  No building permit issued. No building permit shall be issued for any structure or building to be located on any land which has been subdivided or is proposed to be subdivided until a plat of such subdivision has been recorded in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
4-01.5.  Private contracts. This ordinance bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction, nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein to any public official. When this ordinance calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contract, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
4-01.6.  Relation to zoning. When the intended use of all or part of the platted area, as indicated by the preliminary development plan and as shown on that plan, indicates the land to be subdivided would be used in a manner not permitted as a matter of right in the zoning district which exists at the time the final plat is filed with the city, the subdivider shall file at his own expense and as a condition to the approval of the preliminary development plan an application for a change in zoning of the affected area to a classification consistent with the use to be made of the proposed subdivision. 
4-01.7.  Payments by subdividers and developers for certain off-site sewerage and drainage facilities. Subdividers or developers of land may be required to pay a pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary sewerage and drainage facilities, located outside the property limits of the land owned or controlled by them but necessitated or required, at least in part, by the construction or improvement of their subdivision or development. Such payments shall not be required until such time as city council or a department designated by city council shall have established a general sewerage and/or drainage improvement program for an area having related and common sewer or drainage conditions and within which is located the land owned or controlled by the subdivider or developer. 
(1)  Payments shall be required only after establishment of regulations approved by city council which set forth reasonable standards to determine the proportionate share of total estimated cost of ultimate sewerage and drainage facilities required adequately to serve a related and common area, when and if totally developed in accord with the adopted comprehensive plan, that shall be borne by each subdivider or developer within the area. Such share shall be limited to the amount necessary to protect water quality based upon the pollutant loading caused by the subdivision or development or to the proportion of such total estimated cost which the increased sewerage flow, water flow and/or increased volume and velocity of stormwater runoff to be actually caused by his subdivision or development bears to total estimated volume and velocity of such sewerage, water and/or runoff from such area in its totally developed state. In calculating the pollutant loading caused by the subdivision or development or the volume and velocity of stormwater runoff, the city shall take into account the effect of all on-site stormwater facilities or best management practices constructed or required to be constructed by the subdivider or developer and give appropriate credit therefore. 
(2)  The regulations required above shall include a provision that payments received by the city shall be expended only for construction of those facilities for which the payment was required, and until so expended shall be held in an interest-bearing account for the benefit of the developer or subdivider. The regulations may allow, however, for the posting of personal, corporate, or property bond, cash escrow or other method of performance guarantee conditioned on payment at commencement of construction. 
4-01.8.  Court partition. If the partition of any tract is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction when a bona fide dispute exists between the parties in interest, none of the requirements of this ordinance shall apply. Partition shall not be sought merely as a means to circumvent the provisions of this ordinance. 
4-01.9.  Reserved. 
4-01.10.  Conflict with other ordinances. Whenever regulations contained in this ordinance impose higher restrictions than regulations contained in other municipal ordinances, the regulations of this ordinance shall prevail. 
4-01.11.  Conflict with Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance. Any provision of Chapter 13.5, Chesapeake Bay Preservation, which is found to be in conflict with any provision of this ordinance shall be controlling and shall supersede said provision of this ordinance to the extent of such conflict. 
4-01.12.  Subdivisions approved by subdivision review board. Any subdivision for which relief from strict compliance with the provisions of this ordinance was granted by the subdivision review board on or before December 31, 2018, shall be deemed in compliance in all respects with this ordinance. 
4-01.13.  No ingress and egress over landscaped areas of subdivision entrances. No curb cut, nor other improvement, shall be allowed for ingress and egress over landscaped areas of the entrances to subdivisions, which either now exist or are to be dedicated and created in the future, where these landscaped areas are specifically designed or used for aesthetic enhancements to the public rights-of-way and for future expansion of the paved portion of the streets they abut. 
(Ord. No. 3479-86; Ord. No. 4275-91; Ord. No. 4635-94; Ord. No. 4659-94; Ord. No. 4660-94; Ord. No. 4744-95; Ord. No. 5635-01; Ord. No. 5670-01; Ord. No. 5891-03; Ord. No. 5959-03, § 1; Ord. No. 7501-18; Ord. No. 7526-19)  
ARTICLE V. - PROCEDURE FOR MAKING AND RECORDING PLATS 
 
Sec. 5-01. - General requirements. 
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, the subdivider or their agent shall apply in writing to the director for the approval of the preliminary development plan, development plans and final subdivision plat. Approval of these plans by the director and the recording of the subdivision plat shall be prerequisite to the granting of any building permit for the erection of a structure on the land subdivided. 
For subdivisions described in sections 4-01(a) and 4-01(b), if there is no intent on the part of any party to develop any parcel of land included in the subdivision at the time of subdivision, the subdivider or his agent shall apply in writing to the director requesting a waiver from the requirements of the preliminary development plan, development plan and final plat; this waiver request shall be accompanied by a concept plat and certificate in accordance with city policy. Waiver of any or all preliminary development plan, or development plan or final plat requirements shall be based upon and related to the director's determination that existing or proposed public facilities will not be impacted. 
(Ord. No. 3479-86; Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 5-02. - Preliminary development plan. 
Prior to the submission of a development plan, any subdivider contemplating any subdivision of land of more than fifty (50) lots, as herein defined or the extension of an existing street(s) or the creation of a new street or streets shall submit to the director five (5) blue or black line copies of a "preliminary development plan" showing the general layout to be proposed for the entire tract to be subdivided. For a development of fifty (50) or less lots, such submission is at the option of the developer. 
Such preliminary development plan shall be reviewed by the director. The preliminary development plan may be required to conform with the city's comprehensive plan and with accepted principles of subdivision design. If approval of a feature or features of the preliminary development plan by a state agency is necessary, the director shall forward the preliminary development plan to the appropriate state agency or agencies for review within ten (10) business days of receipt of such preliminary development plan. 
The director or authorized representative shall meet with the subdivider to discuss elements of proper street layout and neighborhood design as related to the preliminary development plan and to the general area involved. 
5-02.1. Review fees. The following nonrefundable fees shall be paid upon filing the preliminary development plan: 
(1)  For the initial filing of an original plan: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each lot as shown on the submitted plan. 
(a)  For the next filing of a plan which has been revised in response to initial city review of the original plan, there shall be no charge, and 
(b)  For subsequent filings of a plan which has been revised in response to initial city review of the original plan: Two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). 
(2)  For the filing of any plan to phase the project or make minor alterations or revisions to the original plan, except as provided above: One hundred dollars ($100.00). If the director determines that the alterations and/or revisions reflect major changes in the project, the plan shall be deemed an original plan and processed under section 5-02.1.(1). 
5-02.2. Approval. Approval by the director is required prior to the recordation of any plat creating lots as described in this ordinance. The subdivider shall have not more than twelve (12) months from the date of preliminary development plan approval to record such plats. Failure to do so shall make the approval null and void, provided, however, the director may, on written request by the subdivider, grant an extension of the time limit. Such request shall be filed with the director no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration of the twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 3880-89; Ord. No. 4186-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4411-92; Ord. No. 5206-98, § 1; Ord. No. 6392-07, § 1; Ord. No. 7089-14; Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 5-03. - Plat filing fee. 
For the filing of each plat not covered elsewhere in this appendix, a charge shall be paid to the city. When such charge is applicable, it shall consist of two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each lot as shown on the submitted plat. 
(Ord. No. 4186-91, § 1; Ord. No. 4456-93)  
Sec. 5-04. - Development plans. 
Five (5) blue or black line prints of the plans and specifications for the development of all required physical improvements to be installed shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer or certified land surveyor and shall be submitted as "development plans" to the director for approval or disapproval. If approved, one (1) copy bearing certification of such approval shall be returned to the subdivider. If disapproved, all papers shall be returned. 
If rezoning is required under section 4-01.6, evidence of approval shall be submitted. The plans shall show details for the construction of all improvements required by this ordinance and shall show existing conditions. Details for sewers, water lines, streets, grading of lots with corner elevations, drainage plans, and all other essential details shall be shown as defined in section 10-01. 
5-04.1. Review of plans. The director or his authorized representative shall discuss the development plans with the subdivider in order to determine whether or not his development plans generally conform to the requirements of the [this] subdivision ordinance and of the zoning ordinance [Appendix A]. The subdivider shall then be advised in writing concerning any additional data that may be required, and the character and extent of public improvements that have to be made. An estimate of the cost of construction will be required as a prerequisite to approval of the final subdivision plat. Such an estimate shall be filed with the director by the developer upon submission of the final plat. 
5-04.2. No guarantee. Approval of the development plans by the director does not constitute a guarantee of approval of the final plat. 
5-04.3. Review fees. The following nonrefundable fees shall be paid upon filing the preliminary development plan: 
(1)  For the initial filing of an original plan; Four hundred dollars ($400.00) plus thirty dollars ($30.00) for each lot as shown on the submitted plan. 
(a)  For the next filing of a plan which has been revised in response to initial city review of the original plan, there shall be no charge, and 
(b)  For subsequent filings of a plan which has been revised in response to initial city review of the original plan: Two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). 
(2)  For the filing of any plan to phase the project or make minor alterations or revisions to the original plan, except as provided above: One hundred dollars ($100.00). If the director determines that the alterations and/or revisions reflect major changes in the project, the plan shall be deemed an original plan and processed under section 5-04.3.(1). 
5-04.4.  Approval time. Any submittal or resubmittal of a development plan shall be considered approved if not acted upon within sixty (60) days from the date of such submittal or resubmittal. 
(Ord. No. 3881-89; Ord. No. 4186-91, § 1; Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 5-05. - Filing of final plat. 
The following provisions shall apply to the filing of a final plat: 
5-05.1. Conditions for approval. The plat shall not be approved until the subdivider has completed the general improvements contemplated, certified that the cost of construction thereof has been paid and complied with the general requirements and minimum standards of design in accordance with this ordinance except as provided in section 5-05.2. Any construction which is undertaken to satisfy the requirements of section 5-05.1 or 5-05.2 shall not begin before the director or authorized representative is notified of this commencement of work. Approval of final plat shall be written on the face of the plat by the city manager. 
5-05.2. Bond insurance and agreement. In lieu of actual completion of the improvements required by this ordinance, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the City of Newport News and shall furnish to the city a certified check or bond with corporate surety or escrow agreement evidencing the deposit to the credit of the subdivider with the right of the city to draw on said account in the event subdivider fails to make required improvements or an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank qualified to do business in Virginia evidencing the establishment of credit to the subdivider on which letter the city shall be authorized to draw drafts in the event subdivider fails to make the required improvements in an amount equal to the costs of completion of said improvements. A certificate of insurance shall be given by the subdivider as evidence of liability insurance which shall defend, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or death to persons growing out of the activity by the subdivider in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each occurrence and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) aggregate, together with twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) property damage coverage. Such insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured by separate endorsement to the policy or as otherwise approved by the city attorney's office. The city attorney or assistant shall examine and approve or disapprove the form of the aforementioned instruments. The costs of said uncompleted improvements shall be set by the director for purposes of determining the amount of said check, bond, escrow agreement or letter of credit. The designated length of time to be allowed for the subdivider to complete the required improvements shall be fixed by the director. After the installation by the subdivider of the streets and improvements in the subdivision as required by this ordinance, a performance bond of a value equal to ten (10) percent of the proposed public improvements cost plus the full value of street surfacing for streets not surfaced shall be filed with the director until acceptance of streets and improvements by the city in accordance with section 9-11, "Acceptance of streets and improvements." 
(Ord. No. 4411-92; Ord. No. 5206-98, § 1; Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 5-06. - Recordation of final plat. 
5-06.1.  Recordation after approval. The final plat shall be recorded under the names of the owners of lands signing the plat and under the subdivision name in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Newport News upon approval by the city manager. 
5-06.2.  Recordation, transfer, title. The recordation of such plat shall operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the City of Newport News such portion of the premises platted as is on such plat set apart for streets, alleys, public easement or other public use and to create a public right-of-way passage over the same; but nothing in this ordinance shall affect any right of a subdivider of land heretofore validly reserved.  
Sec. 5-07. - Appeals. 
5-07.1.  Approval. The city manager shall act on any proposed final plat within sixty (60) days after it has been officially submitted for approval by either approving or disapproving the final plat in writing, and giving with the latter specific reasons therefor. The city manager shall thoroughly review the plat and shall make a good faith effort to identify all deficiencies, if any, with the initial submission. Specific reasons for disapproval shall be contained either in a separate document or on the plat itself. The reasons for disapproval shall identify deficiencies in the plat that cause the disapproval by reference to specific duly adopted ordinances, regulations, or policies and shall identify modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the plat. The city manager shall act on any proposed final plat that he has previously disapproved within forty-five (45) days after the plat has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval. 
5-07.2.  Appeal of failure to act. If the city manager fails to approve or disapprove the final plat within sixty (60) days after it has been officially submitted for approval, or within forty-five (45) days after it has been officially resubmitted after a previous disapproval, the subdivider, after ten (10) days' written notice to the city manager, may petition the Circuit Court of Newport News to decide whether the plat should or should not be approved. The court shall give the petition priority on the civil docket, hear the matter expeditiously in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Article 2 (§ 8.01-644 et. seq.) of Chapter 25 of Title 8.01 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and make and enter an order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat. 
If the city manager disapproves a final plat and the subdivider contends that the disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal to the circuit court of the city and the court shall hear and determine the case as soon as may be, provided that his appeal is filed with the circuit court within sixty (60) days of the date of the written disapproval by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 5959-03, § 1)  
Sec. 5-08. - Filing and recording fee. 
5-08.1.  Amount of fee. The following fees shall be paid to the City of Newport News in the public works office prior to recordation of the final subdivision plat: 
a.  Ten dollars ($10.00) for each mylar print (one required). 
b.  Two dollars ($2.00) for each blue line print (thirty (30) required). 
c.  Amount per lot recordation fee as required by the clerk's office. 
d.  Costs of street signs, as required, which will be installed by the city at the expense of the developer. 
e.  Sewer assessment fee pursuant to city policy. 
f.  Inspection fees pursuant to city policy. 
5-08.2. Recording. The final plat shall be recorded by the City of Newport News in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the City of Newport News within a reasonable time after approval. The director shall notify the developer, the developer's attorney or agent of the time and place of recordation. 
5-08.3.  Return of original tracing. The original tracing will be returned to the subdivider or his authorized representative after processing is completed. 
(Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 5-09. - Time of validity for approved final subdivision plats. 
5-09.1.  Period of validity. An approved final subdivision plat which has been duly recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Newport News shall be valid for a period of not less than five (5) years from the date of approval thereof, or for such longer period as the city manager may, at the time of approval, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development. 
5-09.2.  Granting of extensions. The following procedure shall apply to the granting of extensions: 
(1)  Upon application of the subdivider or developer filed prior to expiration of an approved recorded plat, the director or his agent may grant one (1) or more extensions of such approval for additional periods as the director or his agent may, at the time the extension is granted, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development, the laws, ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of the request for an extension. 
(2)  If the director or his agent denies an extension requested as provided herein and the developer contends that such denial was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, the foregoing considerations for granting an extension, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal to the circuit court of Newport News, provided that such appeal is filed with the circuit court within sixty (60) days of the written denial. 
5-09.3.  Effect of changes in law, policy or plan. For so long as the approved and recorded final subdivision plat remains valid in accordance with the provisions of this section, no change or amendment to any city ordinance, map, resolution, rule, regulation, policy or plan adopted subsequent to the date of approval of the recorded plat or development plan shall adversely affect the right of the developer or his successor in interest to commence and complete a final site plan unless the change or amendment is required to comply with state law or there has been a mistake, fraud or a change in circumstances substantially affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
5-09.4.  Minor modifications. Application for minor modifications to recorded plats made during the periods of validity of such plats established in accordance with this section shall not constitute a waiver of the provisions hereof nor shall the approval of such minor modifications extend the period of validity of such plats. 
5-09.5.  Applicability of section. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all final subdivision plats recorded on or after January 1, 1992. Nothing contained in 5-09.1, 5- 09.2, 5-09.3, 5-09.4 and 5-09.5 of this section shall be construed to affect: (i) any litigation concerning the validity of a final subdivision plats recorded prior to January 1, 1992, or any such litigation nonsuited and thereafter refiled; (ii) the authority of the city to impose valid conditions upon approval of any special use permit, conditional use permit or special exception; (iii) the application to individual lots on recorded plats or parcels of land subject to approved development plans, to the greatest extent possible, of the provisions of the city's Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance; or (iv) the application to individual lots on recorded plats or parcels of land subject to approved development plans of the provisions of the city's ordinance to comply with requirements of the federal Clean Water Act, Section 402(p.) of the Stormwater Program and regulations promulgated thereunder by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 4409-92; Ord. No. 5959-03, § 1)  
Sec. 5-10. - Time of validity of approved development plans. 
5-10.1.  Period of validity. An approved development plan shall be valid for a period of five (5) years, provided the subdivider (i) submits a final subdivision plat for all or a portion of the property within one (1) year of such approval, and (ii) thereafter diligently pursues approval of the final subdivision plat. 
(1)  Diligent pursuit of approval means that the subdivider has incurred extensive obligations or substantial expenses relating to the submitted final subdivision plat or modifications thereto. 
(2)  However, no sooner than three (3) years following such development plan approval, and upon ninety (90) days' written notice by certified mail to the subdivider, the city manager may revoke such approval upon a specific finding of facts that the subdivider has not diligently pursued approval of the final subdivision plat. 
5-10.2.  Effect of changes in law, policy or plan. For so long as the approved development plan remains valid in accordance with the provisions of this section, no change or amendment to any city ordinance, map, resolution, rule, regulation, policy or plan adopted subsequent to approval of the development plan shall adversely affect the right of the developer or his successor in interest to commence and complete a final subdivision plat unless the change or amendment is required to comply with state law or there has been a mistake, fraud or change in circumstances substantially affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
5-10.3.  Minor modifications. Application for minor modifications to approved development plans made during periods of validity of such plans established in accordance with this section shall not constitute a waiver of the provisions hereof nor shall the approval of such minor modifications extend the period of validity of such plans. 
5-10.4.  Applicability of section. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all approved development plans valid on or after August 12, 2003. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to affect: (i) any litigation concerning the validity of a development plan pending prior to August 12, 2003, or any such litigation nonsuited and thereafter refiled; (ii) the authority of the city to impose valid conditions upon approval of any special use permit, conditional use permit or special exception; (iii) the application to individual lots on recorded plats or parcels of land subject to approved development plans to the greatest extent possible, of the city's Chesapeake Bay Preservation Ordinance; or (iv) the application to individual lots on recorded plats or parcels of land subject to approved development plans of the provisions of the city's ordinance to comply with requirements of the federal Clean Water Act, Section 402(p.) of the Stormwater Program and regulations promulgated thereunder by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 5959-03, § 1)  
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
 
Sec. 6-01. - Preparation of preliminary development plans. 
6-01.1.  Who may prepare plan. Preliminary plans should be prepared by persons having training or experience in subdivision planning or design notwithstanding that a preliminary plan may be prepared by the owner of the land proposed to be subdivided, or any professional architect, engineer, land surveyor, land planner, or landscape architect experienced in the design of subdivisions. 
6-01.2.  Method of presentation. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. The overall size of said plan shall be twenty-four (24) inches wide and thirty-six (36) inches long. The required information may be on one (1) or more sheets as necessary to show the information set forth in the following provision of this article.  
Sec. 6-02. - Contents of preliminary development plan. 
Every preliminary plan shall include the following data either drawn on the plan or included as separate document as supporting data to the plan. 
6-02.1.  Title data. Name of subdivision, owner, subdivider, surveyor, engineer or other person preparing the plan, date of drawing, number of sheets, north point and scale. 
6-02.2.  Location map. Location of proposed subdivision by an insert map at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet showing adjoining roads, their name and number, subdivisions and other landmarks. 
6-02.3.  Survey data. The boundary survey or existing survey of record, provided such survey shows a closure with an accuracy of not less than one (1) foot in twenty-five hundred (2,500) feet; total acreage, acreage of subdivided area, number and approximate area and frontage of all building sites, existing buildings within the boundaries of the tract, names of owners and their property lines within the boundaries of the tract and adjoining such boundaries. 
6-02.4.  Geographic data. The location, names and widths of all existing or platted streets or other public land within or adjacent to the subdivision including utility or other easements, railroad rights-of-way, public areas, parking spaces, culverts, drains and watercourses. 
6-02.5.  Land to be dedicated. All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use and the conditions of such dedication. 
6-02.6.  Contour map. Topography of an accuracy at least equal to that of the city's one (1) inch to one hundred (100) scale topographic map or such other intervals which may be necessary to show the character of the terrain, properly correlated to the city benchmark system. 
6-02.7.  Sewer and water connections. Proposed connection with existing or proposed sanitary sewers and water supply. 
6-02.8.  Drainage. Preliminary provision for collecting and discharging surface drainage. 
6-02.9.  Proposed dimensions. The locations of and proposed general dimensions of all rights-of-way to be dedicated for streets and alleys, typical lot lines, building setback lines and all known easements or reserved tracts. 
6-02.10.  Adjacent subdivisions. The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent to the property subdivided. 
6-02.11.  Parks, schools and public land. In subdividing property, consideration shall be given to proposed sites for parks, schools, public buildings, arterial thoroughfares or other public facilities as may be proposed in the comprehensive plan or any approved part thereof. When it shall be determined that such proposed facility would be located on the land being subdivided, the subdivider shall incorporate into his preliminary plan design adequate area to accommodate the proposed facility. The city manager shall determine within a reasonable time not to exceed ninety (90) days after submission of the preliminary plan whether the site should be acquired to further the implementation of the comprehensive plan. Upon determining that property for such a public facility should be acquired, the city shall enter into an agreement with the subdivider to acquire through negotiated purchase, or institute condemnation proceedings within ninety (90) days after filing of final plan of the affected area or any area contiguous thereto, or the city's interest therein shall be automatically vacated. 
6-02.12.  Duplication of subdivision names. The name of the subdivision required by the [this] ordinance on all plans shall neither duplicate nor closely approximate the name or names of existing subdivisions. 
6-02.13. CBPA requirements. The preliminary development plan shall show a delineation of any Resource Protection Area ("RPA") and/or Resource Management Area ("RMA") if the property to be developed falls within an area regulated by the CBPA. It shall also include a note that states that the RPA will be retained as an undisturbed and vegetated one hundred (100) foot buffer not subject to development under Code section 37.1-51(b)(1), unless the development is a water dependent facility or redevelopment. If the area to be developed has a septic system, or other onsite sewage treatment facility, the preliminary development plan shall include a note citing to Code section 33-91.1, indicating that there is a requirement for pump-out of the system every five (5) years and a one hundred (100) percent reserve drain field sites for onsite sewage treatment systems. 
(Ord. No. 7454-18)  
ARTICLE VII. - REQUIREMENTS OF FINAL PLATS 
 
Sec. 7-01. - Preparation of final plat. 
7-01.1.  Who may prepare final plat. Final plats shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer or land surveyor duly licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
7-01.2.  Method of presentation. Final plats shall be drawn in ink on reproducible media as approved by the administrator to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet with letters and figures not less than eight one-hundredths (0.08) of an inch in height on a sheet, or sheets, with the following dimensions: The plat shall be sixteen (16) inches wide and twenty-two and four-tenths (22.4) inches long with a three-inch border on three (3) sides. The top side shall contain a four-inch border which shall be along one (1) of the twenty-two and four-tenths (22.4) inch sides. The overall size of said plat shall be twenty-three (23) inches wide and twenty-eight and four-tenths (28.4) inches long, and shall show the following information set forth in the following subsections of this article.  
Sec. 7-02. - Contents of final plats. 
7-02.1.  Title data. Name of subdivision, city, state, owner, north point, scale of drawing and number of sheets. If shown on more than one (1) sheet, matched lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. A space three (3) inches high by five (5) inches long shall be provided with an inked border in the lower right-hand corner of the plat for the use of the approving authority. The names and titles of the city manager and the director of engineering shall be provided within the three-inch by five-inch space. 
7-02.2.  Location map. Location of proposed subdivision by an insert map in the upper left-hand corner at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet indicating adjoining roads, their names and numbers, subdivisions and other landmarks. 
7-02.3.  Boundary lines and names of adjacent owners. The boundaries of the subdivision showing the length of its courses and distances to one one-hundredth (0.01) of a foot and bearings to the nearest ten (10) seconds having been determined by an accurate survey thereof in the field, which shall close with error of closure not exceeding one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet. It shall also contain the names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and the names of the owners of adjoining parcels of land that may be subdivided. 
7-02.4.  (Reserved.) 
7-02.5.  Engineer's certificate and title reference. 
a.  The seal of the engineer shall be affixed to the plat and signed. 
b.  Certificates signed by the surveyor or engineer, shall certify as to the correctness of the survey and plat, and compliance with this ordinance, and set forth the source of title of the owners of the land subdivided, and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. 
c.  When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one (1) source of title the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dash-lines, and identification of the respective tracts shall be placed on the plat. 
7-02.6.  Consent of owners. A statement to the effect that the subdivision as it appears on this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, which shall be signed by the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds. 
7-02.7.  Accurate layout. The accurate location and dimensions by bearings and distance with all curve data on all lots and street lines, right-of-way dedications, boundaries of all proposed or existing easements, parks, school sites or other public areas, the number and area of all building sites, all existing public and private streets, their names, numbers and widths, watercourses and their names, names of owners and their property lines, both within the boundary of the subdivision and adjoining said boundaries and minimum building setback lines shall be shown. The final plat shall contain a table showing the area in acres by use designation of all land within the subdivision. 
7-02.8.  Dimensions. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of foot to the closest one-hundredth of a foot, all bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest ten (10) seconds. 
7-02.9.  Curve data. The data of all curves along the street frontages shall be shown in detail at the curve or in a curve data table containing the following: Degree of curvature, central deflection angle, radius, arc, tangent, chord, and chord bearings. 
7-02.10.  Benchmarks. At least one (1) benchmark, related to the City of Newport News Benchmark System, shall be established on one (1) of the permanent boundary markers in every subdivision, and the elevation thereof shown on the final plat. 
7-02.11.  Dedicated parcels. All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use or for the common use of property owners within the subdivision. 
7-02.12.  Control data. The location and material of all permanent reference monuments and an accurate bearing and distance tie between not less than two (2) permanent monuments on the exterior boundary of the subdivision and permanent monuments at existing street intersections where required by the director of engineering. 
7.02-13. CBPA requirements. The final plat shall show a delineation of any Resource Protection Area ("RPA" and/or Resource Management Area ("RMA") if the property to be developed falls within an area regulated by the CBPA. It shall also include a note that states that the RPA will be retained as an undisturbed and vegetated one hundred (100) foot buffer not subject to development under Code section 37.1-51(b)(1), unless the development is a water dependent facility or redevelopment. If the area to be developed has a septic system, or other onside sewage treatment facility, the final plat shall include a note citing to Code section 33-91.1, indicating that there is a requirement for pump-out of the system every five (5) years and a one hundred (100) percent reserve drain field sites for onsite sewage treatment systems. 
(Ord. No. 7454-18)  
Sec. 7-03. - Changes on final plats. 
No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any plat, nor on accompanying data sheets after approval of the city manager has been endorsed in writing on the plat or sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the city manager. Upon completion of construction of improvements required by this Ordinance, if any changes or revisions have been made, corrected, as built, plans shall be furnished to the city.  
Sec. 7-04. - Preparation of legal plat. 
7-04.1.  Who may prepare legal plat. Legal plats shall be prepared by a certified land surveyor duly licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
7-04.2. Method of presentation. Legal plats shall be drawn in ink on reproducible media as approved by the director. The overall dimension shall be eight and one-half (8.5) inches by fourteen (14) inches with a minimum one-fifth (0.2) inch border on all sides. A north arrow (either true or magnetic north) shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 3479-86; Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 7-05. - Contents of legal plats. 
7-05.1. Title data. Title data shall be in the lower right corner and include the name of the parcel, present owner, new owner, size of parcel, city and state, scale, date, name of certified surveyor who prepared it and his city and state. A title block for the approval of the director shall be provided. 
7-05.2.  Boundary lines and names of adjacent owners. The boundaries of the parcel shall show the length and bearing of its courses with direction arrows. Curves in the boundaries shall show at least arc length and radius. The distance(s) and bearing(s) shall be shown from the nearest recorded street intersection. It shall also contain the names of adjoining subdivisions and/or the names of the owners of adjoining parcels. 
7-05.3.  Certification and accuracy. The legal plat shall include a statement certifying that the perimeter survey is correct to the best of the surveyor's knowledge and belief, including an accuracy of not less than one (1) foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet. It shall be signed and sealed by a certified surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 3479-86; Ord. No. 7501-18)  
ARTICLE VIII. - REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS OF DESIGN 
 
Sec. 8-01. - Lots. 
8-01.1.  Shape. The lot arrangement, design and shape shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings, and be properly related to topography, and conform to requirements of this ordinance. Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide necessary square footage of area which would be unusable for normal purposes. 
8-01.2.  Size. The minimum lot size shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance of the City of Newport News [Appendix A]. 
8-01.3.  Location. Each lot shall have the required frontage as required by the city zoning ordinance [Appendix A] on a street dedicated by the subdivision plat or on an existing publicly dedicated paved street, or on a paved street which has become public by right of use. Except for proposed, or relocations of, arterial streets when the right-of-way of existing streets are not of the required width, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate that portion of any right-of-way necessary to make said street comply with the minimum width fixed for same, measured from the existing center line. 
8-01.4.  Side lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles or radial to the street line, to include cul-de-sacs, where practical. In any case, where a side line is not radial, it shall be denoted as such on the plat. 
8-01.5.  Remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a tract must be added to adjacent lots, or otherwise disposed of rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
8-01.6.  Reserved tracts. The owners of a subdivision may designate parcels of land for the common use of the owners of property within the subdivision for recreational use or permanently reserved open spaces, provided: 
(1)  The amount designated is sufficient in size, suitably located, has adequate access and is served with adequate facilities necessary to serve the recreational purpose intended; 
(2)  That no parcel shall be thus designated unless it contains at least the minimum area for a residential lot as established for the zoning district in which such lot is located; and 
(3)  That evidence is given that satisfactory arrangements will be made for the perpetual maintenance of such designated parcels to relieve the city of the future maintenance. 
8-01.7.  (Reserved). 
8-01.8.  Double frontage lots. Double frontage or reverse frontage lots shall not be permitted except where essential to provide separation of residential development from major thoroughfares or to overcome disadvantages of topography or where access to one (1) of the streets is restricted by fencing, planting or other appropriate screening. 
8-01.9.  Usable land area. Not less than eighty (80) percent of the minimum lot area required by the zoning ordinance [Appendix A] shall be usable land by reason of elevation above flood level and not less than fifty (50) percent of such required minimum lot area shall be usable by reason of absence of easements or servitudes; provided, however, that all of the minimum area required for the building itself together with its required front, side and rear yard lines shall be usable land. 
8-01.10.  Access to major thoroughfares. Residential lots created so as to abut on existing or proposed major thoroughfares and/or rights-of-way for major thoroughfares as designated in the adopted "Major Thoroughfare Plan" shall be planned to front on marginal access or service drives or otherwise planned so as not to provide direct access to the designated major thoroughfare.  
Sec. 8-02. - Blocks. 
8-02.1. Length. The maximum length of blocks generally shall be twelve hundred (1,200) feet between intersections. However, variations may be permitted by the director, based on topography and land conditions. 
8-02.2. Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets, unless prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the director may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth provided, however, in the Neotraditional Overlay District blocks may vary in accordance with the city approved master plan. 
8-02.3. Orientation. Where a subdivision adjoins a major road, the director may require that the greater dimensions of the block shall front or back upon such major thoroughfare to avoid unnecessary ingress and egress. 
8-02.4. Business or industrial. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be designed specifically for such purposes and shall provide for adequate parking and delivery space in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the City of Newport News [Chapter 45], provided, however, in the Neotraditional Overlay District blocks may contain various combinations of commercial uses, including office and retail, and/or residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 3454-86; Ord. No. 5635-01; Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 8-03. - Streets. 
8-03.1. Design, alignment and layout. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the alignment and continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas. The street arrangement must be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. Where, in the opinion of the director, or the director's authorized representative, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary line of such property and improved in accordance with the regulations set forth herein for public streets. Streets shall connect with the principal streets in adjoining subdivisions or public ways. Half streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision may not be permitted. 
At all points of intersection in street lines, a chamfer or curve, whichever is best suited for the conditions, shall be computed and dedicated as a part of the public right-of-way, except that in no case shall the said curve have a radius less than twenty-five (25) feet, at the property line. The minimum dimensions for a chamfer shall be determined by the director. 
The subdivider shall arrange, design and construct streets to conform with the street layout, where applicable, of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Newport News. 
Street construction shall adhere to the requirements of the City Design Criteria Manual, adopted by the city council, provided, however, in the Neotraditional Overlay District, street chamfer or curve radii may vary in accordance with the city approved master plan. 
8-03.2. Service drives. Whenever a proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway or expressway, and where the frontage lots in such subdivision are proposed to front on such highway, provisions shall be made for a service drive or marginal street approximately parallel to such right-of-way at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the land between such highway and the proposed subdivision. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for ingress and egress to the main thoroughfare. The right-of-way of any major highway or street projected across any railroad, limited access highway or expressway shall be of adequate width to provide for the cuts or fills required for any future separation of grades. 
8-03.3. Approach angle. Subdivision streets should intersect with existing or proposed streets at an angle as close to ninety (90) degrees as practicable, but in no case shall such angle be less than seventy-five (75) degrees, unless the director shall approve a lesser angle of approach for reasons of contour, terrain or matching of existing patterns. 
8-03.4. Minimum widths. With the exception of streets in the Neotraditional Overlay District, the minimum width of proposed streets in subdivisions as measured from lot line to lot line shall be shown on any major thoroughfare plan adopted by the City of Newport News or if not shown on such plan shall be: 
a.  Major arterial thoroughfares such as state or federal highways: 
6 lane divided ..... 110 feet 
4 lane divided ..... 90 feet 
4 lane undivided ..... 70 feet 
b.  Secondary thoroughfares: 
When serving as a collector street from one (1) or more major subdivisions to a major thoroughfare—Not less than seventy (70) feet. 
When serving as a collector street within a subdivision—Not less than sixty (60) feet. 
c.  Local residential service streets or other minor streets which cannot be extended in the future—Not less than fifty (50) feet. 
d.  Cul-de-sac streets which can be extended in the future—Not less than fifty (50) feet. 
e.  Cul-de-sac streets which cannot be extended in the future: 
When less than nine hundred (900) feet in length and having a maximum projected ultimate average daily traffic volume of three hundred fifty (350) (Institute of Transportation Engineers-Trip Generation)—Not less than forty (40) feet. 
When more than nine hundred (900) feet in length or having a projected ultimate average daily traffic volume greater than three hundred fifty (350) (Institute of Transportation Engineers-Trip Generation)—Not less than fifty (50) feet. 
f.  Alleys, if permitted—Not less than twenty (20) feet. 
8-03.5. Culs-de-sac. 
(1)  Defined: Minor terminal streets (culs-de-sac), designed to have one (1) end permanently closed. 
(2)  Length: Culs-de-sac shall be no longer than six hundred (600) feet to the beginning of the turnaround, unless warranted by unusual conditions deemed acceptable by the director, and shall be no longer than twelve hundred (1,200) feet under any circumstance. 
(3)  Turnaround: Each cul-de-sac must be terminated by a turnaround, not less than one hundred (100) feet in diameter at the property line. 
(4)  Temporary condition: A temporary circular turnaround having a diameter of not less than sixty (60) feet with appropriate improvements as approved by the director shall be provided at the temporary terminus of a street when it is contemplated by the city that the street will be extended in the future. Such temporary turnaround shall be located within the platted street right-of-way, other abutting property of the subdivider or on an easement established by the developer. In the case of easements, appropriate agreements shall be filed with the city setting forth the terms of the easement agreements (and such documents shall be approved as to form by the city attorney). 
(5)  Waiver: The requirement for a turnaround may be waived by the director under the following conditions: 
a.  If the affected properties from the intersecting right-of-way to the proposed end of the street are non-single family land uses, the length from near side of the intersecting right-of-way to the proposed end of the street is not greater than five hundred (500) feet, and the total trip generation along the cul-de-sac is projected to be less than five hundred (500) trips per day; or 
b.  Alternate turnaround waiver: The alternate turnaround waiver may be granted if the proposed street design includes a permanent alternate turnaround design and construction suitable for WB-50 vehicles. Such alternate turnaround shall be located within the platted street right-of-way or on an easement established by the developer. In the case of easements, appropriate agreements shall be filed with the city setting forth the terms of the easement agreements, including agreements for letters of credit and/or performance bonds to guarantee maintenance. 
8-03.6. Alleys. Alleys should be avoided wherever possible. Deadend alleys, if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities as determined by the director, provided, however, in the Neotraditional Overlay District alleys shall be permitted in accordance with the city approved master plan. In no case shall the clear space have a minimum width of less than twelve (12) feet. 
8-03.7. Private streets. Except in the case of P.R.D.'s and the Neotraditional Overlay District, there shall be no private streets platted in any residential subdivision. Every subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated paved street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the community under conditions approved by the director. 
8-03.8. Names. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with other already existing and named streets, shall bear the names of the existing streets. Failing to meet the above stipulations, in no case shall the name of proposed streets duplicate or too closely approximate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, way, place, lane or court. Street names shall be indicated on all plats and shall be approved by the director. No street name shall contain more than ten (10) letters exclusive of such symbols as St., Ave., or other abbreviations. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by approval of the city council. 
8-03.9. Identification signs. Street identification signs will be installed by the city at each intersection at the expense of the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 5635-01; Ord. No. 6430-07; Ord. No. 7501-18) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 38.  
Sec. 8-04. - Building setback lines. 
The subdivider shall establish and show on the final plat building setback lines along all streets abutting lots. Such setback lines shall not be less than required by regulations applicable to street setback lines.  
Sec. 8-05. - Easements. 
The director may require that easements for drainage through adjoining property be provided by the subdivider. Easements shall be provided for water, sewer, power lines and other utilities in the subdivision when required by the director. The minimum width of these required easements shall be fifteen (15) feet unless otherwise modified by the director. 
(Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 8-06. - Easements along streams. 
Where any stream, lake or other surface drainage course is located within the subdivision and such facility is, in the opinion of the director, part of a public drainage way serving other lands beyond the subdivision, provisions shall be made for an adequate easement of not less than twenty (20) feet along one (1) side of stream or drainage course or along the shoreline of any lake for the purpose of maintenance and protection of the stream or shoreline for drainage purposes. The total easement width shall be in accordance with the provisions of the City of Newport News general sewerage and/or drainage improvement program. Such easements shall not be considered part of a required street width nor will such easements be required for streams, lakes or other surface drainage courses which are proposed for private ownership. 
(Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 8-07. - Land inadequately drained. 
No proposed subdivision which is subject to flooding or which is inadequately drained shall be approved unless evidence is shown by engineering procedures for the proper drainage of the affected area to the satisfaction of the director of engineering.  
Sec. 8-08. - Underground utilities. 
All utility services or extensions of existing utility services, including, but not limited to, all wires, cables, pipes, conduits and appurtenant equipment carrying or used in connection with the furnishing of electricity, telephone, telegraph, cable transmissions, petroleum, gas, steam, water or sewer services or systems, shall be placed below the surface of the ground in accordance with city council adopted ordinances, policies and programs. 
(Ord. No. 3263-84)  
ARTICLE IX. - MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED 
 
Sec. 9-01. - Streets and alleys. 
9-01.1.  Design and specifications. All road and street construction work shall be in accordance with the City of Newport News specifications and/or Design Criteria Manual. Other types of road pavements shall be approved before construction. This road construction shall conform to original approved plans as provided for in Article V., of this ordinance. Arrangements shall be made for the installation of plant mix surface for all subdivision streets pursuant to established city policies, provided, however, in the Neotraditional Overlay District work and specifications shall be in accordance with the city approved master plan. 
9-01.2. Grades. The grades of streets shall be in accordance with specifications established by the City of Newport News. Street grades shall not be less than three-tenths (0.3) percent and no street shall be constructed at an elevation of less than seven and one-half (7½) feet above mean sea level (U.S.C.G.S. Datum) as measured from the top of the curb; provided, however, that where in the opinion of the director unusual circumstances exist as to produce an unusual hardship in developing proper street drainage to the above standards, the street grades may be reduced to two-tenths (0.2) percent. 
9-01.3.  Paving widths. Paving widths shall be in accordance with standards of the City of Newport News. 
(Ord. No. 5635-01; Ord. No. 7501-18) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 38.  
Sec. 9-02. - Sidewalks. 
Concrete sidewalks having a minimum width of not less than five (5) feet shall be installed along both sides of all major arterial thoroughfares, and not less than four (4) feet along both sides of all secondary thoroughfares as defined herein, provided, however, in the Neotraditional Overlay District width and location of sidewalks shall be in accordance with the city approved master plan. 
(Ord. No. 3454-86; Ord. No. 5635-01)  
Sec. 9-03. - Drainage. 
9-03.1. Provision of plans. The subdivider shall provide all necessary information needed to determine what improvements are necessary to develop the subject property properly, including contour intervals, drainage plans and calculations. The subdivider shall also provide plans for all such improvements together with a certified engineer's statement that such improvements, when properly installed, will be adequate for proper drainage. The subdivider shall also provide information pertinent to off-site drainage required by the director. 
9-03.2. Storm sewer and streams. The drainage system shall include all storm sewers, natural streams, curb drop inlets and other drainage structures. All existing open ditches, except ravines, creeks, and canals, shall be piped with approved materials in accordance with the provisions of the City of Newport News sewerage and/or drainage improvement program. Drainage systems shall be designed on the basis of a minimum storm frequency of ten (10) years. A drainage system design based upon a storm frequency greater than ten (10) years may be required where there are extreme risks of flooding as determined by the director and/or described in the City Design Criteria Manual adopted by [the] city council. 
9-03.3. Curb inlets. Curb drop inlets shall be installed at street intersections and at such intermediate locations as required to collect surface water. Such inlets shall be connected to an approved storm sewer. When it is necessary to convey drainage through a lot or along lot lines, storm sewers connected to the street storm sewers, or other storm sewers approved by the director, shall be installed along such lines. 
9-03.4. Sub-drains. Sub-drains shall be installed where it is apparent that underground water will be detrimental to the street paving and accessory structures. 
9-03.5. Final authority. The director shall in every case have the final authority to determine what shall be adequate with respect to drainage and storm sewer facilities within a subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 9-04. - Sanitary sewers. 
9-04.1.Required for all lots. The subdivider shall be required to provide sanitary sewers to all lots within the subdivision in accordance with the existing sewer policy as adopted by the city council of the City of Newport News, Virginia. 
9-04.2.Laterals. The developer shall present complete plans for all required sanitary sewers in the subdivision showing: Sizes of mains, exact locations of house lateral connection points at property lines, manhole locations including stubs, if any, and their sizes and elevations in the manholes. All of the house laterals shall be located exactly as shown on the plans from an established permanent point in the field. Every house lateral required herein shall be terminated at the right-of-way line, and the lateral stand pipe end shall be plugged in place. 
9-04.3. Clean-outs and clean-out box assemblies. The person holding the plumbing permit shall provide and install the required clean-outs and clean out box assemblies as approved by the director at the time of connection of the dwelling to the city sewer system at the property line, complying with permitting and construction provisions set forth in Chapter 22 of the City Code. 
9-04.4. Acceptance testing. The developer shall provide certification by an engineer registered in the State of Virginia attesting that the sanitary sewer collector system including laterals was tested and met the Commonwealth of Virginia Sewage Regulations standards for infiltration and exfiltration. 
(Ord. No. 4168-91) 
Cross reference— Sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 33.  
Sec. 9-05. - Public water. 
Public water service shall be extended to all lots within a subdivision in accordance with the existing water policy as adopted by the city council of Newport News, Virginia, at the expense of the subdivider. 
Cross reference— Water supply, Ch. 42.  
Sec. 9-05.1. - Use of groundwater. 
To the extent that the developer intends to use groundwater wells within the subdivision, the developer must demonstrate full compliance with the terms of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, §62.1-259.1. 
(Ord. No. 7490-18, § 1)  
Sec. 9-06. - Fire protection. 
Adequate fire hydrants as required herein will be installed by the City of Newport News with the expense borne by the developer and/or builder. Placement of hydrants shall be coordinated with the city's fire marshal or his authorized representative; they shall not be greater than seven hundred fifty (750) feet apart in residential districts and five hundred (500) feet apart in other districts. Adequate water supply to such hydrants shall also be available as determined by the standards set forth in the "Standard on Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting," N.F.P.A., Volume 12 (1983 Edition or as subsequently amended). Placement decisions made by the fire marshal should be predicated on public safety and welfare considerations, the standards listed above, and the ability to properly and efficiently use fire-fighting apparatus. Decisions of the fire marshal may be appealed to the fire chief, whose decision shall be final. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 16.  
Sec. 9-07. - Street lights. 
Street lights to provide a suitable illumination level shall be provided within every subdivision. Street lights on residential street shall be spaced approximately one hundred fifty (150) feet apart or as approved by the director. Street lights on collector or arterial streets shall be spaced to provide uniform brightness consistent with street widths and usage, at a level of illumination as approved by the director. 
All street lights shall be installed by the supplying utility company upon request of the city. The developer shall pay all installation costs relative to the installation of such lights, in keeping with the agreement between the city and the utility company and shall compensate the city for one (1) year's operating cost of such lights. 
(Ord. No. 7501-18)  
Sec. 9-08. - Permanent survey monuments. 
9-08.1. Concrete monuments. Concrete monuments four (4) to six (6) inches square, thirty (30) inches long, with a flat top, beveled edges as shown in city standards shall be set in the ground at all corner and angle points in the outer lines of the subdivision and at all point of angles and curvatures in the right-of-way lines of all streets within the subdivision. The top of all concrete monuments shall be set no more than one (1) inch above the finished grade, nor more than six (6) inches below the finished grade of the ground surface at their respective locations. The replacement of any monuments removed, destroyed, or knocked out of line during development of the subdivision shall be the responsibility of the subdivider. 
9-08.2. Lot corner markers. After all street improvements have been completed, all lot corners except those marked by concrete monuments pursuant to section 9-08.1 shall be marked with iron pipe not less than one-half (½) inch or more than one (1) inch in diameter, and twenty-four (24) inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. Other type of property markers may be used if approved by the director of engineering prior to installation. 
9-08.3. Visibility of monuments. Upon completion of subdivision streets, sewers and other improvements, the subdivider shall make certain that all monuments required by the city are clearly visible for inspection and use. Such monuments shall be inspected and approved by the city before any improvements are accepted by the city council.  
Sec. 9-08A. - Noise abatement. 
Noise abatement measures shall be provided in accordance with the existing noise abatement policy as adopted by the city council of Newport News, Virginia, at the expense of the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 4126-90)  
Sec. 9-09. - Responsibility for cost. 
All required improvements shall be installed by the subdivider at his cost unless provisions are made in a separate municipal policy adopted by council to share the cost of a specific improvement in which case the official policy of the city council shall determine the share of cost to be borne by the subdivider.  
Sec. 9-010. - Specifications. 
In cases where specifications have been established for streets, curbs, etc., or by local ordinances and codes, such specifications shall be followed. The subdivider's performance bond shall not be released until construction has been inspected and approved by the director of engineering and accepted by city council, or in the event of a legal appeal upon proper court order.  
Sec. 9-011. - Acceptance of streets and improvements. 
After the installation by the subdivider of the streets and improvements in the subdivision as required by this ordinance, the director of engineering shall issue a Statement of Intent To Accept Streets and Improvements into the Public System. Thereupon, the city shall release part of the performance bond, retaining a bond equal in value to ten (10) percent of the total public improvements. Up to twelve (12) months after issuance of such statement (to allow for the detection and correction of defects) if all defects have been corrected, the city manager shall report to the city council whether or not the streets and improvements have been installed in accordance with the terms of the agreement between the developer and the city and have survived the defect-detection period. Upon such approval the city council shall accept by ordinance such streets and improvements for permanent public maintenance, operation and repair, release all remaining performance bonds, and shall upon request furnish certification of same to the developer, his attorney or agents. 
When the subdivider has complied with applicable provisions of this ordinance, and where the necessary improvements have been substantially, but not completely, installed, the director of engineering may issue a certificate setting forth such facts to the subdivider or to any agency of the state or U.S. Government. 
(Ord. No. 5206-98, § 1)  
ARTICLE X. - DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
 
Sec. 10-01. - Extent of detail required. 
10-01.1. Plans, specifications and sheet size. Development plans shall consist of plans and specifications of all proposed utilities, drainage, sanitary sewers, and streets, and shall be shown on standard plan and profile sheets with an overall dimension of twenty-four (24) inches wide by thirty-six (36) inches long. Such development plans shall generally contain sufficient details and data to enable such improvements to be constructed therefrom. 
10-01.2. Cover sheet. Where the development consists of two (2) or more sheets, a cover sheet shall be provided showing the entire subdivision and direction of drainage. The cover sheet shall be blocked to position the remaining sheets of the plans. The scale of the cover sheet shall be variable so that it will be possible to show the entire subdivision on a single cover sheet. 
10-01.3. Street profiles. Profiles along the center of each street, with established grades indicated, shall be shown at a vertical scale of one (1) inch equals four (4) feet and a horizontal scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet. All elevations shall be referenced to the City Benchmark System. 
10-01.4. Sewer and water profiles. Profiles along the line of every sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and waterline are required. The percent of slope, invert elevations at all manholes, cleanouts, catch basins, inlets or other changes in line or grade together shall be shown. Such profiles shall show existing and proposed sewers and waterlines with proposed street and original ground profiles. 
10-01.5. Lot grading. The development plans shall show the proposed grading for each lot including existing and proposed elevations at all corners of lots to ensure not less than one (1) percent grading. 
10-01.6. As-builts. As-builts of all improvements are required and shall be certified as to its location by a professional engineer or certified land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Such as-builts shall show plan, profiles, percent of slope top and invert elevation, lateral location by station, any offset of sanitary or storm sewers and the corner elevation of all lots. The as-builts shall be shown on twenty-four (24) inches wide by thirty-six (36) inches long on five-mil. reproductable [reproducible] mylar.  
ARTICLE XI. - CONDOMINIUM UNIT DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 11-01. - In general. 
This subdivision ordinance shall apply to any condominium project or development in the same manner that it would apply to a physically identical project or development under different form of ownership.  
Sec. 11-02. - Condominium unit subdivisions development. 
The following special regulations shall apply to any condominium unit subdivision platted under this ordinance: 
(a)  In considering its relation to zoning the condominium development shall be subject to all applicable zoning regulations for the specific housing types planned in such developments. A condominium unit development shall not exceed the maximum lot area per dwelling unit permitted in the zoning district in which the development is located. 
(b)  All structures within such development shall be planned so as not to impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent properties. 
(c)  Off-street parking as prescribed for the district in which such use is located shall be provided. 
(d)  All land within a condominium unit project shall be established in common ownership pursuant to chapter 4.1 of title 55, Code of Virginia. 
Cross reference— Zoning, Ch. 45.  
ARTICLE XII. - VACATION OF PLAT 
 
Sec. 12-01. - Procedure before sale of lot. 
Any time before building construction has progressed to the point that vacation of the plat would place the land and buildings in violation of this or any other ordinance of the city, any plat, or part thereof, recorded in compliance with this ordinance may be vacated with the consent of the city manager, by owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, who signed the statement required in section 7-02.6 at any time before the sale of any lot therein by a written instrument declaring the same to be vacated, duly executed, acknowledged or proved or recorded in the office of the clerk of [the] circuit court wherein the plat to be vacated is recorded. The execution and recordation of such writing shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated and to divest all public rights in, and reinvest such owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, with the title to the streets, alleys, easements, and public areas laid out or described in such plat. 
To determine whether or not vacation would result in a violation, the buildings, if any, on the original tract of land shall be counted and those buildings constructed in the platted area shall be counted also. 
The intent and purpose of this section is to allow vacation of a plat or part thereof only in those cases where reversion of the land to its original size and shape will not place such land and buildings, including all buildings on the land, in such position that a violation of any city ordinance would exist had the plat never been prepared, approved and recorded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2271.  
Sec. 12-02. - Procedure after sale of lot. 
In cases where any lot has been sold, but before building construction has progressed to the point that vacation of the plat would place the land and buildings in violation of this or any other ordinance of the city, the plat or part thereof may be vacated according to either of the following methods: 
(a)  By instrument in writing agreeing to said vacation signed by all the owners of lots shown on said plat and also signed on behalf of the City of Newport News by the city manager for the purpose of showing the approval of such vacation by the city council. The word "owners" shall not include lien creditors except those whose debts are secured by a recorded deed of trust or mortgage and shall not include any consort of an owner. The instrument of vacation shall be acknowledged in the manner of a deed and filed for record in the clerk's office of any court in which said plat is recorded. 
(b)  By ordinance of the Newport News city council on motion of one (1) of its members or on application of any interested person. Such ordinance shall not be adopted until after notice has been given as required by section 15.1-431, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. Said notice shall clearly describe the plat or portion thereof to be vacated and state the time and place of the meeting of the governing body at which the adoption of the ordinance will be voted upon. Any person may appear at said meeting for the purpose of objecting to the adoption of the ordinance. An appeal from the adoption of the ordinance may be filed within thirty (30) days with the circuit court having jurisdiction of the land shown on the plat or part thereof to be vacated. Upon such appeal the court may nullify the ordinance if it finds that the owner of any lot shown on the plat will be irreparably damaged. If no appeal from the adoption of the ordinance is filed within the time above provided, the ordinance shall be amenable to appeal. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2272.  
Sec. 12-03. - Effect of vacation under section 12-02. 
The recordation of the instrument as provided under paragraph (a) of section 12-02 or of the ordinance as provided under paragraph (b) of section 12-02 shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat or part thereof so vacated, and to vest fee simple title to the center line of any streets, alleys, or easements for public passage so vacated in the owners of abutting lots free and clear of any rights of the public or other owners of lots shown on the plat, but subject to the rights of the owners of any public utility installations which have been previously erected therein. If any such street, alley or easement for public passage is located on the periphery of the plat, such title for the entire width thereof shall vest in such abutting lot owners. The fee simple title to any portion of the plat so vacated as was set apart for other public use shall be vested in the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, who signed the statement required by section 7-02.6 free and clear of any rights of public use in the same. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2274.  
Sec. 12-04. - Vacation of boundary lines. 
The boundary lines of any lot or parcel of land may be relocated or otherwise altered as a part of an otherwise valid and properly recorded plat of subdivision or resubdivision approved as provided in this subdivision ordinance and executed by the owner or owners of such land as provided in section 7-02.6, provided such action does not involve the relocation of alteration of streets, alleys, easements for public passage, or other public areas; and provided further, that no easements or utility rights-of-way shall be relocated or altered without the express consent of all persons holding any interest herein.  
Sec. 12-05. - Fee for processing application under section 12-01 or section 12-02. 
A fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for processing an application pursuant to section 12-01 or section 12-02 shall be charged for the vacating of any plat.  
ARTICLE XIII. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 13-01. - Violations. 
(a)  No person shall subdivide land without making and recording a plat of the subdivision and without fully complying with the provisions of this subdivision ordinance. 
(b)  No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it has been submitted and approved as required by this subdivision ordinance. 
(c)  No person shall sell or transfer any land of a subdivision, before a plat has been duly approved and recorded as provided herein, unless the subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of this subdivision ordinance or any provision applicable thereto. However, nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the recordation of the instrument by which such land is transferred or the passage of title as between the parties to the instruments. 
(Ord. No. 5959-03, § 1)  
Sec. 13-02. - Abatement of violations. 
.In the case of any violation or attempted violation of a provision of this ordinance, in addition to or in lieu of the issuance of criminal charges, the city may institute appropriate proceedings or action to prevent such violation or attempted violation, to restrain, correct or abate such violation or attempted violation or to prevent any act which would constitute such a violation. 
(Ord. No. 5959-03, § 1)  
Sec. 13-03. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this subdivision ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot or parcel of land so divided, transferred or sold and shall be required to comply with all provisions of this subdivision ordinance. The description of the lot or parcel by metes and bound in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the penalties or remedies herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 5959-03, § 1)  
ARTICLE XIV. - SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 
 
Sec. 14-01. - Validity. 
Should any provision of this subdivision ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constutionality of this subdivision ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.  
ARTICLE XV. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 15-01. - Procedure. 
15-01.1. General. This ordinance may be amended in whole or in part by the governing body provided that any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the planning commission for recommendation; and further provided that no such amendment shall be adopted unless and until notice of intention to do so has been published in accordance with section 15.2-2204 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, effective on the date of adoption of this ordinance or as subsequently amended. 
15-01.2. Planning commission. In the event the governing body should submit a proposed amendment to the city planning commission for recommendation, the planning commission shall make its recommendation within sixty (60) days after such reference, otherwise the failure of the planning commission to act shall be construed as approval of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 5297-99)  
ARTICLE XVI. - REPEAL 
 
Sec. 16-01. - Conflicting ordinances repealed. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed. 
PASSED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF NEWPORT NEWS, JANUARY 28, 1986. 
Bernice I. Berry, CMC 
Joseph C. Kitchie 
  City Clerk 
Mayor    
