CODE OF THE CITY OF PETERSBURG, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Adopted: January 16, 2001 
Effective: January 16, 2001 
____________ 
Published in 2000 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
PETERSBURG, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Rosalyn R. Dance 
Mayor 
____________ 
Joe R. East, Jr. 
Kevin A. Hill 
Annie M. Mickens 
Dama E. Rice 
Lena M. Whitt 
City Council 
____________ 
B. David Canada 
City Manager 
____________ 
Michael R. Packer 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Erika S. Jenkins 
Clerk of the City Council 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Petersburg, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, as supplemented through July 18, 1995, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Senior Code Attorney, and Bill Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Michael R. Packer, City Attorney, Mr. L.A. Rosenstock, III, Purchasing Agent, and Ms. Erika S. Jenkins, Clerk of the City Council for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Petersburg, Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Petersburg, Virginia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Petersburg, Virginia. 2000. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
Ordinance No. 01-04 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Petersburg, Virginia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
    BE IT ORDAINED, by the City Council of the City of Petersburg, Virginia: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the City of Petersburg, Virginia," published by the Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 122, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 15, 1999, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person who violates any provision of the Code or any ordinance or regulation adopted by the City Council shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 15, 1999, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption by City Council. 
I, the undersigned, Clerk of the Council of the City of Petersburg, Virginia, do certify that the foregoing ordinance is a true and exact copy of an ordinance passed by the said Council at its meeting held on January 16, 2001. 
/s/ Erika S. Jenkins 
      Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 10-14  4- 6-2010 Included 9 10-16  4- 6-2010 Included 9 10-17  4- 6-2010 Included 9 10-15  4- 6-2010 Included 9 10-31  5- 4-2010 Included 9 10-42  6-15-2010 Included 9 10-54  7- 6-2010 Included 9 10-88 10-26-2010 Included 9 11-09  1-18-2011 Included 9 11-40  5-17-2011 Included 9 11-59  6- 7-2011 Included 9 11-60  6- 7-2011 Included 9 11-86  7-19-2011 Included 9 11-97  9-20-2011 Included 9 12-06  1-17-2012 Included 10 12-21  3- 6-2012 Included 10 12-22  4- 3-2012 Included 10 12-41  5-15-2012 Included 10 12-50  5-15-2012 Included 10 12-51  6- 5-2012 Included 10 12-55  6- 5-2012 Included 10 12-56  6-19-2012 Included 10 12-64  8-18-2012 Included 10 12-66 10- 2-2012 Included 10 12-83 12-18-2012 Included 10 12-85 12-18-2012 Included 10 12-86 12-18-2012 Included 10 12-87 12-18-2012 Included 10 13-06  1-22-2013 Included 11 13-23  4- 2-2013 Included 11 13-32  5- 7-2013 Included 11 13-37  5-21-2013 Included 11 13-38  5-21-2013 Included 11 13-39  5-21-2013 Included 11 13-44  5-21-2013 Included 11 13-57  6-18-2013 Included 11 13-61  7- 2-2013 Included 11 13-62  7- 2-2013 Included 11 13-92  7-16-2013 Included 11 14-01  1- 7-2014 Included 12 14-13  3- 4-2014 Included 12 14-17  3-18-2014 Included 12 14-24  4-15-2014 Included 12 14-47  5-20-2014 Included 12 14-52  6- 3-2014 Included 12 14-66  7- 1-2014 Included 12 14-67  7- 1-2014 Included 12 14-77  7-22-2014 Included 12 14-82  9- 2-2014 Included 12 14-83  9- 2-2014 Included 12 14-100 10-21-2014 Included 12 14-101 10-21-2014 Included 12 14-104 11-25-2014 Included 12 14-109 12- 9-2014 Included 12 14-110 12- 9-2014 Included 12 15-30  4-21-2015 Included 13 15-47  6- 2-2015 Included 13 15-64 10-20-2015 Included 13 16-01  1- 5-2016 Included 13 16-18  4-19-2016 Included 13 16-34  9- 6-2016 Included 13 16-35  9-16-2016 Included 13 16-36  9- 6-2016 Included 13 16-38  9- 6-2016 Included 13 16-37  9- 6-2016 Omitted 14 17-15  4- 4-2017 Included 14 17-16  4- 4-2017 Included 14 17-17  5- 2-2017 Included 14 17-20  5-16-2017 Included 14 17-25  6- 6-2017 Included 14 17-30  7-11-2017 Included 14 17-37  9- 5-2017 Included 14 17-38  9- 5-2017 Included 14 19-10  2- 5-2019 Included 15 19-11  2- 5-2019 Included 15 19-12  2- 5-2019 Included 15 19-14  2- 5-2019 Omitted 15 19-15  2- 5-2019 Omitted 15  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is chapter 259 of the 1962 Acts of the General Assembly, approved on March 14, 1962, and effective on March 1, 1960. Amendments to the charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original charter. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Definitions. 
    In the construction of this charter, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the legislature or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    City. The word "city" shall be construed as if the words "of Petersburg" followed it, except where some other city is specifically designated. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given, or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing; a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
    Person. The word "person" may extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    State. The word "state" shall be construed as if the words "of Virginia" followed it. 
Sec. 1-2. - Territorial limits; corporate status. 
    The territory contained within the limits of the corporation of Petersburg, prescribed by the acts of the General Assembly of the State, hereinafter enumerated and by the final decrees or orders of the court establishing such boundaries, hereinafter enumerated, shall be deemed and taken as the City of Petersburg, and the inhabitants of the city for all purposes for which towns and cities are incorporated in this Commonwealth, shall continue to be one body politic, in fact and in name. 
    The acts of the General Assembly and court orders or decrees hereinbefore mentioned are as follows: 
(a)  Acts of the General Assembly. 
1.  Volume 2, Henings Statutes, 1784, page 382. 
2.  Acts, 1815-1816, Chapter 82. 
3.  Acts, 1848-1849, Chapter 297. 
(b)  Court orders or decrees. 
1.  Order entered on November 23, 1921, in the circuit court of Prince George County, recorded in the office of the hustings court of the City of Petersburg in Deed Book 100, beginning on page 160. 
2.  Order entered on December 16, 1932, in the circuit court of Dinwiddie County, recorded in the office of the clerk of the hustings court of the City of Petersburg in Deed Book 124, beginning on page 422. 
3.  Order entered on July 7, 1944, in the circuit court of Prince George County, recorded in the office of the clerk of the hustings court of the City of Petersburg in Deed Book 151, beginning on page 169. 
4.  Order entered on November 11, 1955, in the circuit court of Prince George County, recorded in the office of the clerk of the hustings court of the City of Petersburg in Deed Book 201, beginning on page 480. 
Sec. 1-3. - Government vested in city council, etc. 
    The administration and government of the city shall be vested in the city council and in such other boards and officers as are hereinafter provided for. 
Sec. 1-4. - Penalties for violation of ordinances. 
    Where, by the provisions of this charter or any amendment thereof, the city council has authority to pass ordinances or regulations on any subject, they [it] may prescribe a penalty not exceeding twelve months imprisonment or fine not exceeding one thousand dollars (except where penalty is otherwise provided for in this charter or any amendment) for a violation thereof; provided, however, that should there be a statute of the State upon the same subject, then the city council may provide the same penalty for violation of State statute. The city council may also provide that any police officer may detect and arrest any person violating any of such ordinances or regulations and bring him to trial at the next sitting of the general district court or as soon thereafter as may be. 
(Acts 1975, Ch. 349, § 1) 
Sec. 1-5. - Publication of ordinances; ordinances as evidence. 
    All ordinances hereafter passed by the city council for violation of which any penalty is imposed, shall be published once, at least, in a newspaper published in the city to be designated by the city council; provided, however, the council may, in its judgment, direct that only the title of an ordinance, describing clearly and fully its subject in general terms and setting forth the penalty for its violation, be published and such publication shall be sufficient compliance with this section. When the latter method of publication is used, the publication shall state that complete copies of the ordinance or code so adopted may be obtained by any interested person at the office of the clerk of the city council. A record or entry made by the clerk of the city council, or a copy of such record or entry, duly certified to by him, shall be prima facie evidence of the publication of any such ordinance, or any amendment thereof; and all laws, regulations and ordinances of the city council may be read in evidence in all courts of justice and all proceedings before any officer, body or board in which it shall be necessary to refer thereto, either from a copy thereof, certified by the clerk of the city council, or from the volume of ordinances printed by the authority of the council. But the provisions of this section as to publication of ordinances shall not apply to ordinances embodied in any general compilation, codification or revision of ordinances, printed by authority of the council and adopted by the council as a code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Adoption of ordinances or codes by reference. 
    The city council may adopt, by reference, any standard or recommended ordinance or code relating to any matter subject to regulation by the council. It shall not be required that an ordinance or code so adopted be set forth in full in the adopting ordinance, but reference to the same in the adopting ordinance by name, style or title, in which the purpose thereof is clearly stated, shall be sufficient; provided that it be stated in such adopting ordinance that copies of the ordinances or code so adopted may be obtained at the office of the clerk of the city council or at any other specified place. Publication of the adopting ordinance shall be sufficient compliance with § 1-5 of this charter and recordation by the clerk of the city council of the adopting ordinance in the book kept by him for the recordation of ordinances shall be a sufficient recordation of the ordinance or code adopted by reference; provided, that copies of such ordinance or code shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk of the council. Revisions made by the council in any such standard or recommended ordinance or code shall not affect the validity of the same if adopted in accordance with the provisions of this section. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be applicable to any standard or recommended ordinance or code heretofore adopted by the council, and the same shall be deemed to be valid if the procedure herein provided shall have been substantially followed. 
Sec. 1-7. - [Repealed by Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 2.] 
Sec. 1-7.1. - Borrowing money and issuing evidence of indebtedness. 
    The city council may, in the name of and for the use of the city, borrow money and issue evidence of indebtedness therefor, subject to such limitations as may be imposed by general law, and provided that no ordinance or resolution for such purpose shall be adopted unless presented at two regular meetings no less than fourteen days apart. 
(Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 1) 
CHAPTER 2. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-1. - [Repealed by Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 2.] 
Sec. 2-1.1. - Division of city into wards. 
    The city shall be divided into as many wards as the city council may establish. The wards shall be composed of contiguous and compact territory and be so constituted as to give, as nearly as is practicable, representation in proportion to the population of the ward. Whenever it becomes necessary, because the corporate limits of the city have been extended or contracted, the city council shall redistrict the city into wards, change the boundaries of existing wards, or increase or diminish the number of wards. But in no case shall the city council redistrict the city into wards or change the boundaries of existing wards, except insofar as it may be necessary to maintain wards which meet the test of equitable population distribution, or to change such boundaries for the purpose of attaching newly annexed territory of such existing ward or wards as may be contiguous thereto, more often than once every five (5) years, except upon a recorded vote of three-fourths of the members elected to the council; and in every such case the reason therefor shall be set forth in the ordinance providing for such redistricting. 
(Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 1; Acts 1979, Ch. 350, § 1; Acts 1981, Ch. 68, § 1) 
Sec. 2-2. - [Repealed by Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 2.] 
Sec. 2-2.1. - Creation and composition; election of councilmen generally; application of general laws of the state; council as continuing body. 
    There shall be a council of the city which shall be composed of seven members, one from each ward, who shall have been a resident of the ward he seeks to represent thirty days prior to filing their [his] notice of candidacy. The candidates shall be qualified voters of the city. They shall be elected by the qualified voters of such wards and each shall remain a resident of the ward from which elected during his term of office. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in his ward shall be declared elected and shall serve for a term of four years or until his successor has been elected and qualified except as hereafter provided. 
    On the first Tuesday in May, nineteen hundred seventy-four, there shall be an election in each ward. Candidates in wards one, three, five, and seven, receiving the greatest number of votes each shall serve for a four-year term commencing July one, nineteen hundred seventy-four, and until their successors have been elected and qualified, and thereafter beginning in May, nineteen hundred seventy-eight, elections shall be held in such wards every fourth year on the first Tuesday in May. Candidates in wards two, four and six, receiving the greatest number of votes each shall serve a two-year term, commencing July one, nineteen hundred seventy-four, and until their successors have been elected and qualified, and thereafter beginning in May, nineteen hundred seventy-six, elections shall be held in such wards every fourth year on the first Tuesday in May. The general laws of the Commonwealth relating to the conduct of elections, as far as pertinent, shall apply to the conduct of the general city elections. The council shall be a continuing body and no measures pending before such body shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the expiration of the term of office or removal of the members of said body, or any of them. 
(Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 2-3. - [Repealed by Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 2.] 
Sec. 2-3.1. - Nominations of candidates for council. 
    Candidates for the office of councilman may be nominated by petition or by general law. There shall be printed on the ballots used in the election of a councilman from the designated ward, the names in alphabetical order of all candidates who have been so nominated in that ward. The requirements for nomination by petition shall be: 
(a)  Any qualified voter of the city may be nominated by filing not later than the time fixed for the closing of the polls on the first Tuesday in March before the election on the first Tuesday in May with the clerk of the circuit court having jurisdiction, a petition signed by not less than one hundred twenty-five qualified voters of the ward from which the candidate seeks election; each signature to such petition shall be witnessed by a person whose affidavit to that effect is attached thereto, together with the notice of candidacy required by the general laws of the Commonwealth relating to elections; 
(b)  The petition shall state the name and address of the residence of the person whose name is presented thereby as a candidate. 
(Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 2-4. - Oath of office. 
    The members of the city council, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, shall be respectively sworn in accordance with the constitution and laws of this State. Such oaths shall be administered by the clerk of the circuit court of the city and a certificate of such oaths being taken, together with the oath subscribed, shall be filed with the clerk of the city council, and shall be preserved by him. 
Sec. 2-5. - Power to adopt rules and appoint officers and clerks; discipline of members; journal; open and secret meeting; power to compel attendance of witnesses. 
    The city council shall have authority to adopt such rules and to appoint such officers and clerks as it may deem proper for the regulation of its proceedings, and for the convenient transaction of business, to compel the attendance of absent members, to expel a member for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office. The city council shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and its meeting shall be open, except when by a recorded vote of a majority of those members present, it shall declare a closed session in accordance with the Virginia Freedom of Information Act [Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq.]. The city council or any of its committees, when authorized by the city council may each, in any investigation before them, respectively, within their respective powers and duties, order the attendance of any person as a witness and the production by any person of all proper books and papers. Any person refusing or failing to attend or to testify, or to produce such books and papers, may be summoned by such investigating body before the municipal judge [general district court] and upon failure to give a satisfactory excuse, may be fined by him not exceeding twenty dollars, or imprisoned not exceeding thirty days, such person to have the right of appeal, as in case of misdemeanor, to the circuit court of the city. Such witness may be sworn by the officer presiding at such investigation, and shall be liable to prosecution for perjury for any false testimony given at such investigation. 
    No member of the council shall be eligible, during the term for which he was elected, or for one year thereafter, for any office, position or employment to be filled by the city council or the city manager or by any other city official or employee. 
(Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 1) 
Sec. 2-6. - Quorum; origination and passage of ordinances; reconsideration or rescission of vote at special meeting; appropriation ordinances and resolutions. 
    A majority of the members of the city council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No ordinance or resolution having the effect of an ordinance shall become effective unless passed by a majority of the members of the city council present and voting. No vote shall be reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting, unless at such special meeting there be present at [as] large a number of members as were present when such vote was taken. No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars, imposing taxes, or authorizing the borrowing of money shall be passed, except by a recorded affirmative vote of a majority of all the members elected to the city council. The vote on any such ordinance or resolution shall be taken in the city council by yeas and nays, and shall be entered on the journal, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the members elected to the city council shall be necessary to its passage. 
Sec. 2-7. - Councilmen's salaries. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 15-448-15-454 [formerly Code of Virginia §§ 15.1-939-15.1-945; now repealed], both inclusive, the salaries of all councilmen in the city, including the salary of the mayor, shall be fixed, as provided herein, by a commission of five resident taxpayers, who shall also be qualified citizens of the city, and who shall be appointed by the hustings [circuit] court of the city, or the judge thereof in vacation, having jurisdiction in the city, and who shall serve without compensation. Such commissioners shall be so appointed upon application of the mayor to the court or the judge thereof, as soon as practical after any general election for members of the council, and the salaries so fixed shall become effective as of the date on which members elected at such general election shall take office, but the salaries so fixed shall be applicable with respect to all members of the council, including the mayor, irrespective of the date of their taking office, it being intended that the salaries of all members of the council (with the exception of that of the mayor in the event his salary shall be fixed at a greater amount than that of other members of the council) shall at all times be equal and uniform. The compensation so fixed shall be effective until the expiration of the terms of members of the council next expiring. If such salaries shall not have been fixed on or prior to the date as of which the same shall become effective, as herein provided, all past-due salaries shall be paid to members of the council at the rate fixed as herein provided. 
    The commissioners appointed pursuant to this section shall be notified by the clerk of such court of their appointment, and, upon being so notified, shall, as soon as practicable, meet, and fix such salaries, and make due written report of their action to the clerk of the court. The report so made shall be in the office of the clerk for thirty days, during which time any citizen or taxpayer of the city may file written exceptions to the same. If no exceptions to the report are made, then at the expiration of such thirty days the clerk shall transmit the report to the city council, which report shall be entered in full on the records of the council and shall have the force and effect of an ordinance duly adopted in the mode prescribed by law. 
    If any citizen or taxpayer files exceptions to the report within the thirty-day period above provided for, the matter shall be immediately docketed by the clerk for hearing as a privileged case as soon as the court may be able to hear the same, after the lapse of such thirty days from the making of the report. The judge of such court shall have entire control of the matter, and may either reject, modify or confirm the report. Any citizen or taxpayer of the city may make himself a party to the hearing before the court, and may present such evidence as may be pertinent. If the report be rejected by the court, new commissioners shall be appointed immediately, and the same procedure followed as set forth in the first instance. 
    Upon the final determination of the matter such order as the court may enter shall be certified to the city council, spread upon its records, and have the force and effect of an ordinance duly adopted as prescribed by law. 
Editor's note- See also Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1414.5 and 15.2-1414.6. 
Sec. 2-8. - [Repealed by Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 2.] 
Sec. 2-8.1. - Vacancies in office of councilmen. 
    Vacancies in the office of councilmen from whatever cause arising shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of section 2-2.1 aforesaid by majority vote of the remaining members of council, or, if the council shall fail to fill a vacancy in its membership within thirty days of the occurrence of the vacancy, by appointment by the judge of the circuit court of the city or by the senior judge thereof, in the event there be more than one. 
    When any such vacancy shall occur, the court shall issue a writ of election to fill such vacancy. Such election shall be held at the next ensuing general election. The officer so elected shall hold the office for the unexpired term of his regularly elected predecessor in office. The person so appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold office until the qualified voters shall fill the same by election and the person so elected shall have qualified. In the event the vacancy occurs within one hundred twenty days prior to the next ensuing general election, the writ of election shall issue for an election to fill the vacancy at the second ensuing general election. 
(Acts 1974, Ch. 2, § 1) 
CHAPTER 2.1 - SCHOOL BOARD 

Sec. 2.1-1. - School board and school districts. 
    The supervision of schools in the city shall be vested in a school board consisting of nine members appointed by the council of the city. The members shall serve for three-year staggered terms from each of the three school districts. 
(Acts 2000, Ch. 4, § 1) 
Sec. 2.1-2. - Transition from the nine member appointed school board to a seven member elected school board. 
    At the general election held in May of 2000, the qualified voters of wards two, four, and six shall elect one school board member from each of their respective wards. At the general election held in May of 2002, the qualified voters of wards one, three, five, and seven shall elect one school board member from each of their respective wards. Board members elected at those elections and thereafter shall be elected in the same manner, according to the same schedule, and for the same term that members of council are elected. Terms of appointed members shall expire at the end of their present three-year terms. Council shall appoint one at-large member to the board in June of 2001, that member's term to expire on June 30, 2002. Council shall make no additional appointments except that council may appoint members to the board to fill vacancies as provided by the general laws of the Commonwealth. 
(Acts 2000, Ch. 4, § 1) 
CHAPTER 3. - CITY OFFICERS GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-1. - Oath of city officers generally. 
    Every officer of the city required by law or by ordinance of the city council shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe the oath prescribed by Code of Virginia, § 49-1, and such other oaths as may be required by the city council. Such oaths, unless otherwise provided, shall be taken before the clerk of the city council. The clerk of the city council shall qualify and take the oath provided by this section before the mayor. A certificate of the oaths provided for in this section, together with the oaths subscribed, shall be filed with the clerk of the city council, who shall preserve the same. 
Sec. 3-2. - Filling vacancies; how elections to be held. 
    In the event of the death, resignation or removal of any officer, whose election or appointment is provided for by this charter, the vacancy in such office shall be filled under and by virtue of the terms of this charter. All elections in the city for the officers of the city and members of the council thereof shall be held only under and by virtue of the constitution and laws of this state, and the terms of [this] charter. 
Sec. 3-3. - Delivery of property, books and papers to successor in office. 
    If any person, having been an officer of the city, shall not, within ten days after he shall have vacated or been removed from office, and upon notification and request of the clerk of the city council, or of the authority by whom he was appointed, deliver over to his successor in office all the property, books and papers belonging to the city or appertaining to such office, in his possession or under his control, he shall forfeit and pay to the city the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), to be sued for and recovered with costs. And all books, records and documents used in any such office by virtue of any provisions of this charter, or of any ordinance or order of the city council, or any superior officer of the city, shall be deemed the property of the city and appertain to such office, and the chief officer thereof shall be responsible therefor. 
Sec. 3-4. - Mayor [and vice-mayor] generally. 
    At the organizational meeting thereof, the city council shall proceed to choose, by majority vote of all the members thereof, one of their number to be mayor and one to be vice-mayor for the ensuing two (2) years. The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council and shall have, the same right to vote and speak therein as other members, and shall have no veto power. He shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, of military law and the service of civil process. The vice-mayor shall in the absence or disability of the mayor perform the duties of mayor, and if a vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor shall become mayor for the unexpired portion of the term. In the absence or disability of both the mayor and vice-mayor the council shall by majority vote of those present choose one of their number to perform the duties of mayor. 
Sec. 3-5. - City manager. 
    The city council shall employ a person, who may or may not be a resident or qualified voter of the city or of the State, to be known as the city manager. The city manager, under the control of the city council, shall have general charge and management of the administrative affairs and work of the city and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by the city council. He shall receive such salary as shall be allowed him by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
Sec. 3-6. - City attorney. 
    The city council shall appoint a suitable and proper person, who shall be the attorney and counselor for the city, who shall hold his office for the term of four years, unless sooner removed, and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. The city council may prescribe the powers, duties and liabilities of the city attorney, and fix his compensation at such an amount as to them [it] may seem fit, to be paid by the city. 
Sec. 3-7. - [Repealed by Acts 1987, Ch. 51, § 1.] 
Sec. 3-8. - [Repealed by Acts 1987, Ch. 51, § 1.] 
Sec. 3-9. - [Repealed by Acts 1975, Ch. 349, § 2.] 
Sec. 3-10. - [Repealed by Acts 1975, Ch. 349, § 1.] 
Sec. 3-11. - Duties of commissioner of the revenue. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall keep his office in such place as may be designated and prescribed by the council, and shall keep therein such books, schedules and records, and in such manner as the council may direct and prescribe, which books, records and other papers shall be subject to the inspection and examination of the mayor, members of the council, or of any committee of the city council. 
Sec. 3-12. - Clerk of court to deliver to commissioner lists of recorded deeds, wills and decrees. 
    To aid the commissioner of the revenue in his duties, the clerk of the circuit and hustings court [circuit court] of the city shall deliver to him such lists of recorded deeds, wills, and decrees of court as may be necessary to enable him to make transfer of real estate in the city. 
Sec. 3-13. - Powers and duties of treasurer. 
    The city treasurer shall be the custodian of all moneys belonging to the city, shall deposit the same in such bank or banks as the council shall prescribe, shall keep his office in some place designated by the city council, shall keep his books and accounts in such manner as the city council may require, which books and accounts shall always be open to the inspection of the mayor, and any member or committee of the city council. He shall pay no money except upon the order of the city council, or upon an order of a committee of the city council, lawfully drawn in pursuance of the ordinances of the city. He shall report to the city council at the end of each fiscal year, and oftener, if required, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures during that year and the state of the treasury. He shall keep as a separate fund any special assessment, and the same shall only be used for the purpose for which it was raised. He shall keep all city moneys separate and distinct from his own moneys, and he is prohibited from using either directly or indirectly the corporation money in his custody and keeping, for his own use and benefit or that of any other person or persons whomsoever and any violation of this provision shall subject him to immediate removal from office. 
Sec. 3-14. - Collector of city taxes generally. 
    There may be appointed by the city council, in its discretion, a collector of city taxes who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. He shall perform such duties and have such powers as are prescribed by the city council or by State law. If city council does not appoint a collector of city taxes, duties and powers prescribed [sic] to the collector of city taxes shall be administered by the treasurer and as provided for by State law. 
(Acts 1976, Ch. 482, § 1) 
Sec. 3-15. - Deputies of collector of taxes. 
    The collector of city taxes may appoint one or more deputies, as may be provided by the city council, but the sureties in the bond of such officer shall be equally liable for the acts of the deputies as for those of the principal. 
Sec. 3-16. - Powers and duties of collector of city taxes. 
    The collector of city taxes shall collect all taxes and assessments which may be levied by the city, and perform such other duties as may be herein prescribed or ordained by the council. The collector of city taxes shall keep his office at such place as shall be designated by the city council, and shall keep in such office such books, vouchers, and accounts as the city council may direct and prescribe, all of which shall be subject to the inspection and examination of the mayor, members of the council, and of any committee of the council. He shall make report in writing, under oath, to the city treasurer weekly, or oftener, if required, as to the amount of all moneys collected by him, and shall pay the same into the city treasury weekly. At the end of each fiscal year he shall submit to the council a statement of all moneys collected by him during the year, and the particular assessment or account upon which collected, [and] also a statement showing the amount uncollected. 
Sec. 3-17. - Failure of collector to pay over money; commingling or misuse of funds. 
    The collector of taxes is prohibited from keeping the moneys of the city in his hands beyond the time prescribed for the payment of the same into the city treasury; he shall keep all city moneys separate and distinct from his own moneys, and he is prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the city's moneys in his custody and keeping for his own use and benefit, or for the use and benefit of any other person or persons whomsoever; and violation of this provision shall subject him to immediate removal from office. 
Sec. 3-18. - [Repealed by Acts 1975, Ch. 349, § 2.] 
Sec. 3-19. - Authority to appoint police officer to issue certain civil warrants; qualification and bond. 
    The city council is hereby authorized to appoint one or more officers or members of the police department of the city who, upon such appointment and qualification, as hereinafter provided, shall have the power and authority to issue civil warrants for the collection of city taxes and other claims of the city. Such civil warrants shall be directed to the city sheriff of the city and shall be served by him and returnable to the general district court of the city as other civil warrants. No fee shall be charged by such police officers for the issuance of such warrants. 
    Any officer or member of the police department, appointed pursuant to this section, shall, before entering upon his duties, qualify before the clerk of the city council and shall give bond with surety in the amount set by city council and approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties prescribed by this section. The premium on such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Acts 1975, Ch. 349, § 1) 
CHAPTER 4. - POWERS GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-1. - Adoption of state law provisions. 
    The powers set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-837-15.1-915, both inclusive, as amended, are hereby conferred upon the city. 
(Acts 1975, Ch. 349, § 1) 
Editor's note- The statutes cited in the above section have been recodified in various sections within the Code of 
Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.94:1, 15.2-927 et seq., 15.2-1100 et seq., 15.2-1429 et seq., 15.2-1510, 15.2-1808, 15.2-2000 et seq. and 15.2-2143 et seq. (See table in Code of Virginia, vol. 10.) 
Sec. 4-2. - Regulation of railroads. 
    The city council shall have power to determine and designate the route and grade of any railroad to be laid in the city; to regulate the running of steam, diesel or other locomotive engines within the limits of the city; provided, no contract or legislative authority be thereby impaired or violated. 
Sec. 4-3. - Authority to supply city water outside corporate limits. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this charter, the council shall have power, under such terms and conditions as it may prescribe, to furnish and supply city water to natural persons and corporations for use on property situated not only within the corporate limits of the city but within an area ten miles outside of the corporate limits of the city; provided, that the rates for water used and supplied outside the corporate limits shall not be less than those charged water users within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 4-4. - Restraint and punishment of drunkards, vagrants, etc. 
    The city shall have the power to restrain and punish drunkards, vagrants, mendicants and street beggars. 
Sec. 4-5. - Authority to prevent vice, immorality, disorderly conduct, etc. 
    The city shall have the power to prevent vice and immorality, to preserve public peace and good order, to prevent and quell riots, disturbances and disorderly assemblages, to suppress houses of ill-fame and gaming houses, to prevent lewd and disorderly conduct or exhibitions in the city, and to expel therefrom persons guilty of such conduct who shall not have resided therein as much as one year. 
Sec. 4-6. - Authority relative to wharves, docks, etc. 
    The city shall have the power to establish, construct and keep in order, alter or remove landings, wharves and docks on land belonging to or which may hereafter belong to the city, and to lay and collect a reasonable duty on vessels coming to and using the same; to prevent and remove all obstructions in and upon such landings, wharves and docks; to preserve peace and good order upon the same and upon all other wharves and landings in the city. They [It] may also appoint port wardens for the port of the city, prescribe their duties, and fix their fees or compensation; provided, that no salary or compensation shall be paid such port wardens out of the city treasury. 
Sec. 4-7. - Power of city to acquire land or interests therein for exchange with public utility company. 
    Whenever any public utility company owns any land or any easement, right of way or other interest in land which the city deems necessary and intends to acquire for any public purpose, which land, easement, right of way or other interest in land owned by the public utility company is devoted to a public use, the city may acquire by gift, purchase or by the exercise of the power of eminent domain additional or a like easement, right of way or interest in land adjacent to or approximately adjacent to such land needed and proposed to be acquired by the city and may then convey the same to the public utility company for use by it in lieu of the land, easement, right of way or other interest in land theretofore owned by it but needed by the city. The condemnation of such land, easement, rights of way or other interest in land to be conveyed to any public utility company shall be governed by the same procedure prescribed by this charter and may be carried out at the same time if against the same property owner and if against the same landowner or in the same proceedings in which land is condemned for the city. The city may, with respect to highways, streets and the extension and construction of sewer and water systems, under the same procedure and conditions prescribed by this chapter, with prospective property needed by the city, enter upon and take possession of such property to be conveyed to any public utility company prior to the acquisition of title thereto in condemnation proceedings and proceed with the relocation of the installations of the public utility company in order that the purposes of the city necessitating such action may be carried out without delay. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the city to exercise the power of eminent domain, except subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 25-233, when the interest sought is held by another corporation having the power of eminent domain. 
Sec. 4-8. - Power of city to operate on-street and off-street parking facilities. 
    The city shall have the power to acquire, construct, finance, own, maintain and operate automobile parking facilities, including parking lots, buildings, ramps, curbline parking, meters and all facilities deemed necessary or incidental to the regulation, control and parking of motor vehicles. The city shall have the power to operate such facilities separately or as a combined undertaking, to use the revenues from any of such facilities to finance any other of such facilities and to make such rules and regulations and to enter into such covenants and agreements as it may deem necessary or desirable in connection with acquiring, constructing, financing, owning, maintaining and operating such facilities; provided that no such rule, regulation, covenant or agreement shall surrender the city's rights of control of its streets and the regulation of traffic thereon. 
(Acts 1973, Ch. 102, § 1) 
Sec. 4-9. - Power of city to establish a commission on community relations affairs. 
    The city shall have the power to establish a commission on community relations affairs consisting of twelve citizens to be appointed by the council. Of the twelve members of this commission, four shall be appointed to serve for a term of one year, four for a term of two years, and four for a term of three years. Thereafter appointments shall be for terms of three years, [and] such members shall be eligible for reappointment for one additional term. The commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman and may elect an executive committee and such other officers as may be required for performing its duties and responsibilities. The commission on community relations affairs shall promote mutual understanding and respect among all social, racial, cultural, ethnic and minority groups in the city and seek solutions to problems concerning citizens of the city with the objective of providing an environment in which each citizen shall have equal opportunity to grow to his or her maximum potential. 
    The powers granted the council and any of its committees by § 2-5 of this charter shall not apply to the commission on community relations affairs (CCRA). 
    Council may appoint an executive director of the commission on community relations affairs (CCRA) for an indefinite term, and may provide funds for the salaries and expenses of the executive director's office. 
(Acts 1976, Ch. 482, § 1) 
Sec. 4-10. - Police and fire cadet program; homesteading program. 
    The city shall have the power to establish police and fire cadet programs and a homesteading program for its employees and employees of the school board. Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1505 which prohibits residency requirements for certain employees, shall not apply to employees participating in these programs. 
(Acts 2000, Ch. 4, § 1) 
CHAPTER 5. - TOLL BRIDGES 

Sec. 5-1. - Certain provisions continued in effect. 
    The provisions of Chapter 529 of the Acts of the General Assembly, 1952, are hereby continued in effect. 
CHAPTER 6. - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Amusement tax. 
    In addition to the other powers conferred by law, the city shall have the power to impose, levy and collect, in such manner as its council shall deem expedient, an admission tax on admissions to any place of amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport or athletic event held in the city and may provide that such tax may be added to and collected with the price of admission or other charge for such amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport or athletic event. 
Sec. 6-2. - Consumer tax for use of public utilities; additional annual taxes. 
    In addition to other powers conferred by law, the city council shall have the power to levy, impose and collect, in such manner as it may deem expedient, a consumer or subscriber tax upon the amount paid for the use within the city of water, electricity, gas, telephone, and any other public utility service, or upon the amount paid for any one or more of such public utility services used within the city, and the council may provide that such tax shall be added to, and collected with, bills rendered consumers for such services. 
    Any such tax heretofore levied, imposed or collected by any ordinance of the city and which became effective on or after December first, nineteen hundred forty-seven and all acts done in pursuance of such ordinance or any amendment thereof, be, and they are hereby, ratified and confirmed. 
    In addition to the other powers conferred by law, the council is hereby empowered to raise annually by taxes and assessments sums of money as the council shall deem necessary for the purposes of the city, in such manner, on such subjects and transactions, and from such sources as council deems expedient, in accordance with the constitution and laws of the State and the United States. 
Sec. 6-3. - Officers for collection of taxes. 
    The city council may vest in the collector of city taxes and of any other assessments which the city council is authorized to make, any and all powers which are now or which may hereafter be vested in any collector of State taxes, may prescribe the mode of proceedings of the collector of city taxes and assessments aforesaid and the mode of proceeding against such officer for the failure to perform his duties. 
Sec. 6-4. - Payment of taxes by tenant or fiduciary. 
    Any payment of taxes made by a tenant, unless under an express contract contained in his lease, shall be a credit against the person to whom he owes the rent; and where any tax is paid by a fiduciary on the interest or profit of moneys of an estate invested under an order of court or otherwise, the tax shall be refunded out of such estate. 
ARTICLE II. - ASSESSMENT AND REASSESSMENT OF REAL ESTATE 

Sec. 6-5. - Authority of council; establishment of city real estate assessment office; election and duties of assessor. 
    The city council may, in its discretion, in lieu of the means and methods now prescribed by law, provide by ordinance for the annual assessment and reassessment and equalization of assessments of real estate for local taxation, and to that end may establish in the city a city real estate assessment office and elect as assessor or assessors one or more persons whose duty it shall be to assess and reassess for taxation the real estate within the city, to equalize such assessments, and to discharge such other duties in connection therewith as the city council shall prescribe. 
Sec. 6-6. - Manner of making assessments; authority and duties of assessor; assessments to be made annually; effect of assessments. 
    The assessor or assessors, elected as provided in the preceding section, shall make such assessments and reassessments on the same basis as real estate is required to be assessed under the provisions of Code of Virginia, tit. 58 [Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1], as amended, shall have the same authority as the assessors appointed under the provisions of that title, and shall be charged with duties similar to those thereby imposed upon such assessors, except that such assessments and reassessments so made shall have the same effect as if they had been made by assessors appointed under the provisions of such title. 
(Acts 1975, Ch. 349, § 1) 
Sec. 6-7. - Term and compensation of assessors; council to provide for vacancies, clerical and other assistance; payment of salary, expenses and other costs. 
    The term of the assessor or assessors provided for in this article may be fixed by the city council, but he or they shall serve at the will of the council, and any vacancy or vacancies, however occurring, shall be filled by the city council. The city council shall likewise fix the compensation of any such assessor or assessors, provide such clerical or other assistance as may be necessary, and provide for the payment of such salaries and other expenses as may be properly incident to the work involved, and all such salaries, expenses and other costs incurred in connection with such assessment or reassessment shall be paid out of the treasury of the city. 
Sec. 6-8. - Assessors to assume certain duties and powers of the commissioner of revenue; certain duties of the commissioner of the revenue not affected; extension of annual taxes. 
    All duties imposed and all powers conferred by law on the commissioner of the revenue of the city with respect to the assessment of real estate for taxation shall, upon the adoption of an ordinance by the city under the provisions of this article, be transferred to the assessor or assessors elected by the council of the city pursuant to the provisions of this charter, except that such commissioner of the revenue shall not be relieved of his duties with respect to the preparation of the land books for use in the city and the delivery and filing of copies thereof as required by the provisions of Code of Virginia, tit. 58 [Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1], but such land books shall be prepared by the commissioner of the revenue in accordance with the assessments or reassessments made and certified to him by the assessor or assessors elected under the provisions of this article, and taxes for each year shall be extended on the basis of such assessments or reassessments or on the basis of the last previous assessment of the property involved if no change in such assessment shall have been made. 
Sec. 6-9. - Manner of obtaining relief from assessments. 
    Any person assessed with taxes or levies on real estate under the provisions of this charter may apply for relief therefrom in the manner provided by the applicable provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58-1118 et seq. [Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1820 et seq. and 58.1-3980 et seq.]. 
Sec. 6-10. - Assessors to assume powers of board of equalization. 
    The assessor or assessors elected pursuant to this article shall have the powers conferred on boards of equalization by Code of Virginia, § 58-895 et seq. [Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3370 et seq.], as amended or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 6-11. - Board of equalization. 
    The city council, if in its judgment necessity therefor exists, may at any time during any year, by resolution, request the judge of the hustings [circuit] court, either in term time or vacation, to appoint a board of equalization consisting of three members, all of whom shall be freeholders of the city. The judge of the hustings [circuit] court, upon receiving such request from the city council, shall forthwith appoint such board of equalization, which shall continue in existence for such term not exceeding one year as the city council may prescribe. The compensation of the members of such board shall be fixed by the city council and paid out of the city treasury. The board shall sit at and for such time or times as may be necessary for the discharge of its duties; provided, that the period during which such sittings shall be held shall not exceed thirty days, unless otherwise provided by the city council. The provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 58-895 et seq. [Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3370 et seq.], as amended, or hereafter amended, insofar as the same may be applicable, shall apply to the board of equalization appointed pursuant to the provisions of this section except as otherwise provided herein. 
Sec. 6-12. - When powers of assessors to be in effect. 
    The powers conferred upon the assessor or assessors by § 6-11 of the charter shall continue in effect except during such time as a board of equalization created under the provisions hereof shall be in existence. 
Sec. 6-13. - Article not to affect assessments made by State. 
    This article shall not apply to any assessment of real estate assessable under the law by the State Corporation Commission. 
CHAPTER 7. - CONTINUATION PROVISIONS; APPLICABILITY TO 1962 ELECTIONS; SEVERABILITY; REPEALING PROVISIONS; EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 7-1. - Ratification and continuation of ordinances. 
    All ordinances and resolutions heretofore made and adopted by the city, not in conflict with this charter, are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall be and remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed by the council of the city. 
Sec. 7-2. - Continuation of present offices, etc. 
    All officers and employees heretofore elected or appointed shall remain in office and continue in their employment and be vested with the powers and duties heretofore imposed upon them by the council or by operation of law or hereafter imposed upon them under the provisions of this act until their successors are duly elected or appointed as provided by law or until action is taken by the city as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15-77.9, as in force on January 1, 1962. 
Editor's note- Former Code of Virginia, § 15-77.9, is now Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1107. 
Sec. 7-3. - Application to 1962 councilmanic elections. 
    This act [charter] shall not be construed to apply to the qualification and election of candidates to fill vacancies on the city council occurring in the year 1962 and such candidates shall qualify and be elected as now provided by law. 
Sec. 7-4. - Severability. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this act [charter] shall for any reason be adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be valid [invalid], such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of the act [charter], but shall be confined in its operation to the part of the act [charter] directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall have been rendered. 
Sec. 7-5. - Repealing provisions. 
    The provisions of Chapter 163, page 143 et seq., Acts of Assembly of Virginia, 1874-75, approved March 11, 1875, and all acts amendatory thereof, are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 7-6. - Effective date. 
    This act [charter] shall be in force and effect from and after March 1, 1962. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Year Chapter Section  Section 
this Charter 1973 102 1 4-8 1974 2 1 1-7.1 2-1.1 2-2.1 2-3.1 2-5 2-8.1 1975 349 1 1-4 3-19 4-1 6-6 1976 482 1 3-14 4-9 1979 350 1 2-1.1 1981 68 1 2-1.1 2000 4 1 4-10 2.1-2  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- General provisions, chs. 1, 7. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Petersburg, Virginia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Petersburg City Code." 
(Code 1981, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Ordinance publication requirements not applicable to ordinances embodied in general codification or revision of ordinances, § 1-5. 
State Law reference- Authority for adoption of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1425; authority of city to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the city as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
    City. The term "city" shall be construed as if the words "of Petersburg" followed it. 
    City collector. The term "city collector" shall mean the collector of city taxes. 
    Code, this Code. Whenever the terms "Code" and "this Code" are used without further qualification, they shall mean the Code of the City of Petersburg, Virginia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
    Council; city council. Wherever the terms "council" and "city council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Petersburg. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. 
    Keeper; proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
    Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing, and a term importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
    Oath; swear; sworn. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. And in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the term "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officers, boards, agencies. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, department, employee, board, commission or other agency, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Petersburg, Virginia." 
    Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are referred to, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever is in current use in the city. 
    Or; and. The term "or" may be read "and" and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall include any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or organization of any kind or other legal entity. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.19. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property, as herein defined. 
    Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place open to the general public, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenaments and hereditaments. 
    Shall; may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature; subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State; commonwealth. The terms "the state," "this state," "the commonwealth" and "this commonwealth" shall be construed as if followed by the words "of Virginia." 
    State Code. References to the "State Code" or "Code of Virginia" shall mean the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city. 
    Sunday; holiday. Reports and payments required on the first day of the month shall, when such day falls on Sunday or on a legal holiday, be made on the day following; when required on the last day of the month, such reports and payments shall, when such day falls on Sunday or on a legal holiday, be made on the day preceding. 
    Tenant; occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Written; writing; writings; in writing. The terms "written," "writing," "writings," and "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters, symbols, numbers, or figures, whether (i) printed or inscribed on a tangible medium or (ii) stored in an electronic or other medium and retrievable in a perceivable form and whether an electronic signature authorized by Code of Virginia, § 59.1-467 et seq., is or is not affixed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.32. 
    Year. Unless otherwise expressed, the term "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the term "year" alone shall be equivalent to the expression "year of our Lord." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.33. 
(Code 1981, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions and rules of construction applicable to state law, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article, division or subdivision. 
(Code 1981, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to sections of State Code, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after section in this Code ar not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
Sec. 1-5. - Editor's notes and references. 
    The editor's notes, charter references, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions of Code considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Petersburg City Code adopted on October 5, 1981, and of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1981, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-7. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any ordinance granting any franchise or right; 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget; 
(4)  Any ordinance relating to salaries; compensation or bonds of city officers and employees or members of city boards or commissions or to compensation or pay plans or classification plans for such officers or employees; 
(5)  Any ordinance relative to the retirement system for officers and employees of the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing, extending or contracting the corporate limits of the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any specific public improvement or making any assessment; 
(8)  Any ordinance relative to zoning or to a zoning map; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to building lines or setback lines; 
(10)  Any ordinance relating to the Petersburg Redevelopment and Housing Authority; 
(11)  Any ordinance pertaining to the dedication or acceptance of any plat or subdivision; 
(12)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; or 
(13)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-9. - New ordinances not to affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    No new ordinance or provision shall be construed to repeal a former one as to any offense committed against such former ordinance, nor as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or any right accrued or claim arising under such former ordinance or provision. 
(Code 1981, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinance which repealed another. 
    When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not thereby be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1981, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make them a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of the City of Petersburg, Virginia, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of the City of Petersburg, Virginia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1981, § 1-9) 
State Law reference- Authority to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-13. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
    At least three copies of this Code and at least three copies of every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the clerk of the city council and shall there be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Code 1981, § 1-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-14. - Classification of and penalties for violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance or regulation adopted by the city council it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor. By a fine of not more than $2,500.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor. By a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor. By a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor. By a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(b)  Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance or regulation adopted by the city council any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, such violation shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor punishable as prescribed in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(c)  No penalty referred to in this section shall exceed the penalties prescribed by general law for a like offense. To the extent that any section of this Code prescribes a penalty in excess of a penalty prescribed by general law for a like offense, the penalty prescribed by the general law shall control. 
(d)  Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance or regulation referred to in this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. 
(Code 1981, § 1-11) 
Charter reference- Penalties for violation of ordinances, § 1-4. 
State Law reference- Classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11; authority of city to provide penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one year, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1430; injunctive relief against continuing violation of ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432. 
Sec. 1-15. - Violations as nuisances. 
    In addition to any penalty provided therefor, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, any ordinance of the city or any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 1-12) 
State Law reference- Authority of city with reference to abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-900, 15.2-1115; nuisances generally, Code of Virginia, tit. 48. 
Sec. 1-16. - Prosecution of violation by attorney for the commonwealth and his assistant. 
    The attorney for the commonwealth and assistant attorney for the commonwealth shall be a part of the department of law enforcement of the city and shall have the duties and powers imposed upon him by general law, including the duty of prosecuting all warrants, indictments or informations charging a felony, and he may in his discretion, prosecute class 1, 2 and 3 misdemeanors, or any other violation, the conviction of which carries a penalty of confinement in jail, or a fine of $500.00 or more, or, both such confinement and fine. The attorney for the commonwealth shall enforce all forfeitures, and carry out all duties imposed upon him by Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.23. 
(Code 1981, § 1-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1627. 
Sec. 1-17. - Payment of fine, costs, forfeitures, penalties or restitution in installments or upon other terms and conditions; community work. 
(a)  Whenever (i) a defendant, convicted of a traffic infraction or a violation of any criminal law of the commonwealth or of the city, or found not innocent in the case of a juvenile, is sentenced to pay a fine, restitution, forfeiture or penalty and (ii) the defendant is unable to make payment of the fine, restitution, forfeiture, or penalty and costs within ten days of sentencing, the court shall order the defendant to pay such fine, restitution, forfeiture or penalty and any costs which the defendant may be required to pay in deferred payments or installments. The court may authorize the clerk to establish and approve the conditions of all deferred or installment payment agreements, pursuant to guidelines established by the court. As a condition of every such agreement, a defendant who enters into an installment or deferred payment agreement shall promptly inform the court of any change of mailing address during the term of the agreement. If the defendant is unable to make payment within ten days of sentencing, the court may assess a one-time fee not to exceed $10.00 to cover the costs of management of the defendant's account until such account is paid in full. This one-time fee shall not apply to cases in which costs are assessed pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 17.1-275.1, 17.1-275.2, 17.1-275.3 or 17.1-275.4. Installment or deferred payment agreements shall include terms for payment if the defendant participates in a program as provided in subsection (b) or subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  When a person, sentenced to a local correctional facility owes any fines, costs, forfeitures, restitution or penalties, he shall be required as a condition of participating in any work release, home/electronic incarceration or nonconsecutive days program as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 53.1-60, 53.1-131, 53.1-131.1 or 53.1-131.2, to either make full payment or make payments in accordance with his installment or deferred payment agreement while participating in such program. If, after the person has an installment or deferred payment agreement, the person fails to pay as ordered, his participation in the program may be terminated until all fines, costs, forfeitures, restitution and penalties are satisfied. The sheriff or other administrative head of any local correctional facility shall withhold such ordered payments from any amounts due to such person. Distribution of the money collected shall be made in the following order of priority to: 
(1)  Meet the obligation of any judicial or administrative order to provide support and such funds shall be disbursed according to the terms of such order; 
(2)  Pay any fines, restitution or costs as ordered by the court; 
(3)  Pay travel and other such expenses made necessary by his work release employment or participation in an education or rehabilitative program, including the sums specified in Code of Virginia, § 53.1-150; and 
(4)  Defray the offender's keep. 
The balance shall be credited to the offender's account or sent to his family in an amount the offender so chooses. The board of corrections shall promulgate regulations governing the receipt of wages paid to persons participating in such programs, the withholding of payments and the disbursement of appropriate funds. 
(c)  The court shall establish a program to provide an option to any person upon whom a fine and costs have been imposed to discharge all or part of the fine or costs by earning credits for the performance of community service work before or after imprisonment. The program shall specify the rate at which credits are earned and provide for the manner of applying earned credits against the fine or costs. The court shall have such other authority as is reasonably necessary for or incidental to carrying out this program. 
(d)  The provisions of Code of Virginia, § 19.2-354 et seq. shall be applicable to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 1-14) 
State Law reference- Payment of fines and costs on installment basis, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1431, 19.2-354 et seq. 
Sec. 1-18. - Disposition of fines. 
    All fines imposed under any provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall go to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 1-15) 
Sec. 1-19. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code, or its application to any person or circumstances, shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code or their application. 
(Code 1981, § 1-17) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Vesting of administration and government of city, § 1-3; powers generally, ch. 4. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance relative to the retirement system for officers and employees of the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(5); community development, ch. 38; courts, ch. 42; elections, ch. 46; administration and enforcement of floodplain management regulations, § 58-36; human relations, ch. 66; law enforcement, ch. 70; offenses against the administration of justice, § 74-411 et seq.; planning, ch. 82; social services, ch. 90; taxation, ch. 106; administration of real estate taxes for the elderly and disabled, § 106-108; utilities, ch. 114; administrative responsibility for plan of development process, § 122-96 et seq. 
State Law reference- The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq.; State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq.; Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 11-35 et seq.; counties, cities and towns, Code of Virginia, tit. 15.2; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
(a)  The corporate seal of the city is as follows: around the margin of the seal a raised circle, 13/4 inches in diameter, containing the words "City of Petersburg, Virginia," with two stars dividing the phrases, and within the circle an eagle bearing a scroll inscribed "E Pluribus Unum." 
(b)  No other seal shall be used for the city, and no paper issued by municipal authority, which requires the seal of the city, shall be valid, unless the seal prescribed in this section shall be duly affixed thereto. 
(c)  The clerk of the city council shall be the keeper of the city seal. 
(Code 1981, § 2-1; Ord. 12-85, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 2-2. - Southside Virginia Emergency Crew recognized as part of safety program. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.1-133.6, the Southside Virginia Emergency Crew is recognized by the city as the rescue squad, which is an integral part of the official safety program of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-4) 
Sec. 2-3. - Use of courthouse. 
    The courthouse is hereby set apart for the use of such courts of the state as may hold their sessions in the city, for the offices of the judge of the circuit court and for other city officers, and no part thereof shall be otherwise used except by permission of the city council or the city manager. That part of the building used by the courts shall be under the special charge of the city sheriff. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-5. - Code of ethics for officials and employees of the city. 
(a)  Purpose and scope. In order to best serve the citizens and customers of the City of Petersburg, the elected and appointed officials, and employees of the city must act individually and collectively to create a city government that is responsible, fair, honest and open. City employees and officials are expected to demonstrate the highest standards of personal integrity, honesty and conduct in all activities in order to inspire public confidence and trust in city employees. 
    Here, the citizens of the city expect and must receive the highest standard of ethics from all those in the public service. City officials and employees must be independent, impartial and responsible in the performance of their duties and accountable to the members of the public. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish guidelines reflecting expected values and behaviors for use by and applicable to elected and appointed city officials, city officers, including board and commission members and employees. Individuals employed by the city under contractual agreement must also observe the provisions of this policy for the term of their contract or as the contract may stipulate. 
(b)  Policy. Elected and appointed officials and employees of the city at all levels are guardians of the public trust. City officials and employees are required to be impartial and responsible in the fulfillment of their duties. The citizens and customers of the city expect and must receive the highest standard of ethics from all those in public service, regardless of personal consideration. 
(1)  Responsibilities of public service. City officials and employees are obligated to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Virginia and to comply with federal, state, and local laws and city policies. Recognizing the special responsibilities of serving the city and its citizens and customers, city officials and employees are required to maintain the highest standards of integrity and honesty, and they are expected to treat all members of the public and fellow city employees with respect, courtesy, concern and responsiveness. The conduct of city officials and employees in both their official and private affairs should be above reproach to assure that their city position is not used for personal gain. 
(2)  General rule with respect to conflicts of interest. City employees and officials are expected to avoid any conflicts of interest. Further, employees should avoid the appearance of conflicts of interest in order to ensure that city decisions are made in an independent and impartial manner. 
All city officials, officers and employees are prohibited from making, participation in making, or attempting in any way to use his or her official position to influence a city decision in which the employee knows or has reason to know that he or she, or his or her immediate family member, has a financial interest as defined by law. For example, city employees and officials shall not make personal investments nor maintain any direct or indirect interest in enterprises, activities, or entities which they have or have reason to believe may be involved in decisions or recommendations to be made by them or persons under their supervision, or which may create a conflict between their private interests or may impair their independence of judgment in the accomplishment of their official duties. If persons in the public service have financial interests in matters coming before them, or before the department in which they are employed, they shall remove themselves from making, participating in the making, or seeking to influence any decision regarding such matter. 
A conflict of interest may arise when dealing with a current or prospective vendor, supplier, or other business. 
(3)  Acceptance of favors, gratuities and gifts. City employees and officials shall not accept money or other consideration or favors from anyone other than the city for the performance of an act which they would be required or expected to perform in the regular course of their duties; nor shall such persons accept any gifts as defined in the city's gift ordinance, gratuities or favors of any kind which may be perceived or interpreted as an attempt to influence their actions with respect to city business. 
(4)  Use of confidential information. City employees and officials shall not use or disclose confidential information acquired by or available to them in the course of their employment with the city for personal gain or for any reason not related to city business. City employees and officials shall uphold the public's right to know not only the decisions taken, but also the deliberations which shape public policies. Any employee or official, who is aware of a breach of confidentiality, is expected to bring forth that information to the appropriate officials in a timely manner. 
(5)  Use of city employment and facilities for personal gain. City employees and officials shall not use city time, city funds or city facilities, equipment or supplies for personal use, personal gain or for campaign related political activities, nor shall they use or attempt to use their position to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for themselves or others. 
(6)  Outside employment. No employee shall engage in any work, employment or occupation outside city employment, which is detrimental to city service, which prevents or impedes the efficient performance of their duties in city employment, or which is in any way in conflict with their employment with the city. No employee shall engage in any work, employment or occupation outside city employment unless they have notified their department via an outside work permit, and the permit has been approved by the department director. 
(7)  Discussion of future employment. All offers or discussions of offers to city employees of future employment outside city service must be reported immediately to the employee's supervisor whenever such discussions occur with, or when such offer is made by, any person, firm or organization presently dealing with the city concerning matters directly within the employee's current areas of decision-making responsibilities. It shall be within the supervisor's discretionary powers to relieve said employee from further decision-making responsibilities in relationship to said person, firm or organization if he or she determines that the offer of employment or discussions of an offer of employment would impair the employee's independence or judgment or could be construed by others as a bid for favorable treatment. 
(8)  Employment after leaving a city position. Former city employees or officials are barred for one year after they leave city employment from personally appearing before any agency of the city in connection with matters that were under their authority during the last two years of their city employment. Similarly, city employees or officials cannot ever be paid to work on some matter for anyone other than the city if that employee or official participated in the matter as a city employee or official. 
(9)  Interference with administrative services by members of city council. No city council member shall interfere with any city administrative service for which the city manager or other appointed city officers are responsible. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council member shall deal with such administrative services solely through the city manager. No council member shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager or other appointed city officer, either publicly or privately. No council member shall attempt to coerce or influence the city manager or other appointed city officers with respect to any particular contract or administrative action. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit a city council member from requesting public information from city employees. 
(10)  Reporting of improper activities. The city has a responsibility to conduct its affairs ethically and in compliance with the law. city employees and persons in city service are expected and encouraged to promptly raise questions and concerns regarding possible violations of city policy or local, state or federal law with his/her immediate supervisor or another management employee within the employee's department. 
(11)  Retaliation not tolerated. It is the policy of the city to prohibit the taking of any adverse employment action against those who in good faith report or participate in investigations into complaints of alleged violations of city policy or local, state or federal law in retaliation for that reporting or participation. No officer or employee of the city shall directly or indirectly use or attempt to use the authority or influence of such officer or employee for the purpose of intimidating, threatening, coercing, directing or influencing any person with the intent of interfering with that person's duty to disclose alleged violation of city policy or local, state or federal law. 
(12)  Discrimination and harassment. City employees and officials shall not, in the performance of their duties, discriminate against any person on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, gender, pregnancy, childbirth or related medical condition, sexual orientation, marital status, disability, medical condition and actual or perceived gender identity and they will reinforce the city's commitment to equal employment opportunity and a work environment free of discrimination and harassment, including sexual harassment. 
(c)  Violations of the code of ethics. In addition to any other penalty as provided by law, employees who violate the code of ethics will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination. The violation of this code of ethics by a city official, elected or appointed, constitutes official misconduct subject to discipline as determined by city council. 
(Ord. No. 13-57, 6-18-2013) 
Secs. 2-6-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- City council, ch. 2. 

Sec. 2-31. - Salaries. 
    The annual salary of the mayor shall be $8,500.00. The annual salary of each member of the city council shall be $6,500.00. 
(Code 1981, § 2-27.1) 
State Law reference- Salary of members of city council, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1414.5, 15.2-1414.6. 
Secs. 2-32-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- City officers generally, ch. 3. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance relating to salaries, compensation or bonds of city officers and employees or members of city boards or commissions or to compensation or pay plans or classification plans for such officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-7(4); animal control officer, § 18-3; director of social services, § 90-31 et seq.; collector of city taxes, § 106-31 et seq. 
State constitution reference- County and city officers, art. VII, § IV. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Official oaths. 
    Every person elected or appointed to any office in the city, except such as are required to qualify before a court, shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the laws of the state and such other oaths as may be required by the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-26) 
Charter reference- Oath of members of the city council, § 2-4; oath of city officers generally, § 3-1. 
Sec. 2-62. - Bonds. 
(a)  The bond of every officer or employee required to give a bond shall be with such security as the city council may approve, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by him of his duties as such officer or employee. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that the bonds required are given and that such bonds are kept in force. 
(b)  A blanket bond covering all city officers and employees, with the exception of such officers and employees as may be excepted by resolution of the city council, shall be required, which bond shall be in the penalty of $25,000.00 as to any particular officer or employee. However, the city council may, by resolution, require that any particular officer or employee be covered by such bond to such amount in excess of $25,000.00 as the city council may require. 
(c)  In every case where a bond is required of a city officer or employee for the faithful performance of his duties, such officer or employee shall give as surety on such bond a company which has complied with the provisions of the Code of Virginia. The city shall pay out of the city treasury the premium on each bond given; provided it is obtained at the lowest rate and is approved by the city manager. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall be subject to any exceptions that may be provided in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1527 et seq., Code of Virginia, § 49-12 et seq., or other law. 
(Code 1981, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-63. - Compensation. 
    The city council shall prescribe the compensation of all city officers. The salary of every officer shall begin from the date of his qualification, to be certified by the clerk of the city council, and shall be paid upon the approval of the finance department, but no payment shall be made to any officer who is in arrears to the city, or who is indebted to the city for taxes or any other claim, or who is in default in not rendering any account required of such officer. 
(Code 1981, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-64. - Terms. 
    Every officer appointed by the city council, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-65. - Deputies, substitutes. 
(a)  Any officer appointed by the city council may be allowed by the city council to appoint a deputy, if the city council thinks a deputy necessary. But no person shall be appointed as such deputy until he has been approved by the city council, and the officer and his sureties, if any, shall be liable for the conduct of the deputy in the office. 
(b)  If any officer appointed by the city council is at any time unable, by reason of sickness or other unavoidable cause, to discharge the duties of his office, the city council may appoint a substitute to act for him during such inability. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to affect the right of the city council to remove any officer, appointed by it. 
(Code 1981, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-66. - Conflicts of interests. 
    Conflicts of interest shall be regulated by the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1981, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-67. - Receipt for and surrender of city property. 
(a)  Every officer of the city, when entering upon the discharge of official duties, shall file with the director of finance an itemized receipt for all personal property furnished him by the city, specifying in detail its cost or estimated value. Every officer shall also be responsible for the safekeeping of such property as he may receive from the city and, at the expiration of his term of office, he shall surrender the property to the city in good condition, save reasonable wear and tear. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 2-32) 
Charter reference- Duty of officers to deliver property, books and papers to their successors in office, § 3-3. 
Sec. 2-68. - Appeal from officer's decision to deny, revoke or suspend permit. 
    Except as otherwise provided, any person aggrieved by a decision of any officer of the city denying or refusing to issue a permit provided for in this Code or other ordinance of the city, or revoking or suspending such permit, shall have the right to appeal from such decision to the circuit court of the city; provided, written notice of such appeal shall be filed with the officer in question within ten days from the date of such decision. Such notice shall set forth the grounds for appeal and, in such notice, there shall be specified, summarized or attached all testimony and other evidence presented before the officer involved, as well as all pertinent documents, plats, maps and other papers presented to such officer. The record, as constituted, shall then be transferred by the officer in question to the clerk's office of the circuit court and no other matters may be considered by the court upon the hearing of the case upon appeal. 
(Code 1981, § 2-33) 
Secs. 2-69-2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- City manager, § 3-5. 

Sec. 2-86. - General powers and duties. 
    The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the efficient administration of all administrative and executive affairs of the city. The city manager shall have the power and it shall be his duty to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced and, to this end, he shall be vested with all powers of a police officer. 
(2)  Exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions created by the city council. 
(3)  Attend all regular meetings of the city council with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. The city manager shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings. 
(4)  Recommend to the city council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(5)  See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the violation to the attention of the city attorney, whose duty it shall be to take such steps as are necessary to protect and enforce such terms and conditions. 
(6)  Make and execute all contracts on behalf of the city, except those which he may authorize, in writing, the purchasing agent to execute. 
(7)  Act as budget commissioner and, as such, to prepare and submit to the city council the annual budget. 
(8)  Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(9)  Perform all such other duties as may be prescribed by law or be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-87. - Authority to appoint, discipline or remove officers and employees. 
    The city manager shall appoint all such city officers and employees as the city council shall determine are necessary for the proper administration of the affairs of the city, except those specifically reserved in the Charter of the city, the legal and judicial departments and clerical and other attendants to the city council. The city manager shall also have the power to discipline and remove any officer or employee appointed by him. 
(Code 1981, § 2-52) 
Sec. 2-88. - Duties with respect to insurance on city property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the property of the city insured with such coverage and in such amounts as he may deem proper. On or before June 1 of each year, he shall submit to the city council a statement showing such insurance. 
(b)  In the event loss is sustained on any of the city's property by reason of fire, the city manager shall prove such loss and do all things necessary for the protection of the rights of the city and the collection of any insurance benefits. 
(Code 1981, § 2-53) 
Sec. 2-89. - Assistant manager. 
(a)  There is hereby established the position of assistant city manager, who shall be appointed by the city manager and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the assistant city manager to: 
(1)  Perform liaison activities with other local, state, and federal agencies; 
(2)  Exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions; 
(3)  Prepare research reports for the city manager or the city council; 
(4)  Act as and assume the powers of the city manager in the latter's absence; 
(5)  Participate in budget coordination and financial administration; 
(6)  Process complaints and respond to inquiries from the city council and the public; and 
(7)  Perform all other duties that may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-54) 
Sec. 2-90. - Acceptance of gifts. 
(a)  The city manager, for and on behalf of the city, is hereby authorized to accept gifts, donations, bequests or grants of money, securities, personally or in-kind services of a value up to and including $5,000.00. 
(b)  Within 30 days of the end of each fiscal quarter, the city manager shall furnish the city council with a report describing all money accepted pursuant to this section. For each gift, donation, bequest and grant of money, such report shall include, at a minimum, (i) the identity of the donor or grantor, (ii) the amount of the gift, donation, bequest or grant, (iii) any conditions, including requirements for matching funds, placed upon the gift, donation, bequest or grant. 
(Ord. No. 12-55, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Secs. 2-91-2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CLERK OF THE CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-106. - Office established; appointment and term. 
    There is hereby established the office of the clerk of the city council. The clerk shall be appointed by the city council to serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-71) 
Sec. 2-107. - General duties. 
    The clerk of the city council shall attend every city council meeting and keep a neat and accurate record of the city council 's proceedings, preserve carefully the bonds of all city officers and file all papers belonging to city council. If the clerk of the city council shall be unable to attend a meeting, the city council shall designate an individual to perform the clerk's duties for that meeting. 
(Code 1981, § 2-72) 
Sec. 2-108. - Duty to record and index ordinances and furnish copies to city officers. 
    The clerk of the city council shall record, in the minute book, the number, title and purpose of all ordinances passed by the city council. The clerk shall also furnish to every city officer an attested copy or abstract of any ordinance passed by the city council affecting the duties of such officer. The books containing the proceedings and ordinances shall be accurately indexed and shall be open to the inspection of any citizen of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-73) 
Sec. 2-109. - Attestation and publication of ordinances, amendments. 
    The clerk of the city council shall attest and publish all ordinances or amendments thereof passed by the city council, for a violation of which any penalty is imposed, except as provided in sections 1-5 and 1-6 of the Charter, and such other papers and proceedings as the city council may direct, in a newspaper published in the city, to be designated by the city council. Such newspaper shall have the qualifications provided in Code of Virginia, § 8.01-324. 
(Code 1981, § 2-74) 
Secs. 2-110-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- City attorney, § 3-6. 

Sec. 2-126. - General duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city attorney to: 
(1)  prepare all bonds, contracts, deeds and instruments in writing whatsoever, which may be required by any ordinance or order of the city council, or when, by law, usage or agreement, the preparation of such instrument is to be at the expense of the city; 
(2)  Give, whenever required, to the city council and other officers of the city, any and all necessary legal counsel and advice concerning their duties and matters and questions pertaining to such duties; 
(3)  Defend any and all suits or proceedings instituted against the city; 
(4)  Institute and prosecute all suits or proceedings commenced by the city; and 
(5)  Render such other legal service as the city council may require. 
(Code 1981, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-127. - Representation of city officers and employees. 
(a)  In addition to the other duties prescribed by law, the city attorney shall render legal services to the officers and employees of the city in all suits, actions and proceedings brought against them as defendants, other than those involving violations of the criminal laws of the state and penal ordinances of the city, in which the city has an interest when: 
(1)  There is no conflict between the city's interest and that of any such officer and employee; and 
(2)  The subject matter of the suit, action or proceeding arose during and out of the scope of the employment of such officer or employee and during the hours prescribed for performing such services. 
(b)  The city shall pay all costs and expenses lawfully assessed against or incurred on behalf of such officers or employees in their defense, but the city shall not be liable for any judgment rendered against any such officer or employee. 
(Code 1981, § 2-87) 
Sec. 2-128. - Travel expenses. 
    Reasonable travel expenses shall be allowed the city attorney when his attendance shall be required out of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-88) 
Secs. 2-129-2-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 

Sec. 2-146. - Appointment and term. 
    The city manager shall appoint a director of finance for the city. The director of finance's term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-147. - Maintenance of accounting system. 
    The director of finance shall maintain an accounting system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in order to report on and analyze the financial condition of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-102) 
Sec. 2-148. - Keeping of insurance policies. 
    Policies of insurance on city buildings and other property shall be kept by the city director of finance. 
(Code 1981, § 2-103) 
Sec. 2-149. - Annual report. 
    The director of finance shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, an annual report on the financial condition of the city. The annual report shall contain a certificate from an independent certified public accounting firm and other financial information in accord with generally accepted accounting principles. The director of finance shall present the report to the city council as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1981, § 2-104) 
Secs. 2-150-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TREASURER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Powers and duties of city treasurer, § 3-13. 
Cross reference- City treasurer, § 106-31 et seq. 

Sec. 2-166. - Receipts and disbursements generally. 
    The city treasurer shall receive all the taxes, rents and other revenues of the city and make such disbursements as the city council may order or the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city may require, but no money of the city shall be paid out by the city treasurer except on the warrant of the director of finance. 
(Code 1981, § 2-116) 
Sec. 2-167. - Record of receipts, disbursements and accounts. 
    It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to keep suitable books, in which all his receipts and disbursements shall be regularly entered and all accounts of the city kept clearly and plainly, so that the state of such funds and accounts may at all times be easily seen and understood. 
(Code 1981, § 2-117) 
Sec. 2-168. - Deposit of funds. 
    The city treasurer shall keep all money in his hands belonging to the city in such banks as the city council may, by resolution, designate as a depository for city funds. No such funds shall be deposited in any bank which has not met the requirements of the Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.1-359 et seq.). 
(Code 1981, § 2-118) 
Sec. 2-169. - Inspection of books and accounts; transfer to successor. 
    The books and accounts of the treasurer, and all papers relating to the accounts and transactions of the city, shall be at all reasonable times subject to the inspection of the city manager and the city council, or of such person as the city council may appoint to examine the such books accouts and papers, and, together with any balance of money on hand, shall be transferred by the treasurer to his successor, at every new election, or delivered up as the city council may at any time require. 
(Code 1981, § 2-119) 
Sec. 2-170. - Annual settlement; final settlement. 
    The treasurer shall receive the city levy in the manner prescribed for the receipt of the state revenue and shall, at the first August meeting of the city council, or within 30 days thereafter, settle with the city council accounts for that year. Out of the balance shown to be in the treasurer's hands upon the settlement the treasurer shall at once pay all warrants drawn on the appropriations for that year not previously paid, in the order of their presentation. When the treasurer's term of office expires or if the treasurer dies, resigns or is removed from office, the treasurer, upon the expiration of the treasurer's term of office, resignation, or removal, or the treasurer's personal representative, upon the treasurer's death, shall immediately make such settlement, showing the amount in the treasurer's hands to be accounted for and the fund to which such funds belong and deliver to the treasurer's successor all securities belonging to the treasurer's office and all money belonging to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-120) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3137. 
Sec. 2-171. - Deputy treasurer. 
    Any deputy treasurer appointed by the city treasurer under the authority of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1603, where such appointment is certified and recorded as therein required, and who has taken and prescribed the oath therein provided for, may discharge any of the official duties of the city treasurer during his continuance in office, unless it is some duty the performance of which by a deputy is expressly forbidden by law. 
(Code 1981, § 2-121) 
Secs. 2-172, 2-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - COLLECTOR OF CITY TAXES 

Sec. 2-174. - Collector of city taxes, generally. 
    The city council, in its discretion, may appoint a collector of city taxes who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The collector of city taxes shall perform such duties and have such powers as are prescribed by the city council or by state law. If city council does not appoint a collector of city taxes, duties and powers prescribed to the collector of city taxes shall be administered by the treasurer and as provided for by state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-175. - Deputies of collector of taxes. 
    The collector of city taxes may appoint one or more deputies, as may be provided by the city council, but the sureties in the bond of such officer shall be equally liable for the acts of the deputies as for those of the principal. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-176. - Bond; compensation; duties; powers generally. 
    The collector of city taxes shall execute such bond and receive such compensation as the council may prescribe. The collector of city taxes shall collect all taxes, assessments, and other charges which may be levied or otherwise due to the city and perform such other duties as may be prescribed in this article or ordained by the council and for the purposes set forth in this article. The collector of city taxes is hereby vested with any and all the powers which are now or may hereafter be vested in any collector of state taxes. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-177. - Office; books and accounts. 
    The collector of city taxes shall keep an office in such place as the council may designate and prescribe and shall keep therein such books and accounts, subject to the inspection of the city manager and members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-178. - Removal for failure to make payment to treasurer. 
    The collector of city taxes is expressly prohibited from keeping the moneys of the city in the collector of city taxes' hands, or in the hands of any person for the collector of city taxes' use, beyond the time prescribed for the payment of such moneys into the city treasury, and any violation of this section shall subject him to immediate removal from office. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-179. - To be governed by license ordinance, etc. 
    The collector of city taxes, in the collection of taxes and of taxes on licenses, shall be governed in all respects by the provisions, regulations and restrictions of the license ordinance of the city, the annual tax ordinance and the other relevant provisions of this Code and of the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-180. - Power and authority generally. 
    The collector of city taxes shall collect all delinquent taxes, assessments, and other charges due the city, and for that purpose shall have full power and authority to levy for all such that is due and unpaid by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of the person so delinquent or any goods and chattels legally liable therefor, in like manner as is now or may hereafter be provided by the laws of the state, in case of nonpayment of city levies, or by any other laws of the state, or as is now or may hereafter be provided by the Charter and ordinances of the city. The collector of city taxes is hereby granted, for purposes aforesaid, the power of garnishment which is vested in the state officers by state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-181. - Duties same as treasurer. 
    The duties of the collector of city taxes with respect to delinquent taxes, levies, assessments, and other charges shall be the same as those prescribed by general law for treasurers with respect to such taxes, levies, assessments, and other charges. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-182. - Delivery of tax books to collector of taxes. 
    It shall be the duty of the collector of city taxes to turn over to the city director of finance, at such times as the council shall direct, the tax books for any preceding year or years, containing the list of the names of the delinquent taxpayers for such year or years, and the city director of finance shall thereupon credit the collector of city taxes with the amount of taxes shown upon such list and return the list to the collector of city taxes and charge the collector of city taxes with the amount of taxes shown thereon. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 2-183. - Books and accounts; reports to director of finance; payment to treasurer. 
    The collector of city taxes shall keep all necessary and proper books, vouchers, and accounts in regard to delinquent city taxes, assessments, and other charges, which shall be subject to the inspection of the city manager and members of the council. The collector of city taxes shall make daily reports in this regard to the director of finance and daily payments to the treasurer of all taxes, assessments and other charges collected, and the city treasurer shall give to the collector of city taxes a receipt for the taxes paid to him and deliver to the city director of finance a duplicate thereof. 
(Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Secs. 2-184-2-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 54-31 et seq.; police department, § 70-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-191. - Creation of city departments. 
    In addition to departments required by city ordinance or general or special law, the city council shall have the authority to create such departments as are necessary for the efficient operation of city government. These departments may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Blandford Cemetery. 
(2)  Building inspection. 
(3)  Data processing. 
(4)  Finance. 
(5)  Fire. 
(6)  Health. 
(7)  Library. 
(8)  Personnel. 
(9)  Planning. 
(10)  Police. 
(11)  Public works. 
(12)  Recreation. 
(13)  Social services. 
(14)  Tourism. 
(15)  Traffic and transportation. 
(Code 1981, § 2-3) 
Secs. 2-192-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HEALTH DEPARTMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Local health departments and directors, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-30 et seq. 

Sec. 2-211. - Appointment, term and compensation of director. 
    A health director shall be appointed by the state commissioner of health. The term of office of the health director shall be at the pleasure of the state commissioner of health and his compensation shall be set by the state personnel system. 
(Code 1981, § 2-136) 
Sec. 2-212. - General powers and duties of director. 
    The health director shall enforce all laws, rules and regulations relating to the public health, and the laws, rules and regulations of the bureau of vital statistics, for which purpose he is hereby invested with police authority in the performance of his duties. It shall be the duty of the health director, and he shall have power and authority, to determine what is a nuisance, or what is detrimental to the health of any portion of the city. The health director shall have a general supervision over the sanitary condition of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-137) 
Sec. 2-213. - Staffing of department. 
    The health director shall ensure adequate staffing of the health department as authorized by the state department of health and in accordance with budgetary limitations approved by the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-138) 
Sec. 2-214. - Duties of sanitarians. 
    The health department sanitarians shall, under the supervision of the health director, have charge of the sanitary work of the city, shall see that the schools and public places are kept in a sanitary condition, that the orders of the health director made in pursuance of state law and city ordinances are carried out, and shall report all infractions of state law and city ordinances to the health director. 
(Code 1981, § 2-139) 
Sec. 2-215. - Inspection of streets and premises. 
    The health director shall cause to be inspected all streets, yards, lots, privies, stables or other places which are alleged to be or likely to become offensive or dangerous to the public health. 
(Code 1981, § 2-140) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 2-216. - Correction of conditions injurious to health generally. 
    When any condition shall be found which, in the opinion of the health director, is, or is likely to become, injurious to health, the health director shall require the person causing such condition or the owner or occupant of the premises on which such condition is found, to correct the condition forthwith in such manner as the health director shall deem best. If the premises in question are unoccupied and the owner is not known, or cannot be found, the health director shall cause any such condition to be removed and the premises cleaned and disinfected at the expense of the city, and the owner shall be liable to repay such expense to the city, with ten percent damages. 
(Code 1981, § 2-141) 
Secs. 2-217-2-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Tourism advisory board, § 38-31 et seq.; recreation advisory board, § 78-31 et seq.; planning commission, § 82-31 et seq.; advisory board, § 90-61 et seq.; traffic and transportation safety commission, § 110-61 et seq. 

Secs. 2-241-2-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOOKS, RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- Duty of officers to deliver property, books and papers to their successors in office, § 3-3. 
State Law reference- Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq. 

Sec. 2-281. - Establishment and composition of records management committee. 
    In order to provide for the disposition of the books, records and accounts kept by the departments, boards, commissions and other agencies of the city government, a records management committee is hereby established, consisting of the assistant city manager, the city attorney, the director of finance, the clerk of the city council and the city librarian. 
(Code 1981, § 2-171) 
Sec. 2-282. - Disposition generally. 
    The several departments, boards, commissions and other agencies of the city government shall, at such times as the city manager shall prescribe and in such form as he may require, submit to the records management committee schedules for the systematic disposition of the books, records and accounts kept by them respectively. It shall be the duty of the records management committee to review such schedules, and it shall satisfy itself that they reasonably comply with the policy established in section 2-283 and the standards prescribed in section 2-284, and shall recommend to the city manager, in writing, the disposition to be made of the books, records and accounts described in such schedules or any of them. Upon the receipt of such recommendations, the city manager is empowered to authorize the disposal of such books, records and accounts in such manner and by such method as he shall deem to be in the best interest of the city and in accordance with and pursuant to such policy and standards. 
(Code 1981, § 2-172) 
Sec. 2-283. - Policies as to use and disposition. 
    In dealing with books, records and accounts referred to in this article, the records management committee, the city manager and the departments, boards, commissions and other agencies of the city government shall conform to the following policies: 
(1)  Such books, records and accounts shall not be used or authorized to be used for private purposes by any officer or employee of the city government or disposed of except as authorized by this article; and 
(2)  Such books, records and accounts shall be systematically and periodically disposed of when they no longer serve their current administrative purposes and have lost their legal, research or historical value and significance. 
(Code 1981, § 2-173) 
Sec. 2-284. - Preservation. 
    In determining whether and for what length of time books, records and accounts referred to in this article shall be preserved, the records management committee, the city manager and the departments, boards, commissions and other agencies of the city government shall base their decisions, as far as possible, on the following criteria: 
(1)  The frequency and extent of the use of such books, records and accounts by the officers and employees of the city government and by the public. 
(2)  The availability and accessibility of copies or reproductions of such books, records and accounts for such use. 
(3)  The availability or accessibility of transcriptions or summarizations of the contents of such books, records and accounts for such use. 
(4)  The necessity or desirability for the preservation of such books, records and accounts to support or explain the contents of other such books, records or accounts which should be preserved. 
(5)  The importance of such books, records and accounts as an integral part of the historical documents of the city. 
(6)  The necessity for or desirability of preserving such books, records and accounts for studies in administrative procedures, operations or management. 
(7)  The necessity for or desirability of preserving such books, records and accounts to support a claim on behalf of the city or to refute a claim against the city. 
(8)  The value of the preservation of such books, records and accounts for legislative, administrative or other investigations. 
(9)  The value of the preservation of such books, records and accounts to meet the requirements of agencies having no connection with the city government. 
(10)  The space required to maintain and house such books, records and accounts and the cost of providing such space and its relationship to the future value of such books, records and accounts. 
(Code 1981, § 2-174) 
Sec. 2-285. - Reproduction. 
    The city manager may provide for the photographing, microphotographing or recording by any other process which accurately reproduces or forms a durable medium for reproducing the original of all or any part of the books, records and accounts referred to in this article in accordance with such standards and retention schedules as may be issued in pursuance of Code of Virginia, § 42.1-82, and the preservation of such photographs, microphotographs or medium in conveniently accessible files, and when the original of such books, records and accounts have been so photographed, microphotographed or reproduced, such original may be destroyed. 
(Code 1981, § 2-175) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for reproduction of records, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1412. 
Secs. 2-286-2-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(1); any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any specific public improvement or making any assessment saved from repeal, § 1-7(7); taxation, ch. 106. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-311. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall commence on July 1 of each year and end on the following June 30. 
(Code 1981, § 2-2) 
State Law reference- Uniform fiscal year for cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500. 
Sec. 2-312. - Charges for city publications. 
    The city manager shall, from time to time, establish charges for publications which the city sells to the general public. Such charges shall include the cost to the city for such publications and a reasonable additional amount for indirect expenses, such as postage and handling. A list of such charges shall be posted at City Hall and at all such places where such publications are sold. 
(Code 1981, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-313. - Fee for passing bad check to city. 
    If any person shall utter, publish or pass any check or draft for payment of any taxes or any other sums due the city, which is subsequently returned for insufficient funds, or because there is no account or the account has been closed, the treasurer of city taxes shall add to such taxes or sums a fee of $20.00 for each such check or draft. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, 15.2-106. 
Sec. 2-314. - Destruction of certain bonds and coupons. 
(a)  At least twice a year, a committee, which is hereby created, consisting of the treasurer, the director of finance and the city manager, shall cause all cancelled coupons paid, all coupons clipped from bonds which have been registered as to principal and interest, and all city bonds paid off, to be destroyed and shall supervise and witness the destruction of such bonds and bond coupons. A period of five fiscal years shall have elapsed from the end of the fiscal year in which such bonds and bond coupons were paid before they are destroyed. 
(b)  The committee shall prepare and execute a certificate setting forth the means by which such paid instruments were destroyed, the issue, series, number and maturity date of the paid bonds so destroyed and the fiscal year in which paid. Every such certification shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the city council and shall be acknowledged in the manner prescribed by law for the acknowledgment of deeds. The certification shall be prepared in duplicate, the original of which shall be made a part of the minutes of the city council, and the copy thereof shall be retained as a permanent record of the office of the treasurer. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall in any way affect the provisions of section 2-334. 
(Code 1981, § 2-176) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3130. 
Secs. 2-315-2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-06, § 1, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed Div. 2, §§ 2-331-2-335, which pertained to the sinking fund and derived from Code 1981, §§ 2-189-2-193. 

Secs. 2-331-2-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-01, adopted Jan. 7, 2014, amended Div. 3 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said division to read as set out herein. The former Div. 3, §§ 2-351-2-354, 2-371, 2-372, 2-391, 2-411-2-438, 2-456-2-462, 2-481-2-484, and 2-501-2-512, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 24.6-1-24.6-52 of the 1981 Code, and Ord. No. 10-31, § 1, adopted May 4, 2010. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-351. - Purpose. 
    To the end that the municipal government of the city obtains high quality goods and services at reasonable cost, that all of its procurement procedures be conducted in a fair and impartial manner with avoidance of any impropriety or appearance of impropriety, that all qualified vendors have access to city business and that no offeror is arbitrarily or capriciously excluded, and to increase public confidence in purchasing by the city, it is the intent of this division that competition be sought to the maximum feasible degree, that the administration enjoy broad flexibility in conducting such competition, that the rules governing contract awards be made clear in advance of the competition, that specifications reflect the procurement needs of the city rather than being drawn to favor a particular vendor, and that the city and vendors freely exchange information concerning what is sought to be procured and what is offered. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-352. - Application of division. 
(a)  This division applies to contracts for the procurement of goods, services, insurance and construction entered into by the city involving every expenditure for public purchasing irrespective of its source. 
(b)  Where any procurement transaction involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the receipt of which is conditioned upon compliance with mandatory requirements in federal laws or regulations not in conformance with the provisions of this division, only upon written determination of the city council that acceptance of the grant or contract funds under the applicable conditions is in the public interest. Such determination shall state the specific provision of this division in conflict with the conditions of the grant or contract. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-353. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The requirements of this division shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Purchases by the department of social services for the acquisition of motor vehicles for sale or transfer to temporary assistance to needy families (TANF) recipients. 
(2)  Procurement transactions involving the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the receipt of which is conditioned upon compliance with mandatory requirements in federal laws or regulations not in conformance with this division, where the purchasing agent has determined in a writing, which states the specific section of this division in conflict with the conditions of the grant or contract, that acceptance of the grant or contract funds under the applicable conditions is in the public interest and where the city complies with such federal requirements. 
(3)  The purchase of goods or services that are produced or performed by: 
a.  Persons, or in schools or workshops, under the supervision of the state department for the blind and vision impaired; or 
b.  Nonprofit sheltered workshops or other nonprofit organizations that offer transitional or supported employment services serving the handicapped. 
(4)  The purchase of legal services or expert witnesses or other services associated with litigation or regulatory proceedings, including the printing of legal briefs. 
(5)  The purchase of insurance or electric utility services if purchased through an association of which the city is a member if the association was formed and is maintained for the purpose of promoting the interest and welfare of and developing close relationships with public bodies similar to the city, provided such association has procured the insurance or electric utility services by use of competitive principles and provided that the purchasing agent has made a determination in advance after reasonable notice to the public and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding and competitive negotiation are not fiscally advantageous to the public and the basis for this determination. 
(6)  Any purchase for the administration of public assistance and social services programs as defined in Code of Virginia, § 63.2-100; any purchase for a community services board as defined in Code of Virginia, § 37.1-1; and any purchase of services under (i) the comprehensive services act for at-risk youth and families, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-5200-2.2-5214, or (ii) the Virginia Juvenile Community Crime Control Act, Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-309.2-16.1-309.10, for goods or personal services for direct use by the recipients of such programs if the procurement is made for an individual recipient; however, contracts for the bulk procurement of goods or services for the use of recipients shall not be exempted from the requirements of this division. 
(7)  Contracts for purchases or equipment, services, the printing of ballots or statements of results, or other materials essential to the conduct of a general primary or special election. 
(8)  Purchases from the Virginia Correctional Enterprises, from the state department general services division of purchases and supply and from the state department of transportation. 
(9)  Purchase for special police work when the chief of police certifies to the purchasing agent that items are needed for undercover police operations. 
(10)  Scientific instruments and equipment, medicines and drugs, legal and scientific books and periodicals, and professional books and periodicals. 
(11)  Manuscripts, maps, charts, sheet music, phonograph records, compact video or audio discs, video or audio cassette tapes, books, pamphlets and periodicals. 
(12)  Such perishable articles as may be designated in the rules and regulations established by ordinance. 
(13)  Association dues and membership in professional associations for city agencies and employees. 
(14)  Expenses for city-sponsored: 
a.  Conference-related room deposits; 
b.  Hotel and motel lodging; 
c.  Conference registration; 
d.  Banquets; and 
e.  Catering. 
(15)  Advertising in publications. 
(16)  Sculptures, paintings or other works of art. 
(17)  Purchases on existing contracts established by professional organizations that the city may use by virtue of its membership in such organizations. 
(18)  Purchases on existing contracts established by other public bodies. 
(19)  Services purchased by the city retirement system related to the management, purchase, or sale of investments authorized by this section, including but not limited to actuarial services, when governed by the standard of care set forth in Code of Virginia, § 51.1-803. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, the requirements of section 2-359 concerning prompt payment of bills and subdivision VIII of this division concerning ethics in public contracting shall apply to any procurement transaction listed in this section. 
(c)  The purchasing agent of the purchasing office may delegate to the director of public works the authority to purchase natural gas and to arrange for the transportation of natural gas without requiring that sealed bids be received pursuant to invitations extended as set out in section 2-401. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4343-2.2-4346. 
Sec. 2-354. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brand name or equal specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers, to describe the standard of quality, performance and other salient characteristics needed to meet city requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
    Brand name specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
    Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity. 
    Change order (unilateral) means a written order signed and unilaterally issued by the purchasing agent, directing the contractor to make changes which the changes clauses of the contract authorizes the purchasing agent to order without the consent of the contractor. 
    Competitive negotiation means a method of source selection that involves individual discussions between the city and the offeror on the basis of responses to the city's request for proposals. 
    Competitive sealed bidding means a method of contractor selection under this division, not required for the procurement of professional services, that begins with the public notice and issuance of a written invitation for bids under section 2-401, includes a public opening under section 2-406, and results in the evaluation of bids under section 2-408 and an award under section 2-409. 
    Construction means building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any structure, building, road, street or highway, and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. 
    Construction management contract means a contract in which a party is retained by the city to coordinate and administer contracts for construction services for the benefit of the city, and may also include, if provided in the contract, the furnishing of construction services to the city. 
    Contract means all types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of goods, services, insurance or construction. 
    Contract modification/supplement means any written alteration in specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity or other provision of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract. 
    Contractor means any person, company, corporation, or partnership having a contract with the city or a using agency thereof. 
    Cost analysis means the evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving at costs actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be paid, and costs to be reimbursed. 
    Cost data means factual information concerning the cost of labor, material, overhead, and other cost elements, which are expected to be incurred or which have been actually incurred by the contractor in performing the contract. 
    Cost reimbursement contract means a contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the contract terms and this division and fee or profit, if any. 
    Design-build contract means a contract between the city and another party in which the party contracting with the city agrees to both design and build the structure, roadway or other item specified in the contract. 
    Direct or indirect participation means involvement through decision, approval, disapproval, preparation of any part of a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or any other advisory capacity. 
    Disadvantaged business means a business meeting the definitions set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations pertaining to the applicable federal grant program. 
    Emerging small business means a business that: 
(1)  Has been certified by the office of minority business development for a period of up to seven years; 
(2)  Has annual gross receipts of $500,000.00 or less for each of its three fiscal years preceding application for such certification if engaged primarily in the construction business or of $250,000.00 or less if engaged primarily in a non-construction business; 
(3)  Has fewer than ten full-time, permanent employees; 
(4)  Is not a subsidiary of another business and does not belong to a group of businesses owned and controlled by the same individuals; 
(5)  Has its principal place of business entirely within the boundaries of a city enterprise zone; 
(6)  Possesses a city business license; and 
(7)  Pays personal property, real estate, and business taxes, as applicable, to the city. 
    Employee means an individual drawing a salary or wages from the city, whether elected or not; any non-compensated individual performing personal services for the city or any department, agency, commission, council, board or any other entity established by the executive or legislative branch of this city; and any non-compensated individual serving as an elected official of the city. 
    Good faith minority business enterprise and emerging small business participation efforts the sum total of efforts by a particular business to provide for the equitable participation of minority business enterprises or emerging small business subcontractors. For past efforts, this sum total shall be comprised of the record of participation by minority business enterprises and emerging small businesses through subcontracting or joint ventures. For future efforts, it shall be comprised of such efforts which are proposed to allow equitable participation of minority business enterprises or emerging small business subcontractors. 
    Goods means all material, equipment, supplies, printing and automated data processing hardware and software. 
    Informality means a minor defect or variation of a bid or proposal from the exact requirements of the invitation for bids or the request for proposals which does not affect the quality, quantity or delivery schedule for the goods, services or construction being procured. 
    Insurance means a contract whereby, for a stipulated consideration, one party undertakes to compensate the other for loss on a specified subject by specified perils. 
    Intent to award means an intent by the city to accept a bid or proposal. 
    Invitation for bids means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. 
    Minority business enterprise means a business, at least 51 percent of which is owned and controlled or 51 percent minority-owned and operated by minority group members or, for a stock corporation, at least 51 percent of the stock which is owned and controlled by minority group members. 
    Minority group members mean citizens of the United States who are Blacks, Hispanics, Asians, Indians, Eskimos, or Aleuts. 
    Nominal value means a value so small, slight, or the like, in comparison to what might properly be expected, as scarcely to be entitled to the same, but in no case to be more than $30.00. 
    Nonprofessional services means any services not specifically identified as professional services. 
    Person means any business, individual, corporation, union, committee, club, other organization, or group of individuals. 
    Professional services means work performed by an independent contractor within the scope of the practice of accounting, actuarial services, architecture, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, dentistry, medicine, optometry, pharmacy or professional engineering. 
    Public body means any legislative, executive or judicial body, agency, office, department, authority, post, commission, committee, institution, board or political subdivision created by law to exercise some sovereign power or to perform some governmental duty, and empowered by law to undertake the activities described in this division. 
    Public contract means an agreement between a public body and a nongovernmental source that is enforceable in a court of law. 
    Purchasing agent means the purchasing agent of the city. 
    Qualified products list means an approved list of goods, services or construction items described by model or catalog number that, prior to competitive solicitation, the city has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
    Recycled paper means any paper having a total weight consisting of not less than 50 percent recovered materials, as that term is defined for purposes of purchasing paper and paper products in 40 CFR 247.3 (2001), as amended. 
    Request for proposals means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
    Request for qualifications means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting qualification statements. 
    Responsible bidder and responsible offeror mean a person who has the capability, in all respects, to perform fully the contract requirements and the moral and business integrity and reliability which will ensure good faith performance, and who has been prequalified, if required. 
    Responsive bidder means a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids. 
    Services mean any work performed by an independent contractor which does not consist primarily of acquisition of equipment or materials, or the rental of equipment, materials and supplies. 
    Specification means any written description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a good, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a good, service or construction item for delivery. 
    Using agency means any department, agency, bureau, board, commission, court, city jail or jail forum or other unit in the city government requiring goods, services, insurance or construction as provided for in this division. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4301. 
Sec. 2-355. - Public inspection of certain records. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, all proceedings, records, contracts and other public records relating to procurement transactions shall be open to the inspection of any citizen or any interested person, firm or corporation, in accordance with the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3799 et seq. 
(b)  Cost estimates relating to a proposed procurement transaction prepared by or for a public body shall not be open to public inspection. 
(c)  Any competitive sealed bidding bidder, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect bid records within a reasonable time after the opening of all bids but prior to award, except in the event that the public body decides not to accept any of the bids and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, bid records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(d)  Any competitive negotiation offeror, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect proposal records within a reasonable time after the evaluation and negotiations of proposals are completed but prior to award except in the event that the public body decides not to accept any of the proposals and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, proposal records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(e)  Any inspection of procurement transaction records under this section shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. 
(f)  Trade secrets or proprietary information submitted by a bidder, offeror or contractor in connection with a procurement transaction or prequalification application submitted pursuant to section 2-400 shall not be subject to the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq.; however, the bidder, offeror or contractor shall: 
(1)  Invoke the protections of this section prior to or upon submission of the data or other materials; 
(2)  Identify the data or other materials to be protected; and 
(3)  State the reasons why protection is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4342. 
Sec. 2-356. - Financing arrangements. 
    As a requisite for entering into any contract for the procurement of goods, services, insurance, construction or other purchase to be made pursuant to this division, the approval of insurance, construction or other purchase to be made pursuant to this division, the approval of the director of finance shall be obtained prior to agreeing to the terms of any contract that will involve lease-purchase, installment payments, payment of interest on deferred balances or any other means of financing a deferred balance of the cost of purchase of such goods and services. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-357. - Unauthorized purchases. 
    Except as provided in this division, no official, elected or appointed, or any employee shall purchase or contract for any goods, services, insurance or construction within the purview of this division other than by and through the purchasing agent. Any purchase order or contract made contrary to this division or any purchase order or contract made when sufficient funds are not available is not approved, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-358. - Purchasing of recycled materials. 
    In determining the award of any contract for paper or paper products to be purchased for use by city agencies, the purchasing office shall award to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder offering recycled paper of a quality suitable for the purpose intended, so long as the bid price is not more than ten percent greater than the bid price of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder offering a product that does not qualify under the definition of the term "recycled paper" found in section 2-353. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4326. 
Sec. 2-359. - Prompt payment of bills. 
(a)  Every city agency that acquires goods or services or conducts any other type of contractual business with a nongovernmental, privately owned enterprise shall promptly pay for the completed delivered goods or services by the required payment date. The required payment date shall be either: 
(1)  The date on which payment is due under the terms of the contract for the provision of goods or services; or 
(2)  If a date is not established by contract, not more than 45 days after goods or services are received or not more than 45 days after the invoice is rendered, whichever is later. 
(b)  Separate payment dates may be specified for contracts under which goods or services are provided in a series of partial executions or deliveries to the extent that the contract provides for separate payment for partial execution or delivery. 
(c)  Within 20 days after the receipt of the invoice or goods or services, the agency shall notify the supplier of any defect or impropriety that would prevent payment by the payment date. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided under the terms of the contract for the provision of goods or services, every agency that fails to pay by the payment date shall pay any finance charges assessed by the supplier that shall not exceed one percent per month. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to the late payment provisions in any public utility tariffs or public utility negotiated contracts. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4352. 
Secs. 2-360-2-370. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Purchasing Agent 

Sec. 2-371. - Appointment of purchasing agent. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of purchasing agent, who shall be this city's principal public purchasing official. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be subject to his general direction and control. The purchasing agent appoint and remove all officers and employees of the office, subject to applicable personnel policies established by ordinance, and shall have the power to make rules, regulations and operational procedures consistent with the division and city ordinances for the conduct of the functions of the office. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-372. - Authority and duties. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall be responsible for the following functions: 
(1)  To purchase, lease and contractually maintain, when required, for the use of all using agencies, all goods, capital improvements and services, and to perform all other requirements as specified in this division; 
(2)  To secure the best value for the tax dollar, effect all purchases and contracts on the basis of free and open competitive bids whenever practicable. All awards shall be made to the lowest responsive responsible bidder; 
(3)  To issue and enforce an annual requisitioning schedule for all using agencies to follow for submission of requisitions for goods; 
(4)  To purchase, lease or contract for goods and services for using agencies in time of emergency; 
(5)  To operate and maintain a central stores warehouse to supply as many common items as possible to all using agencies; 
(6)  To operate a central print shop for the use of all using agencies; 
(7)  To develop, with the cooperation of using agencies, and enforce standard city specifications for goods purchased; 
(8)  To develop and supervise an inspection program to guide using agencies in inspection of all purchased goods delivered to the city, and to cause tests to be made, when necessary, in order to determine quality and conformance with specifications; 
(9)  To dispose of all surplus, salvage or obsolete city property by transfer between city agencies, trade-in on new goods, or sale by public auction competitive bids, or open fixed-price sales; 
(10)  To initiate and control all contracts, and to act as sole city representative in contract matters, including complaints on delivery, failure to conform to specifications, or modifying the terms of contracts; 
(11)  To establish rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this division, relating to the purchase of goods, services and construction for the city. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided for by law, the city manager and the purchasing agent are the only city representatives authorized to obligate the city for the expenditure of funds to purchase goods, services and construction for the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Secs. 2-373-2-390. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Contract Formation and Methods of Source Selection 

Sec. 2-391. - Small purchases. 
    Any contract not exceeding the amount specified in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(G) as the ceiling for the use of small purchase procedures may be made in accordance with small purchase procedures established by the purchasing agent; provided, however, that contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. Insofar as it is practical, no less than four businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations, at least one of which shall be a local minority business enterprise or emerging small business. The efforts to solicit a local minority business enterprise or emerging small business shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the businesses submitting a quotation and the dates and amounts of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(G). 
Sec. 2-392. - Only practical source procurement. 
    Should the purchasing agent determine in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source practicably available for that which is to be procured, the purchasing agent may award a contract to that source without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation and may conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery and terms. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. The purchasing agent shall maintain a record of only practical source procurements that lists the following for each procurement: 
(1)  A description of that which is being procured; 
(2)  The contractor selected; 
(3)  The date on which the contract was or will be awarded; 
(4)  The amount and type of the contract; and 
(5)  The identification number of the contract file. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(E). 
Sec. 2-393. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  In an emergency, the purchasing agent may authorize or order the expenditure of funds for emergency purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services for the using agencies without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation; however, such procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency shall be included in the contract file. 
(b)  An emergency shall be deemed to exist when the purchasing agent determines that: 
(1)  A breakdown or failure of machinery or other equipment has occurred; 
(2)  A curtailment, diminution or termination of an essential service is threatened; or 
(3)  A dangerous condition has developed and that a procurement without recourse to competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation is: 
a.  Needed to prevent loss of life or property; 
b.  Essential to protect and preserve the interests of the city and its inhabitants; 
c.  Needed to maintain the proper functioning of the city government; or 
d.  Needed to maintain the efficient rendering of public services. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(F). 
Sec. 2-394. - Cooperative procurement. 
(a)  Cooperative procurement agreements. The city may participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative procurement agreement on behalf of or in conjunction with one or more other public bodies, or public agencies or institutions or localities of the several states, of the United States or its territories, the District of Columbia or the United States General Services Administration, for the purpose of combining requirements to increase efficiency or reduce administrative expenses in any acquisition of goods and services. 
(b)  Purchases off of other public bodies' contracts. 
(1)  By city. The city may purchase from the contract of another public body or of any authority, department, agency or institution of the commonwealth even if it did not participate in the request for proposals or invitation for bids, if the request for proposals or invitation for bids specified that the procurement was being conducted on behalf of other public bodies. 
(2)  By other public bodies. A public body may purchase from the city's contract even if it did not participate in the request for proposals or invitation for bids, if the request for proposals or invitation for bids specified that the procurement was being conducted on behalf of other public bodies. 
(3)  Exceptions. The city may not purchase architectural or engineering services from the contract of any other public body or any authority, department, agency or institution of the commonwealth. No other public body may purchase from the city's contracts for architectural or engineering services. 
(c)  Policies and procedures to be followed. If the city is the party conducting the procurement, the procurement shall comply with the policies and procedures set forth within this division and the rules and regulations promulgated to implement this division. If the city is not the party conducting the procurement, then the procurement shall comply with the policies and procedures of the public body conducting the procurement. Prior to any city purchase under a contract entered by another public body, the purchasing agent shall find that the process pursuant to which the contract was entered generally complied with the policies and procedures established by this division and the rules and regulations promulgated to implement this division. 
(d)  Purchases off of federal contracts. As authorized by the United States Congress and consistent with applicable federal regulations, and provided the terms of the contract permit such purchases, the city may purchase goods and nonprofessional services from a United States General Services Administration contract or a contract awarded by any other agency of the United States government, upon approval of the purchasing agent. 
(e)  Utility marking services. The city, which is also a utility operator, may purchase services through or participate in contracts awarded by one or more utility operators which are not public bodies for utility marking services, as required by the Underground Utility Damage Prevention Act, Code of Virginia, § 56-265.14 et seq. A purchase of services under this subsection may deviate from the procurement procedures set forth in this division, upon a determination made in advance by the purchasing agent and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public and the contract is awarded based on competitive principles. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4304. 
Sec. 2-395. - Conditions for use of competitive sealed bidding. 
    All public contracts with nongovernmental contractors for the purchase or lease of goods or for the purchase of services, insurance or construction shall be awarded after competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation as provided in this division, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(A). 
Sec. 2-396. - Competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiations on state-aid projects. 
    No contract for the construction of any building or for an addition to or improvement of an existing building for which state funds of not more than $30,000.00 in the aggregate or for the sum of all phases of a contract or project, either by appropriation, grant-in-aid or loan, are used or are to be used for all or part of the cost of construction shall be let except after competitive sealed bidding or after competitive negotiation as provided under section 2-421(a)(3). The procedure for the advertising for bids or for proposals and for letting of the contract shall conform, mutatis mutandis, to this division. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4305. 
Sec. 2-397. - Permitted contracts with certain religious organizations; purpose; limitations. 
(a)  The general assembly has indicated its intent, in accordance with the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, PL 104-193, to authorize the city to enter into contracts with faith-based organizations for the purposes described in this section on the same basis as any other nongovernmental source without impairing the religious character of such organization and without diminishing the religious freedom of the beneficiaries of assistance provided under this section. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "faith-based organization" means a religious organization that is or applies to be a contractor to provide goods or services for programs funded by the block grant provided pursuant to the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, PL 104-193. 
(c)  The city, in procuring goods or services or in making disbursements pursuant to this section shall not: 
(1)  Discriminate against a faith-based organization on the basis of the organization's religious character; or 
(2)  Impose conditions that: 
a.  Restrict the religious character of the faith-based organization, except as provided in subsection (f) of this section; or 
b.  Impair, diminish, or discourage the exercise of religious freedom by the recipients of such goods, services, or disbursements. 
(d)  The city shall ensure that all invitations for bids, requests for proposals, contracts, and purchase orders prominently display a nondiscrimination statement indicating that the city does not discriminate against faith-based organizations. 
(e)  A faith-based organization contracting with the city: 
(1)  Shall not discriminate against any recipient of goods, services, or disbursements made pursuant to a contract authorized by this section on the basis of the recipient's religion, religious belief, refusal to participate in a religious practice or on the basis of race, age, color, gender or national origin; and 
(2)  Shall be subject to the same rules as other organizations that contract with the city to account for the use of the funds; provided, however, if the faith-based organization segregates public funds into separate accounts, only the accounts and programs funded with public funds shall be subject to audit by the city. 
Nothing in subsection (e)(2) of this section shall be construed to supersede or otherwise override any other applicable state law. 
(f)  Consistent with the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, PL 104-193, funds provided for expenditure pursuant to contracts with the city shall not be spent for sectarian worship, instruction, or proselytizing; however, this prohibition shall not apply to expenditures pursuant to contracts, if any, for the services of chaplains. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as barring or prohibiting a faith-based organization from any opportunity to make a bid or proposal or contract on the grounds that the faith-based organization has exercised the right, as expressed in 42 USC 2000e-1 et seq., to employ persons of a particular religion. 
(h)  If an individual, who applies for or receives goods, services, or disbursements provided pursuant to a contract between the city and a faith-based organization, objects to the religious character of the faith-based organization from which the individual receives or would receive the goods, services, or disbursements, the city shall offer the individual, within a reasonable period of time after the date of the individual's objection, access to equivalent goods, services, or disbursements from an alternative provider. The city shall provide to each individual who applies for or receives goods, services, or disbursements provided pursuant to a contract between the city and a faith-based organization a notice in boldface type that states: 
"Neither the City's selection of a charitable or faith-based provider of services nor the expenditure of funds under this contract is an endorsement of the provider's charitable or religious character, practices, or expression. No provider of services may discriminate against you on the basis of religion, a religious belief, or your refusal to actively participate in a religious practice. If you object to a particular provider because of its religious character, you may request assignment to a different provider. If you believe that your rights have been violated, please discuss the complaint with your provider or notify the appropriate person as indicated in this form." 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4343.1. 
Sec. 2-398. - Design-build and construction management contracts. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4308, the city is authorized to enter into contracts for construction on a fixed-price or not-to-exceed price design-build or construction management basis in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Prior to making a determination to use a design-build or construction management contract for a specific construction project, the city shall have in its employ or under contract an architect or professional engineer with professional competence appropriate to the project who will advise the city regarding the use of a design-build or construction management contract for that project and assist the city with the preparation of the request for proposals and the evaluation of proposals submitted by interested offerors in response to the request for proposals for that project. 
(c)  Prior to issuing a request for proposals for a design-build or construction management contract, the purchasing agent shall make a written determination, to be maintained in the file for the procurement, that: 
(1)  Explains why a design-build or construction management contract is more advantageous than a competitive sealed bidding contract for the project; 
(2)  Identifies the specific benefits to the city from using the design-build or construction management contract; and 
(3)  Finds that competitive sealed bidding is neither practical nor fiscally advantageous to the city for the project. 
(d)  The selection, evaluation and award of design-build and construction management contracts shall conform to the requirements of this section. Requests for proposals for design-build and construction management contracts shall include and define the criteria of such construction projects in the areas of (i) site plans, (ii) floor plans, (iii) exterior elevations, (iv) basic building envelope materials, (v) fire protection information plans, (vi) structural, mechanical (HVAC) and electrical systems, (vii) special telecommunications and (viii) such other requirements as the using agency determines appropriate for that particular construction project. The procurement of each design-build or construction management contract shall be conducted in two steps. The first step shall consist of a prequalification. The conduct of the prequalification step shall conform to the requirements of section 2-400. The second step shall consist of a competitive negotiation. The conduct of the competitive negotiation step shall conform to the requirements of section 2-421. For any guaranteed maximum price construction management contract, the contract shall require that (i) not more than ten percent of the construction work (measured by cost of the work) shall be performed by the construction manager with its own forces and (ii) the remaining 90 percent of the construction work shall be performed by subcontractors of the construction manager which the construction manager shall procure by competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiations. 
(e)  The purchasing agent shall issue such rules, regulations and operational procedures pursuant to the authority granted to the purchasing agent by section 2-372 of this Code as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this section. Such rules, regulations and operational procedures shall be designed to conform to the requirements of state law and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4308. 
Sec. 2-399. - Prequalification of nonconstruction bidders and offerors. 
(a)  The purchasing agent is authorized to prequalify bidders or offerors prior to a solicitation of bids or proposals, whether for goods, services, or insurance, by requiring prospective bidders or offerors to submit such information as the purchasing agent shall deem appropriate, including but not limited to samples, financial reports, and references. The opportunity to prequalify shall be given to any prospective bidder or offeror who has not been suspended or debarred under this division. 
(b)  The purchasing agent may refuse to prequalify any prospective bidder or offeror provided that the bidder or offeror is notified in writing. Such notice shall state the reasons for the action taken. A prospective bidder or offeror who fails to prequalify for a procurement may not bid on the procurement. However, such prospective bidder or offeror may appeal the disqualification as provided in section 2-451. 
(c)  In considering any request for prequalification, the purchasing agent shall determine whether there is reason to believe that the bidder or offeror possesses the management, financial soundness, and history of performance which indicate apparent ability to successfully complete the plans and specifications of the invitations for bids or request for proposals 
(1)  No other qualified, willing, and able prospective bidders have applied for prequalification. 
(d)  Prequalification of a bidder or offeror shall not constitute a conclusive determination that the bidder or offeror is responsible, and such bidder or offeror may be rejected as nonresponsible on the basis of subsequently discovered information. 
(e)  Failure of a bidder or offeror to prequalify with respect to a given procurement shall not bar the bidder or offeror from seeking prequalification as to future procurements or from bidding or offering proposals on procurements which do not require prequalification. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4317. 
Sec. 2-400. - Prequalification of construction bidders. 
(a)  Any prequalification of prospective contractors for construction shall be pursuant to a prequalification process consistent with this section. The opportunity to prequalify shall be given to any prospective bidder who has not been suspended or debarred under this division. 
(b)  The application form used in the prequalification process shall set forth the criteria upon which the qualifications of prospective contractors will be evaluated. The application form shall request of prospective contractors only such information as is appropriate for an objective evaluation of all prospective contractors pursuant to such criteria. Such form shall allow the prospective contractor seeking prequalification to request, by checking the appropriate box, that all information voluntarily submitted by the contractor pursuant to this subsection shall be considered a trade secret or proprietary information subject to section 2-355. 
(c)  Advance notice shall be given of the deadline for the submission of prequalification applications. The deadline for submission shall be sufficiently in advance of the date set for the submission of bids as to allow the procedures set forth in this subsection to be accomplished. 
(d)  At least 30 calendar days prior to the date established for submission of bids or proposals under the procurement of the contract for which the prequalification applies, the city shall advise in writing each contractor which submitted an application whether that contractor has been prequalified. If a contractor is denied prequalification, the written notification to such contractor shall state the reasons for such denial of prequalification and the factual basis of such reasons. A decision by the city denying prequalification under this section shall be final and conclusive unless the contractor appeals the decision as provided in section 2-451. 
(e)  Prequalification may be denied to any contractor only if the city finds one of the following: 
(1)  The contractor does not have sufficient financial ability to perform the contract that would result from such procurement. If a bond is required to ensure performance of a contract, evidence that the contractor can acquire a surety bond from a corporation included on the United States Treasury list of acceptable surety corporations in the amount and type required by the city shall be sufficient to establish the financial ability of such contractor to perform the contract resulting from such procurement; 
(2)  The contractor does not have appropriate experience to perform the construction project in question; 
(3)  The contractor or any officer, purchasing agent or owner thereof has had judgments entered against the contractor within the past ten years for the breach of contracts for governmental or nongovernmental construction, including but not limited to design-build or construction management; 
(4)  The contractor has been in substantial noncompliance with the terms and conditions of prior construction contracts with the city without good cause. If the city has not contracted with a contractor in any prior construction contracts, the city may deny prequalification if the contractor has been in substantial noncompliance with the terms and conditions of comparable construction contracts with another public body without good cause. The city may not utilize this subsection (e)(4) to deny prequalification unless the facts underlying such substantial noncompliance were documented in writing in the prior construction project file and such information relating thereto was given to the contractor at that time, with the opportunity to respond; 
(5)  The contractor or any officer, director, owner, project manager, procurement manager or chief financial official thereof has been convicted within the past ten years of a crime related to governmental or nongovernmental construction or contracting, including, but not limited to, a violation of: 
a.  Subdivision VII of this division; 
b.  The Virginia Governmental Frauds Act, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-498.1 et seq.; 
c.  Code of Virginia, § 59.1-68.6 et seq., which pertains to conspiracy to rig bids to government; or 
d.  Any substantially similar law of the United States or another state; 
(6)  The contractor or any officer, director or owner thereof is currently debarred pursuant to an established debarment procedure from bidding or contracting by any public body, agency of another state or agency of the federal government; 
(7)  The contractor failed to provide to the city in a timely manner any information requested by the city relevant to subsections (e)(1)-(6) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code § 2.2-4317. 
Sec. 2-401. - Notice of invitation to bid. 
(a)  Notice inviting bids or requesting proposals shall be posted in a designated public area at least ten calendar days preceding the last day set for the receipt of bids or proposals. 
(b)  When requesting proposals or inviting bids, the purchasing agent shall also solicit proposals or sealed bids from a minimum of three responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a vendors' list, which the purchasing agent shall maintain, by sending another notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. Where there exist less than three known suppliers, the purchasing agent shall solicit proposals or sealed bids from each source. In any case, solicitations sent to the vendors on the vendors' list shall be limited to goods or services that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the solicitations are sent. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall also advertise pending purchases or sales by notice posted on the public bulletin board in the lobby of the purchasing office. 
(d)  In addition to the requirements of this section, the purchasing agent may provide the notices required by this section electronically and on the city's website in accordance with such policies and procedures as the purchasing agent may promulgate to govern such notices. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code, § 2.2-4302.1. 
Sec. 2-402. - Use of brand names. 
    Unless otherwise provided in the invitation for bids, the name of a certain brand, make or manufacturer shall not restrict bidders to the specific brand, make or manufacturer named and shall be deemed to convey the general style, type, character and quality of the article desired. Any article that the city in its sole discretion determines to be the equal of that specified, considering quality, workmanship, economy of operation, and suitability for the purpose intended, shall be accepted. The burden of proof as to the comparative quality and suitability of the alternative equipment, articles, materials or supplies shall be on the bidder or offeror, who shall furnish at the bidder's or offeror's own expense such information relating thereto as may be required by the purchasing agent. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4315. 
Sec. 2-403. - Comments on specifications. 
    For complex equipment, supplies, services or construction, pre-bid conferences with prospective bidders may be desirable after draft specifications have been prepared. Such conferences may be utilized to help detect unclear provisions that tend to widen competition by removing unnecessarily restrictive language. Conferences on purchasing bids will be called by the purchasing agent and attended by a requesting agency or department representative and, if necessary, the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4316. 
Sec. 2-404. - Bid bonds on construction contracts. 
(a)  Except in cases of emergency, all bids or proposals for nontransportation-related construction contracts in excess of $500,000.00 or transportation-related projects authorized under Code of Virginia, § 33.1-12 that are in excess of $250,000.00 and partially or wholly funded by the commonwealth shall be accompanied by a bid bond from a surety company selected by the bidder that is authorized to do business in Virginia, as a guarantee that, if the contract is awarded to the bidder, the bidder will enter into the contract for the work mentioned in the bid. The amount of the bid bond shall not exceed five percent of the amount bid. 
(b)  For nontransportation-related construction contracts in excess of $100,000.00 but less than $500,000.00, where the bid bond requirements are waived, prospective contractors shall be prequalified for each individual project in accordance with section 2-400 of this Code. 
(c)  No forfeiture under a bid bond shall exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  The difference between the bid for which the bond was written and the next low bid; or 
(2)  The face amount of the bid bond. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from requiring bid bonds to accompany bids or proposals for construction contracts anticipated to be less than $500,000.00 for nontransportation-related projects or $250,000.00 for transportation-related projects authorized under Code of Virginia, § 33.1-12 and partially or wholly funded by the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4336. 
Sec. 2-405. - Bonds for other than construction contracts. 
(a)  At the discretion of the purchasing agent, bidders may be required to submit with their bids a bid bond from a surety company selected by the bidder that is authorized to do business in the state, or a certified check, in an amount to be determined by the purchasing agent and specified in the invitation for bids, which shall be forfeited to the city upon the bidder's failure to execute a contract awarded to the bidder or upon the bidder's failure to furnish any required performance or payment bonds in connection with a contract awarded. 
(b)  The purchasing agent may require successful bidders to furnish a performance bond and/or a payment bond from a surety company selected by the bidder that is authorized to do business in the state at the expense of the successful bidder, in amounts to be determined by the purchasing agent and specified in the invitation for bids, to ensure the satisfactory completion of the work for which a contract or purchase order is awarded. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4339. 
Sec. 2-406. - Bid opening. 
    Bids received pursuant to this division shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information as the purchasing agent deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded; the record and each bid shall be open to public inspection upon completion of the award. A tabulation of all bids received shall be made available for public inspection after the bid opening. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-407. - Withdrawal of bid due to error. 
(a)  A bidder for a public construction contract, other than a contract for construction or maintenance of public highways, may withdraw the bid from consideration if the price bid was substantially lower than the other bids due solely to a mistake in the bid, provided the bid was submitted in good faith, and the mistake was a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake and was actually due to an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of a bid, which unintentional arithmetic error or unintentional omission can be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection of original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. 
(b)  If a bid contains both clerical and judgment mistakes, a bidder may withdraw the bid from consideration if the price bid would have been substantially lower than the other bids due solely to the clerical mistake that was an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of a bid that shall be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection of original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. 
(c)  One of the following procedures for withdrawal of a bid shall be selected by the purchasing agent and stated in the advertisement for bids: 
(1)  The bidder shall give notice in writing of the claim of right to withdraw the bid within two business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure and shall submit original work papers with such notice; or 
(2)  The bidder shall submit to the purchasing agent the bidder's original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid within one day after the date fixed for submission of bids. The work papers shall be delivered by the bidder in person or by registered mail at or prior to the time fixed for the opening of bids. In either instance, the work papers, documents and materials may be considered as trade secrets or proprietary information subject to the conditions of section 2-355(f). The bids shall be opened one day following the time fixed by the purchasing agent for the submission of bids. Thereafter, the bidder shall have two hours after the opening of bids within which to claim in writing any mistake as defined in this subsection and withdraw the bid. The contract shall not be awarded by the city until the two-hour period has elapsed. The mistake shall be proved only from the original work papers, documents and materials delivered as required in this subsection. 
(d)  The purchasing agent may establish procedures for the withdrawal of bids for other than construction contracts. 
(e)  No bid shall be withdrawn under this section when the result would be the awarding of the contract on another bid of the same bidder or of another bidder in which the ownership of the withdrawing bidder is more than five percent. 
(f)  If a bid is withdrawn in accordance with this section, the lowest remaining bid shall be deemed to be the low bid. 
(g)  No bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid shall, for compensation, supply any material or labor to or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for the person to whom the contract is awarded or otherwise benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project for which the withdrawn bid was submitted. 
(h)  If the purchasing agent denies the withdrawal of a bid under this section, the purchasing agent shall notify the bidder in writing stating the reasons for the decision and award the contract to such bidder at the bid price, provided such bidder is a responsible and responsive bidder. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4330. 
Sec. 2-408. - Bid evaluation under competitive sealed bidding. 
    In determining the lowest responsive and responsible bidder on purchases or contracts, the following factors, among such others as will protect and preserve the interests of the city and its inhabitants, shall be considered: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and will of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the services promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract, purchase or service. 
(6)  The equipment, personnel and facilities available to the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
(7)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
(8)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, materials, equipment or services to the particular use required. 
(9)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the purchase or contract. 
(10)  The amount and conditions, if any, of the bid. 
(11)  The bidder's showing that it can and will comply with its proposed commitments to minority business enterprise and emerging small business participation efforts. 
(12)  The bidder's past performance with regard to its minority business enterprise and emerging small business participation efforts. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-409. - Bid award under competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Bids under competitive sealed bidding shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. When the terms and conditions of multiple bids are so provided in the invitation to bid, awards may be made to more than one bidder. 
(b)  The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. If all bids for a procurement exceed available funds allocated to that procurement by prior agency, departmental or other official action, as certified by the agency head or department director, the purchasing agent, with the approval of the city manager, is authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude resolicitations of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the lowest responsive and responsible bidder in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds allocated to that procurement. 
(c)  When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the purchasing office and filed with the other papers relating to this transaction. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4318. 
Sec. 2-410. - Tie bids. 
(a)  In the case of a tie bid, preference shall be given to goods, services and construction produced in the city or provided by persons in the city, if such a choice is available; otherwise, the tie shall be decided by lot, unless section 2-358 applies. 
(b)  Whenever any bidder is a resident of any other state and such state under its laws allows a resident contractor of that state a preference, a like preference may be allowed to the lowest responsible bidder who is a resident of this state. 
(c)  In any contract which is to be awarded through competitive sealed bidding, if there are equal bids among qualified bidders, the contract shall be awarded to the contractor who will be able to provide the greatest degree of accessibility to the city officials who will be administering the contract. 
(d)  If more than two bids received are tied, the city shall compare location, payment terms, delivery terms, and other terms and shall select the bid most favorable to the city based on that comparison, which shall be documented in writing. 
(e)  If none of the subsections of this section resolve the tie, the purchasing agent may cancel the solicitation and rebid. Records shall be kept of any proceeding connected with tie bids. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4328(A). 
Sec. 2-411. - Contract pricing arrangements. 
(a)  Except as prohibited in this division, public contracts may be awarded on a fixed price or cost reimbursement basis or on any other basis that is not prohibited. 
(b)  Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract which is appropriate to the procurement and which will promote the best interests of the city may be used, provided that the use of a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract or a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-construction-cost contract is prohibited. 
(c)  A cost reimbursement contract may be used only when a determination is made in writing that such contract is likely to be less costly to the city than any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the supply, service, or construction item required except under such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4331. 
Sec. 2-412. - Multiterm contracts. 
(a)  Specified period. Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for goods, services or insurance may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interest of the city, provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefor. 
(b)  Cancellation due to unavailability of funds in succeeding fiscal periods. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be canceled. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-413. - Contract modification or supplement. 
    A public contract may include provisions for modification of the contract during performance, but no fixed-price contract may be increase by more than 25 percent of the contract during performance or $50,000.00; whichever is greater, without the advance written approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4309. 
Sec. 2-414. - Retainage on construction contracts. 
(a)  In any public contract for construction that provides for progress payments in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion, the contractor shall be paid at least 95 percent of the earned sum when payment is due, with not more than five percent being retained to ensure faithful performance of the contract. All amounts withheld may be included in the final payment. 
(b)  Any subcontract for a public project that provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to this section. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4333. 
Sec. 2-415. - Deposit of certain retained funds on certain contracts; penalty for failure to timely complete. 
(a)  When contracting directly with contractors for public contracts of $200,000.00 or more for construction of highways, roads, streets, bridges, parking lots, demolition, clearing, grading, excavating, paving, pile driving, miscellaneous drainage structures, and the installation of water, gas, sewer lines and pumping stations where portions of the contract price are to be retained, the city shall include in the bid proposal an option for the contractor to use an escrow account procedure for utilization of the city's retainage funds by so indicating in the space provided in the proposal documents. If the contractor elects to use the escrow account procedure, the escrow agreement form included in the bid proposal and contract shall be executed and submitted to the purchasing agent within 15 calendar days after notification. If the escrow agreement form is not submitted within the 15-day period, the contractor shall forfeit the contractor's rights to the use of the escrow account procedure. 
(b)  In order to have retained funds paid to an escrow agent, the contractor, the escrow agent, and the surety shall execute an escrow agreement form. The contractor's escrow agent shall be a trust company, bank or savings institution with its principal office located in the commonwealth. The escrow agreement and all regulations adopted by the city shall be substantially the same as that used by the state department of transportation. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to public contracts for construction for railroads, public transit systems, runways, dams, foundations, installation or maintenance of power systems for the generation and primary and secondary distribution of electric current ahead of the customer's meter, the installation or maintenance of telephone, telegraph or signal systems for public utilities, and the construction or maintenance of solid waste or recycling facilities and treatment plants. 
(d)  Any such public contract for construction with the city which includes payment of interest on retained funds may require a provision whereby the contractor, exclusive of reasonable circumstances beyond the control of the contractor stated in the contract, shall pay a specified penalty for each day exceeding the completion date stated in the contract. 
(e)  Any subcontract for such public project which provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to this section. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4334. 
Sec. 2-416. - Public construction contract provisions barring damages for unreasonable delays declared void. 
(a)  Any provision contained in any public construction contract that purports to waive, release, or extinguish the rights of a contractor to recover costs or damages for unreasonable delay in performing such contract, either on the contractor's behalf or on behalf of the contractor's subcontractor if and to the extent the delay is caused by acts or omissions of the city, its agents or employees and due to causes within their control shall be void and unenforceable as against public policy. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed to render void any provision of a public construction contract that: 
(1)  Allows the city to recover that portion of delay costs caused by the acts or omissions of the contractor or its subcontractors, agents or employees; 
(2)  Requires notice of any delay by the party claiming the delay; 
(3)  Provides for liquidated damages for delay; or 
(4)  Provides for arbitration or any other procedure designed to settle contract disputes. 
(c)  A contractor making a claim against the city for costs or damages due to the alleged delaying of the contractor in the performance of its work under any public construction contract shall be liable to the city and shall pay it for a percentage of all costs incurred by the city in investigating, analyzing, negotiating, litigating and arbitrating the claim, which percentage shall be equal to the percentage of the contractor's total delay claim which is determined through litigation or arbitration to be false or to have no basis in law or in fact. 
(d)  If the city denies a contractor's claim for costs or damages due to the alleged delaying of the contractor in the performance of work under any public construction contract, the city shall be liable to and shall pay such contractor a percentage of all costs incurred by the contractor to investigate, analyze, negotiate, litigate and arbitrate the claim. The percentage paid by the city shall be equal to the percentage of the contractor's total delay claim for which the city's denial is determined through litigation or arbitration to have been made in bad faith. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4335. 
Sec. 2-417. - Performance and payment bonds. 
(a)  Upon the award of any (i) public construction contract exceeding $50,000.00 awarded to any prime contractor; (ii) construction contract exceeding $50,000.00 awarded to any prime contractor requiring the performance of labor or the furnishing of materials for buildings, structures or other improvements to real property owned or leased by a public body; (iii) construction contract exceeding $50,000.00 in which the performance of labor or the furnishing of materials will be paid with public funds; or (iv) transportation-related projects exceeding $250,000.00 that are partially or wholly funded by the Commonwealth, the contractor shall furnish to the city the following bonds: 
(1)  A performance bond in the sum of the contract amount conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract in strict conformity with the plans, specifications and conditions of the contract. For transportation-related projects authorized under Code of Virginia, § 33.1-12, such bond shall be in a form and amount satisfactory to the purchasing agent. 
(2)  A payment bond in the sum of the contract amount. The bond shall be for the protection of claimants who have and fulfill contracts to supply labor or materials to the prime contractor to whom the contract was awarded or to any subcontractors, in furtherance of the work provided for in the contract, and shall be conditioned upon the prompt payment for all such material furnished or labor supplied or performed in furtherance of the work. For transportation-related projects authorized under Code of Virginia, § 33.1-12, and partially or wholly funded by the Commonwealth, such bond shall be in a form and amount satisfactory to the purchasing agent. 
The term "labor or materials" shall include public utility services and reasonable rentals of equipment, but only for periods when the equipment rented is actually used at the site. 
(b)  For nontransportation-related construction contracts in excess of $100,000.00 but less than $500,000.00, where the bid bond requirements are waived, prospective contractors shall be prequalified for each individual project in accordance with section 2-400 of this Code. 
(c)  Each of the bonds shall be executed by one or more surety companies selected by the contractor that are authorized to do business in Virginia. 
(d)  Bonds shall be payable to the city. 
(e)  Each of the bonds shall be filed with the purchasing agent. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the purchasing agent from requiring payment or performance bonds for construction contracts below $50,000.00 for nontransportation-related projects or $250,000.00 for transportation-related projects authorized under Code of Virginia, § 33.1-12, and partially or wholly funded by the commonwealth. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the contractor from requiring each subcontractor to furnish a payment bond with surety thereon in the sum of the full amount of the contract with such subcontractor conditioned upon the payment to all persons who have and fulfill contracts that are directly with the subcontractor for performing labor and furnishing materials in the prosecution of the work provided for in the subcontract. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4337. 
Sec. 2-418. - Action on performance bond. 
    No action against the surety on a performance bond given pursuant to this division shall be brought unless within one year after: 
(1)  Completion of the contract, including the expiration of all warranties and guaranties; or 
(2)  Discovery of the defect or breach of warranty, if the action is for such. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4340. 
Sec. 2-419. - Actions on payment bond. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, any claimant who has performed labor or furnished material in accordance with the contract documents in furtherance of the work provided in any contract for which a payment bond has been given and who has not been paid in full before the expiration of 90 days after the day on which the claimant performed the last of the labor or furnished the last of the materials for which the claimant claims payment may bring an action on such payment bond to recover any amount due for the labor or material and may prosecute such action to final judgment and have execution on the judgment. The obligee named in the bond need not be named a party to such action. 
(b)  Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with any subcontractor from whom the contractor has not required a subcontractor payment bond under section 2-417(f), but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with the contractor, may bring an action on the contractor's payment bond only if the claimant has given written notice to such contractor within 180 days from the day on which the claimant performed the last of the labor or furnished the last of the materials for which the claimant claims payment, stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the person for whom the work was performed or to whom the material was furnished. Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with a subcontractor from whom the contractor has required a subcontractor payment bond under section 2-417(f), but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the subcontractor's payment bond. Notice to the contractor shall be served by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to such contractor at any place where the contractor's office is regularly maintained for the transaction of business. Claims for sums withheld as retainages with respect to labor performed or materials furnished shall not be subject to the time limitations stated in this subsection. 
(c)  Any action on a payment bond must be brought within one year after the day on which the person bringing such action last performed labor or last furnished or supplied materials. 
(d)  Any waiver of the right to sue on the payment bond required by this section shall be void unless it is in writing, signed by the person whose right is waived, and executed after such person has performed labor or furnished material in accordance with the contract documents. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4341. 
Sec. 2-420. - Alternative forms of security. 
(a)  In lieu of a bid, payment or performance bond issued pursuant to this division, a bidder may furnish a certified check or cash escrow in the face amount required for the bond. 
(b)  If approved by the city attorney, a bidder may furnish a personal bond, property bond, or bank or savings institution's letter of credit on certain designated funds in the face amount required for the bid, payment or performance bond. Approval shall be granted only upon a determination that the alternative form of security proffered affords protection to the city equivalent to a corporate surety's bond. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4338. 
Sec. 2-421. - Competitive negotiation for nonprofessional services. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Conditions for use of competitive negotiation for nonprofessional services shall be as follows: 
(1)  Upon a determination made in advance by the purchasing agent and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public, goods, services, or insurance may be procured by competitive negotiation. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
(2)  Upon a written determination made in advance by the city manager that competitive negotiation is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous, insurance may be procured through a licensed agent or broker selected in the following manner, the basis for this determination being documented in writing: 
a.  Selection shall be made of two or more offerors deemed to be fully qualified and best suited among those submitting proposals, on the basis of the factors involved in the request for proposals, including price if so stated in the request for proposals. Negotiations shall then be conducted with each of the offerors so selected. Price shall be considered, but need not be the sole determining factor. After negotiations have been conducted with each offeror so selected, the purchasing agent shall select the offeror which, in the purchasing agent's opinion, has made the best proposal and shall award the contract to that offeror. When the terms and conditions of multiple awards are so provided in the request for proposals, awards may be made to more than one offeror. 
b.  Should the purchasing agent determine in writing and in the purchasing agent's sole discretion that only one offeror is fully qualified or that one offeror is clearly more highly qualified than the others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. 
(3)  Construction may be procured only by competitive sealed bidding. However, upon a determination made in advance by the purchasing agent and set forth in writing by the purchasing agent that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public, competitive negotiation may be used in the following instances: 
a.  For the alteration, repair, renovation or demolition of buildings when the contract is not expected to cost more than $500,000.00; and 
b.  For the construction of highways and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. 
(b)  Request for proposals. A request for proposals shall be in writing and indicate in general terms what is sought to be procured, specifying the factors which will be used in evaluating the proposal and containing or incorporating by reference the other applicable contractual terms and conditions, including any unique capabilities or qualifications which will be required of the contractor. If appropriate, requests for qualifications can be requested prior to the release of a request for proposals. In such case, only those vendors who have demonstrated that they are qualified may submit a response to the request for proposals. 
(c)  Public notice. At least ten days prior to the date set for receipt of proposals, public notice shall be given by posting in a public area normally used for posting of public notices or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Richmond area or both. In addition, proposals may be solicited directly from potential contractors. 
(d)  Receipt of proposals. No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the identity of any offeror or the contents of any proposal to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. 
(e)  Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. One evaluation factor shall be good faith minority business enterprise and emerging small business participation efforts. Such good faith minority business enterprise and emerging small business participation efforts shall comprise ten percent of the total evaluation. 
(f)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revision to proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, discussion may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to ensure full understanding of and conformance with the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(g)  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible and responsive offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(C), (D). 
Sec. 2-422. - Contracting for professional services by competitive negotiation. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Where the cost of professional services is not expected to exceed $30,000.00 in the aggregate or for the sum of all phases of a contract or project, professional services may be procured by direct negotiation with a contractor deemed by the using agency to be qualified. Where the cost of professional services is expected to exceed $30,000.00 in the aggregate or for the sum of all phases of a contract or project, professional services shall be procured by competitive negotiation. 
(b)  Competitive negotiation; discussion and award. The purchasing agent shall engage in individual discussions with two or more offerors deemed fully qualified, responsible and suitable on the basis of initial responses and with emphasis on professional competence to provide the required services. Repetitive informal interviews shall be permissible. The offerors shall be encouraged to elaborate on their qualifications and performance data or staff expertise pertinent to the proposed project, as well as alternative concepts. The request for proposals shall not, however, request that offerors furnish estimates of man-hours or cost for services. At the discussion stage, the purchasing agent may discuss nonbinding estimates of total project costs, including, but not limited to, life cycle costing and, where appropriate, nonbinding estimates of price for services. Proprietary information from competing offerors shall not be disclosed to the public or to competitors. At the conclusion of discussion, outlined in this subsection, on the basis of evaluation factors published in the request for proposals and all information developed in the selection process to this point, the purchasing agent shall select in the order of preference two or more offerors whose professional qualifications and proposed services are deemed most meritorious. Negotiations shall then be conducted, beginning with the offeror ranked first. If a contract satisfactory and advantageous to the city can be negotiated at a price considered fair and reasonable, the award shall be made to that offeror. Otherwise, negotiations with the offeror ranked first shall be formally terminated and negotiations conducted with the offeror ranked second, and so on until such a contract can be negotiated at a fair and reasonable price. Should the purchasing agent determine in writing and in the purchasing agent's sole discretion that only one offeror is fully qualified or that one offeror is clearly more highly qualified and suitable than any others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. If appropriate, requests for qualifications can be made prior to the release of a request for proposals. In such cases, only those vendors who have demonstrated that they are qualified may submit a response to the request for proposals. 
(c)  Architectural or professional engineering services for multiple projects. A contract for architectural or professional engineering services relating to construction projects may be negotiated by the city for multiple projects, provided: 
(1)  The projects require similar experience and expertise; 
(2)  The nature of the projects is clearly identified in the request for proposals; and 
(3)  The contract term is limited to one year or when the cumulative total project fees reach the maximum cost authorized in this subsection, whichever occurs first. 
    Such contract may be renewable for five additional one-year terms at the option of the city. Under such contract, the fair and reasonable prices, as negotiated, shall be used in determining the cost of each project performed; the sum of all projects performed in one contract term shall not exceed $500,000.00; and the project fee of any single project shall not exceed $100,000.00. Any unused amounts from the first contract term shall not be carried forward to the additional term. Competitive negotiations for such contracts may result in awards to more than one offeror provided the request for proposals so states. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4301. 
Sec. 2-423. - Consideration of accessibility of contractors. 
    In any contract which is to be awarded through competitive negotiation, the request for proposals shall contain, as one factor for evaluation of proposals, the degree of accessibility that the contractor will be able to provide to the city officials who will be administering the contract. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-424. - Employment discrimination by contractor prohibited; required contract provisions. 
    The city shall include in every contract of more than $10,000.00 the following provisions: 
(1)  During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows: 
a.  The contractor shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, or other basis prohibited by state law relating to discrimination in employment, except where there is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the contractor. The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
b.  The contractor, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, shall state that such contractor is an equal opportunity employer. 
c.  Notices, advertisements and solicitations placed in accordance with federal law, rule or regulation shall be deemed sufficient for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section. 
(2)  During the performance of this contract, the contractor shall include the provisions of subsection (1) of this section in every subcontract or purchase order of over $10,000.00, so that the provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4311. 
Sec. 2-425. - Obstruction of practices required under division. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Directly or indirectly cause or coerce or attempt to cause or coerce any person to disregard any practice required to be performed under this division. 
(2)  Directly or indirectly engage in economic reprisal or intimidation or harm or threaten harm to any person or retaliate or interfere with any person because such person is willing to or has complied with any practice required to be performed under this division or encouraged others to comply with any section in this division or has exercised or attempted to exercise any right conferred in this division. 
(3)  Directly or indirectly cause or coerce or attempt to cause or coerce another person to engage in economic reprisal or intimidation or harm or threaten harm to any person or retaliate against or interfere with any person because such person is willing to or has complied with any practice required to be performed under this division or encouraged others to comply with any section in this division or has exercised or attempted to exercise any right conferred in this division. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-426. - Cancellation of solicitations and rejection of bids or proposals; waiver of informalities. 
(a)  The purchasing agent may cancel an invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or any other solicitation and may reject any or all bids or proposals in whole or in part when the purchasing agent determines that it is in the best interest of the city to do so. The reasons for cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the contract file. The purchasing agent shall not cancel or reject an invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or any other solicitation, bid or proposal pursuant to this section solely to avoid awarding a contract to a particular responsive and responsible bidder or offeror. 
(b)  The purchasing agent may waive informalities in bids. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4319. 
Secs. 2-427-2-430. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Disposal of Surplus Property 

Sec. 2-431. - Reports of unused property. 
    All using agencies shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such time and in such form as prescribed, reports showing stocks of all supplies, materials and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. Agencies having surplus, obsolete or unused supplies, materials or equipment shall declare such property surplus to the purchasing agent by completing a declaration of surplus property form, including quantity, description, location and other details required by the form. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-432. - Transfer of stock to other using agencies. 
    The purchasing agent shall have the sole authority to transfer surplus stock to other using agencies. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-1124(B)(1). 
Sec. 2-433. - Sale or exchange. 
    The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies, materials and equipment that the purchasing agent determines in writing to be unsuitable for public use. Further, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to exchange such supplies, materials and equipment for or to trade in such supplies, materials and equipment for new supplies, materials, or equipment. When property is sold in lieu of being traded in on the purchase of new supplies, materials or equipment, the amount received shall be credited to the appropriate city account. Agencies shall list all possible trade-in items on their replacement purchase requisitions. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-434. - Donation. 
(a)  If the purchasing agent finds in writing that it is impractical to sell or exchange supplies, materials, equipment or vehicles that are unsuitable for public use as provided in section 2-433, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to donate such supplies, materials, equipment or vehicles to other public bodies or to nonprofit organizations. 
(b)  The library director shall have the authority to transfer city-owned books that the library director determines to be surplus to private nonprofit organizations that will dispose of such books through a public book sale and return the proceeds to the city for the purchase of additional books or materials for the public library. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-1124(B)(12). 
Sec. 2-435. - Special restrictions. 
(a)  Whenever items are surplus, obsolete or unused in one agency, they shall be transferred to another city agency, sold only by the purchasing agent, or traded in on the purchase of needed supplies, materials or equipment. 
(b)  Surplus property not transferred to a city agency or traded in shall be sold by competitive bidding or public auction whenever practicable. When determined in writing to be impractical or when no bids or offers are received, the purchasing agent may sell surplus property on a negotiated basis. Receipts shall be credited to the appropriate income account. 
(c)  Employees and dependents of employees of the disposing agency and selling agency may purchase city surplus property at uniform prices available to the general public in accordance with the state and local government Conflict of Interest Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Secs. 2-436-2-440. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Debarment[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4321. 

Sec. 2-441. - Authority to debar or suspend. 
    After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the city manager, after consulting with the city attorney, is authorized to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall be for a period of not more than three years. After consultation with the city attorney, the city manager is authorized to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in any activity which might lead to debarment. The suspension shall be for a period not exceeding three months. The causes for debarment include the following: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract or in the performance of such contract or subcontract; 
(2)  Conviction under state and federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects responsibility as a city contractor; 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals; 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as follows, of a character which is regarded by the city manager to be so serious as to justify debarment action: 
a.  Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or 
b.  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts, provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment; and 
(5)  Any other cause that the city manager determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause in this division and for violation of the ethical standards set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4321. 
Sec. 2-442. - Decision to debar or suspend. 
    The city manager shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend pursuant to this division. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and shall inform the debarred or suspended person involved of such person's rights concerning judicial or administrative review. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4321. 
Sec. 2-443. - Notice of decision. 
    A copy of the decision required by section 2-442 shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended person. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-444. - Finality of decision. 
    A decision under section 2-442 shall be final and conclusive, unless the debarred or suspended person appeals the decision as provided in section 2-458 for administrative appeals or, in the alternative, by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-459. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Secs. 2-445-2-450. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Appeals and Remedies for Protest[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4365. 

Sec. 2-451. - Ineligibility of bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(a)  Any bidder, offeror or contractor refused permission to participate or disqualified from participating in public contracts shall be notified in writing. Such notice shall state the reasons for the action taken. This decision shall be final unless the bidder, offeror or contractor appeals the decision as provided in section 2-458 for administrative appeals or, in the alternative, by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-459. 
(b)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the action taken was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution or any applicable state law or regulation, then the sole relief shall be restoration of eligibility. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4357. 
Sec. 2-452. - Appeal of denial of withdrawal of bid. 
(a)  A decision denying withdrawal of a bid under section 2-407 due to error shall be final and conclusive unless the bidder appeals the decision as provided in section 2-458 for administrative appeals or, in the alternative, by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-459. 
(b)  If no bid bond was posted, a bidder refused withdrawal of a bid under section 2-407, prior to appealing, shall deliver to the purchasing agent a certified check or cash bond in the amount of the difference between the bid sought to be withdrawn and the next lowest bid. Such security shall be released only upon a final determination that the bidder was entitled to withdraw the bid. 
(c)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the decision refusing withdrawal of the bid was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution, any applicable state law or regulation or the terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, the sole relief shall be withdrawal of the bid. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4358. 
Sec. 2-453. - Determination of nonresponsibility. 
(a)  Following public opening and announcement of bids received on an invitation for bids, the city shall evaluate the bids in accordance with section 2-408. At the same time, the city shall determine whether the apparent low bidder is responsible. If the city so determines, it may proceed with an award in accordance with section 2-409. If the city determines that the apparent low bidder is not responsible, it shall proceed as follows: 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a written determination of nonresponsibility, the city shall: 
a.  Notify the apparent low bidder in writing of the results of the evaluation; 
b.  Disclose the factual support for the determination; and 
c.  Allow the apparent low bidder an opportunity to inspect any documents which relate to the determination, if so requested by the bidder within five business days after receipt of the notice. 
(2)  Within ten business days after receipt of the notice, the bidder may submit rebuttal information challenging the evaluation. The city shall issue its written determination of nonresponsibility based on all information in the possession of the city, including any rebuttal information, within five business days of the date the city received such rebuttal information. At the same time, the city shall notify the bidder in writing of its determination. 
(3)  Such notice shall state the basis for the determination, which shall be final unless the bidder appeals the decision as provided in section 2-458 for administrative appeals or, in the alternative, by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-459. 
This subsection shall not apply to procurements involving the prequalification of bidders and the rights of any potential bidders under such prequalification to appeal a decision that such bidders are not responsible. 
(b)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the decision of the city was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution, any applicable state law or regulation or the terms and conditions of the invitation for bids and the award of the contract in question has not been made, the sole relief shall be a finding that the bidder is a responsible bidder for the contract in question or a directed award as provided in section 2-458(a) or both. If it is determined that the decision of the city was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution, any applicable state law or regulation or the terms and conditions of the invitation for bids and an award of the contract has been made, the relief shall be as set forth in section 2-454(b). 
(c)  A bidder contesting a determination that the bidder is not a responsible bidder for a particular contract shall proceed under this section and may not protest the award or proposed award under section 2-454. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the city, when procuring by competitive negotiation, to furnish a statement of the reasons why a particular proposal was not deemed to be the most advantageous. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4359. 
Sec. 2-454. - Protest of award or decision to award. 
(a)  Any bidder or offeror may protest the award or decision to award a contract by submitting such protest in writing to the purchasing agent no later than ten calendar days after the award or the announcement of the decision to award, whichever occurs first. The purchasing agent shall not be required to consider protests not properly addressed and delivered to the purchasing agent within the ten-calendar-day period. Any potential bidder or offeror on a contract negotiated on an only practical source or emergency basis who desires to protest the award or decision to award such contract shall submit such protest in the same manner no later than ten calendar days after the notice of such contract. However, if the protest of any actual or potential bidder or offeror depends in whole or in part upon information contained in public records pertaining to the procurement transaction which are subject to inspection under section 2-355, the time within which the protest must be submitted shall expire ten calendar days after those records are available for inspection by such bidder or offeror under section 2-355 or at such later time as provided in this section. No protest shall be for a claim that the selected bidder or offeror is not a responsible bidder or offeror. The written protest shall include the basis for the protest and the relief sought. The purchasing agent shall issue a decision in writing within ten calendar days stating the reasons for the action taken. This decision shall be final unless the bidder or offeror appeals as provided in section 2-458 for administrative appeals or, in the alternative, by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-459. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to permit a bidder or offeror to challenge the validity of the terms or conditions of the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
(b)  If, prior to an award, it is determined that the decision to award was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution, applicable state law, or the terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, the sole relief shall be a finding to that effect. The purchasing agent shall cancel the proposed award or revise it to comply with the law. If, after an award, it is determined that an award of a contract was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution, applicable state law, or the terms and conditions of the invitation for bids, the sole relief shall be as provided in subsection (c) of this section. Where the award has been made, but performance has not begun, the performance of the contract may be enjoined. Where the award has been made and performance has begun, the city manager may declare the contract void upon a finding that this action is in the best interest of the public. Where a contract is declared void, the performing contractor shall be compensated for the cost of performance up to the time of such declaration. In no event shall the performing contractor be entitled to lost profits. 
(c)  If the procurement review board established by section 2-458(c)(1) determines, after a hearing held following reasonable notice to all bidders or offerors, that there is probable cause to believe that a decision to award was based on fraud or corruption or on an act in violation of subdivision VII of this division, the procurement review board may enjoin the award of the contract to a particular bidder or offeror. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code, § 2.2-4360. 
Sec. 2-455. - Effect of appeal upon contract. 
    Pending final determination of a protest or appeal pursuant to this division, the validity of a contract awarded and accepted in good faith in accordance with this division shall not be affected by the fact that a protest or appeal has been filed. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code, § 2.2-4361. 
Sec. 2-456. - Stay of award during protest. 
    An award need not be delayed for the period allowed a bidder or offeror to protest, but if a timely protest is filed as provided in section 2-454 or a timely legal action is filed as provided in section 2-459, no further action to award the contract will be taken unless there is a written determination that proceeding without delay is necessary to protect the public interest or unless the bid or offer would expire. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code, § 2.2-4362. 
Sec. 2-457. - Contractual disputes. 
(a)  Contractual claims, whether for money or other relief, shall be submitted in writing to the purchasing agent no later than 60 calendar days after final payment; however, written notice of the contractor's intention to file such claim shall have been given at the time of the occurrence or beginning of the work upon which the claim is based. Nothing in this section shall preclude a contract from requiring submission of an invoice for final payment within a certain time after completion and acceptance of the work or acceptance of the goods. Pendency of claims shall not delay payment of amounts agreed due in the final payment. 
(b)  A procedure for consideration of contractual claims shall be included in each contract. Such procedure, which may be incorporated into the contract by reference, shall establish a time limit for a final decision in writing by the purchasing agent. 
(c)  A contractor may not invoke administrative procedures as provided in section 2-458 or institute legal action as provided in section 2-459 prior to receipt of the decision on the claim, unless the purchasing agent fails to render such decision within the time specified in the contract. 
(d)  The decision of the purchasing agent shall be final and conclusive unless the contractor appeals within 30 calendar days of the date of the final decision on the claim by the purchasing agent as provided in section 2-458 for administrative appeals or, in the alternative, by instituting legal action as provided in section 2-459. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize or permit any contractor pursuing, by any available procedure, an appeal of a contractual claim or dispute to cease performance of a contract while such claim or dispute is pending. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code. § 2.2-4363. 
Sec. 2-458. - Administrative appeals procedure. 
(a)  An administrative appeals procedure is hereby established for hearing protests of a decision to award or an award, appeals from refusals to allow withdrawal of bids, appeals from disqualifications and determinations of nonresponsibility, appeals from debarments or suspensions, and appeals from decisions on disputes arising during the performance of a contract, or any of these. 
(b)  Procedures for the initial administrative appeal shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any act or decision of the city listed in subsection (a) of this section may be appealed or protested by writing to the purchasing agent within ten calendar days of the act or decision at issue. The writing must indicate the basis for the protest and the relief sought. 
(2)  The purchasing agent must send a written response to the appeal or protest within ten calendar days of the purchasing agent's receipt of the appeal or protest. 
(3)  If the decision of the purchasing agent is not satisfactory to the offeror, bidder or contractor, the offeror, bidder or contractor has ten calendar days from the receipt of the purchasing agent's decision to request, in writing, a hearing before the procurement review board. Such letter of request shall be addressed and delivered to the office of the purchasing agent. 
(c)  Procedures for hearings shall be as follows: 
(1)  A procurement review board shall be established, to be comprised of three disinterested individuals. The members of the procurement review board shall not be employees of the city. 
(2)  From the receipt of the letter requesting a hearing, the office of the purchasing agent of procurement services has ten calendar days to inform the offeror, bidder or contractor of the date, time and location of the hearing. Notice of the hearing must be sent at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing date. 
(3)  At the hearing before the procurement review board, there shall be an opportunity for both the offeror, bidder or contractor and the city to present pertinent information. 
(4)  The procurement review board shall issue a written decision containing findings of fact. The findings of fact shall be final and conclusive and shall not be set aside unless they are: 
a.  Fraudulent, arbitrary or capricious; 
b.  So grossly erroneous as to imply bad faith; or 
c.  For denial of prequalification of a potential construction bidder; such findings were not based upon the criteria for denial of prequalification set forth in section 2-400(g). No determination on an issue of law shall be final if appropriate legal action pursuant to section 2-459 is instituted in a timely manner. 
(d)  Any party to the administrative appeals procedure, including the city, shall be entitled to institute judicial review if such action is brought within 30 calendar days of receipt of the written decision of the procurement review board. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code § 2.2-4365. 
Sec. 2-459. - Legal actions. 
(a)  A bidder or offeror, actual or prospective, who is refused permission or disqualified from participating in bidding or competitive negotiations or who is determined not to be a responsible bidder or offeror for a particular contract, may bring an action in the circuit court of the city challenging that decision, which shall be reversed only if the petitioner establishes that the decision was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution, any applicable state law or regulation, or the terms or conditions of the invitation for bids or request for proposals or, for denial of prequalification of a potential construction bidder, that the decision to deny prequalification was not based upon the criteria for denial of prequalification set forth in section 2-400(g). If the apparent low bidder, having been previously determined by the city to be not responsible, is found by the court to be a responsible bidder, the court may direct the city to award the contract, forthwith, to such bidder in accordance with the requirements of this section and the invitation for bids. Section 2-454(b) shall apply to any such award directed by the court. 
(b)  A bidder denied withdrawal of a bid under section 2-407 may bring an action in the circuit court of the city challenging that decision, which shall be reversed only if the bidder establishes that the decision of the city was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution, any applicable state law or regulation, or the terms and conditions of the invitation for bids. 
(c)  A bidder, offeror or contractor may bring an action in the circuit court of the city challenging a proposed award or the award of a contract, which shall be reversed only if the petitioner establishes that the proposed award or the award is not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather is arbitrary, capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution, applicable state law or regulation, or the terms and conditions of the invitation for bids or request for proposals. 
(d)  If injunctive relief is granted, the court, upon request of the city, shall require the posting of reasonable security to protect the city. 
(e)  A contractor may bring an action involving a contract dispute with the city in the circuit court of the city. 
(f)  A bidder, offeror or contractor need not utilize administrative procedures as provided in section 2-458, but if those procedures are invoked by the bidder, offeror or contractor, the procedures shall be exhausted prior to instituting legal action concerning the same procurement transaction unless the city council adopts a resolution providing otherwise. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from instituting legal action against a contractor. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code § 2.2-4364. 
Sec. 2-460. - Alternative dispute resolution. 
    The city may enter into agreements to submit disputes arising from contracts entered into pursuant to this division to arbitration and to utilize mediation and other alternative dispute resolution procedures; however, such procedures entered into by the city shall be nonbinding. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code § 2.2-4366. 
Secs. 2-461-2-470. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Ethics in Public Contracting 

Sec. 2-471. - Purpose. 
(a)  The provisions of this division supplement, but shall not supersede, other provisions of law including, but not limited to, the state and local government conflict of interests act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq.; the Virginia Governmental Frauds Act, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-498.1 et seq.; and Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-438 et seq. and 18.2-446 et seq. 
(b)  The provisions of this division apply notwithstanding the fact that the conduct described may not constitute a violation of the state and local government conflict of interests act. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4367. 
Sec. 2-472. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Immediate family means a spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters, and any other person living in the same household as the employee. 
    Official responsibility means administrative or operating authority, whether immediate or final, to initiate, approve, disapprove or otherwise affect a procurement transaction or any claim resulting therefrom. 
    Pecuniary interest arising from the procurement means a personal interest in a contract as defined in the state and local government conflict of interests act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq. 
    Procurement transaction means all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any goods, services or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of the contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
    Public employee means any person employed by the city, including elected officials or appointed members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4368. 
Sec. 2-473. - Proscribed participation by public employees in procurement transaction. 
    Except as may be specifically allowed by Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3112(A)(2)-(4), no public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall participate in that transaction on behalf of the city when the employee knows that: 
(1)  The employee is contemporaneously employed by a bidder, offeror or contractor involved in the procurement transaction; 
(2)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family holds a position with a bidder, offeror or contractor such as an officer, director, trustee, partner, or the like or is employed in a capacity involving personal and substantial participation in the procurement transaction, or owns or controls an interest of more than five percent; 
(3)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family has a pecuniary interest arising from the procurement transaction; or 
(4)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family is negotiating, or has an arrangement concerning, prospective employment with a bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4369. 
Sec. 2-474. - Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. 
    No public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from a bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal or minimal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. The city may recover the value of anything conveyed in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4371(a). 
Sec. 2-475. - Disclosure of subsequent employment. 
    No public employee or former public employee having official responsibility for procurement transactions shall accept employment with any bidder, offeror or contractor with whom the employee or former employee dealt in an official capacity concerning procurement transactions for a period of one year from the cessation of employment by the city unless the employee or former employee provides written notification to the city manager prior to commencement of employment by that bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4370. 
Sec. 2-476. - Gifts by bidders, offerors, contractors or subcontractors. 
    No bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor shall confer upon any public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4371(b). 
Sec. 2-477. - Kickbacks. 
(a)  No contractor or subcontractor shall demand or receive from any of his or her suppliers or his or her subcontractors, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order, any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(b)  No subcontractor or supplier shall make or offer to make kickbacks as described in this section. 
(c)  No person shall demand or receive any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of value in return for an agreement not to compete on a public contract. 
(d)  If a subcontractor or supplier makes a kickback or other prohibited payment as described in this section, the amount thereof shall be conclusively presumed to have been included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the city and will be recoverable from both the maker and recipient. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4372. 
Sec. 2-478. - Participation in bid preparation; limitation on submitting bid for same procurement. 
(a)  No person who, for compensation, prepares an invitation for bids or request for proposals for or on behalf of the city shall submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or any portion thereof, or disclose to any bidder or offeror information concerning the procurement which is not available to the public. However, the city manager may permit such person to submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or any portion thereof if the city determines that the exclusion of such person would limit the number of potential qualified bidders or offerors in a manner contrary to the best interest of the city. This determination shall be stated in writing and kept as part of the procurement's records. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section only, the term "prepares" shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Serving as a director or deputy director of the agency which has initiated the procurement; 
(2)  Serving as the purchasing agent of the purchasing office after the purchasing office has received information on an agency's intent to procure; 
(3)  Serving as the procurement manager for the agency which has initiated the procurement; 
(4)  Serving as the procurement officer in charge of the procurement; 
(5)  Assisting in the development of specifications for invitations for bids or requests for proposals; 
(6)  Attending an evaluation committee meeting that is closed to the public; 
(7)  Voting on or scoring a bid or proposal; or 
(8)  Any other participation in the procurement process which could lead to unfair advantage. 
(c)  The determination of disqualification under this section shall be made by the city manager. 
(d)  A contractor submitting a bid or proposal may appeal a determination of disqualification under this section by following the administrative appeals procedure as provided in section 2-458 or, in the alternative, instituting legal action as provided in section 2-459. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4373. 
Sec. 2-479. - Purchase of building materials, etc., from architect or engineer prohibited. 
(a)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for the city shall be sold by or purchased from any person employed as an independent contractor by the city to furnish architectural or engineering services, but not construction, for such building or structure, or from any partnership, association or corporation in which such architect or engineer has a personal interest as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3101. 
(b)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for the city shall be sold by or purchased from any person who has provided or is currently providing design services specifying a sole source for such materials, supplies or equipment to be used in such building or structure to the independent contractor employed by the city to furnish architectural or engineering services in which such person has a personal interest as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3101. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply in cases of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4374. 
Sec. 2-480. - Certification of compliance required; penalty for false statements. 
(a)  The city may require public employees having official responsibility for procurement transactions in which they participated to annually submit for such transactions a written certification that they complied with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Any public employee required to submit a certification as provided in subsection (a) of this section who knowingly makes a false statement in such certification shall be punished as provided in section 2-482. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4375. 
Sec. 2-481. - Misrepresentations prohibited. 
    No public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall: 
(1)  Knowingly falsify, conceal, or misrepresent a material fact; 
(2)  Knowingly make any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations; or 
(3)  Make or use any false writing or document knowing the writing or document to contain any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4376. 
Sec. 2-482. - Penalty for violation. 
    Willful violation of any provision of this division shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. Upon conviction, any public employee, in addition to any other fine or penalty provided by law, shall forfeit his or her employment. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4377. 
Secs. 2-483-2-490. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VIII. - Public-Private Partnerships 

Sec. 2-491. - Purpose; definitions; application. 
(a)  Purpose. This division establishes procedures for the implementation by the city of the Public-Private Transportation Act of 1995, codified in Chapter 22 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, and the Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, codified in Chapter 22.1 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. Pursuant to state law, this division allows the city to create public-private partnerships for the development of a wide range of projects for public use if the city determines that (i) there is a need for the project and (ii) private involvement may provide the project to the public in a timely or cost-effective fashion. 
(b)  Definitions. Terms used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them by §§ 56-557 or 56-575.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, or section 2-354 of this Code, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The terms "project" or "qualifying project" as used in this division, shall also refer to qualifying transportation facilities unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(c)  Application. This division applies only to projects defined as "qualifying transportation facilities" under § 56-557 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, or "qualifying projects" under § 56-575.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. Such projects include the following: 
(1)  Any education facility, including, but not limited to a school building (including any stadium or other facility primarily used for school events), any functionally related and subordinate facility and land to a school building and any depreciable property provided for use in a school facility that is operated as part of the public school system or as an institution of higher education; 
(2)  Any building or facility for principal use by any public entity; 
(3)  Any improvements, together with equipment, necessary to enhance public safety and security of buildings to be principally used by a public entity; 
(4)  Utility and telecommunications and other communications infrastructure; 
(5)  A recreational facility; 
(6)  Technology infrastructure, including, but not limited to, telecommunications, automated data processing, word processing and management information systems, and related information, equipment, goods and services; 
(7)  Technology, equipment, or infrastructure designed to deploy wireless broadband services to schools, businesses or residential areas; 
(8)  Any improvements necessary or desirable to any unimproved locally- or state-owned real estate; or 
(9)  Any road, bridge, tunnel, overpass, ferry, airport, mass transit facility, vehicle parking facility, port facility or similar commercial facility used for the transportation of persons or goods, together with any other property that is needed to operate the transportation facility, acquired, constructed, improved, maintained and/or operated by a private entity pursuant to the Public-Private Transportation Act of 1995, codified in Chapter 22 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
Nothing in this division shall be interpreted or construed to affect the city's duty to comply with any other applicable law not in conflict with the Public-Private Transportation Act of 1995, codified in Chapter 22 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended or the Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, codified in Chapter 22.1 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code § 56-557.1. 
Sec. 2-492. - Prerequisite for operation of a qualifying project. 
(a)  Generally. Proposals may be either solicited by the city or submitted to the city by a private entity on an unsolicited basis according to section 2-494 or section 2-495. In general, proposals should provide a concise description of the proposer's capabilities to complete the proposed qualifying project and the benefits to be derived from the project by the city. Each proposal shall identify specifically or conceptually any facility, building, infrastructure or improvement included in that proposal as part of a qualifying project. 
(b)  Clarifications. Each proposal submitted under this division shall be clearly identified as a "PPEA proposal." Further, the city may require that any proposal be clarified. Such clarification may include, but need not be limited to: 
(1)  Submission of additional documentation; 
(2)  Responses to specific question; and 
(3)  Interviews with potential project participants. 
(c)  Upon receipt by the city of a proposal submitted by a private entity initiating the approval process pursuant to subsection A of section 2-493, the city shall determine whether to accept such proposal for consideration in accordance with the Code of Virginia § 56-575.16. If the city determines not to accept for consideration the proposal submitted by the private entity pursuant to section 2-493(a), it shall return the proposal, together with all fees and accompanying documentation, to the private entity. 
(d)  Two-phase process. The city shall require proposers to follow a two-part proposal submission process consisting of a conceptual phase and a detailed phase. The conceptual phase proposal shall contain specified information on proposer qualifications and experience, project characteristics, project financing, anticipated public support or opposition, or both, and project benefit and compatibility. The detailed phase proposal shall contain specified deliverables. 
(e)  The responsible public entity may reject any proposal initiated by a private entity pursuant to section 2-493(a) at any time. If the responsible public entity rejects a proposal initiated by a private entity that purports to develop specific cost savings, the public entity shall specify the basis for the rejection 
(f)  Freedom of information; confidential proprietary information. 
(1)  Generally. Proposal documents submitted by private entities are subject to the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq. The city shall release those documents if requested as required by that act, except to the extent that they relate to: 
a.  Confidential proprietary information submitted to the city under a promise of confidentiality; or 
b.  Memoranda, working papers or other records related to proposals if making public such records would adversely affect the financial interest of the city or the private entity or the bargaining position of either party. 
c.  Once a comprehensive agreement has been entered into, and the process of bargaining of all phases or aspects of the comprehensive agreement is complete, the city shall make available, upon request, procurement records in accordance with section 2-355. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code, § 56-575.3. 
Sec. 2-493. - Approval of qualifying projects. 
(a)  A private entity may request approval of a qualifying project by the city. Such request shall be accompanied by the following material and information unless waived by the city: 
(1)  A topographic map (1:2,000 or other appropriate scale) indicating the location of the qualifying project; 
(2)  A description of the qualifying project, including the conceptual design of such facility or facilities or a conceptual plan for the provision of services or technology infrastructure, and a schedule for the initiation of and completion of the qualifying project to include the proposed major responsibilities and timeline for activities to be performed by both the public and private entity; 
(3)  A statement setting forth the method by which the private entity proposes to secure necessary property interests required for the qualifying project; 
(4)  Information relating to the current plans for development of facilities or technology infrastructure to be used by a public entity that are similar to the qualifying project being proposed by the private entity, if any, of each affected local jurisdiction; 
(5)  A list of all permits and approvals required for the qualifying project from local, state, or federal agencies and a projected schedule for obtaining such permits and approvals; 
(6)  A list of public utility facilities, if any, that will be crossed by the qualifying project and a statement of the plans of the private entity to accommodate such crossings; 
(7)  A statement setting forth the private entity's general plans for financing the qualifying project including the sources of the private entity's funds and identification of any dedicated revenue source or proposed debt or equity investment on the behalf of the private entity; 
(8)  The names and addresses of the persons who may be contacted for further information concerning the request; 
(9)  User fees, lease payments, and other service payments over the term of the interim or comprehensive agreement pursuant to section 2-499(a) or (b) and the methodology and circumstances for changes to such user fees, lease payments, and other service payments over time; and 
(10)  Such additional material and information as the responsible public entity may reasonably request. 
(b)  The city may request proposals or invite bids from private entities for the development or operation of qualifying projects. 
(c)  The city may grant approval of the development or operation of the education facility, technology infrastructure or other public infrastructure or government facility needed by a public entity as a qualifying project, or the design or equipping of a qualifying project so developed or operated, if the city determines that the project serves the public purpose of this chapter. The city may determine that the development or operation of the qualifying project as a qualifying project serves such public purpose if: 
(1)  There is a public need for or benefit derived from the qualifying project of the type the private entity proposes as a qualifying project; 
(2)  The estimated cost of the qualifying project is reasonable in relation to similar facilities; and 
(3)  The private entity's plans will result in the timely development or operation of the qualifying project. 
In evaluating any request, the city may rely upon internal staff reports prepared by personnel familiar with the operation of similar facilities or the advice of outside advisors or consultants having relevant experience. 
(d)  The city may charge a reasonable fee to cover the costs of processing, reviewing and evaluating the request, including without limitation, reasonable attorney's fees and fees for financial, technical, and other necessary advisors or consultants. 
(e)  The city's approval shall be subject to the private entity's entering into an interim or comprehensive agreement pursuant to section 2-499. 
(f)  In connection with its approval of the qualifying project, the city shall establish a date for the commencement of activities related to the qualifying project. The city may extend such date from time to time. 
(g)  The city shall take appropriate action to protect confidential and proprietary information provided by the private entity pursuant to section 2-492(f). 
(h)  Any proposed comprehensive agreement for a qualifying project where the responsible public entity is an agency or institution of the commonwealth that (i) creates state tax-supported debt, (ii) requires a level of appropriation significantly beyond the appropriation received by the responsible public entity in the most recent appropriation act, or (iii) significantly alters the commonwealth's discretion to change the level of services or the funding for such services over time, shall be reviewed by the appropriating body prior to execution. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code, § 56-575.4. 
Sec. 2-494. - Proposal submission-Solicited proposals. 
(a)  Generally. The city may issue requests for proposals (RFP) from private entities to acquire, construct, improve, renovate, expand, maintain, operate, implement or install qualifying projects or to design or equip projects so constructed, improved, renovated, expanded, maintained, operated, implemented or installed. 
(b)  Methods of solicitation. When proceeding under this division, the city shall use competitive sealed bidding as defined in section 2-354 to procure a comprehensive agreement concerning a qualifying project. However, the city may use competitive negotiation as defined in section 2-354 and as outlined for the procurement of nonprofessional services in division III of this chapter to procure a comprehensive agreement concerning a qualifying project if the city manager or designee determines in writing, stating the reasons for the determination, that the use of competitive negotiation is likely to be advantageous to the city and the public, based on (i) the probable scope, complexity or urgency of the project or (ii) risk sharing, added value, an increase in funding or economic benefit from the project that would not otherwise be available. 
(c)  Contents of solicitation. The solicitation may invite bidders or offerors to submit bids or proposals on individual projects identified by the city. The city shall set forth in the solicitation the format and supporting information required to be submitted. The solicitation shall contain or incorporate by reference the applicable terms and conditions, including any unique capabilities or qualifications that will be required of the private entities submitting proposals. 
(d)  Public notice. The city shall post, publish and otherwise advertise the solicitation as required by this chapter and in the manner in which the city customarily posts, publishes and advertises its invitations to bid or requests for proposals. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-495. - Proposal submission-Unsolicited proposals. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The city may receive, evaluate and select for negotiations unsolicited proposals from private entities to acquire, construct, improve, renovate, expand, maintain, operate, implement or install a qualifying project or to design or equip projects so constructed, improved, renovated, expanded, maintained, operated, implemented or installed. The city may publicize its needs and may encourage interested parties to submit proposals subject to the terms and conditions of this division and the Public-Private Transportation Act of 1995, codified in Chapter 22 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, or the Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, codified in Chapter 22.1 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, as applicable. Any proposal submitted pursuant to this division that is not received in response to an invitation for bids or a request for proposals shall be treated as an unsolicited proposal under this division. 
(2)  Upon receipt of any unsolicited proposal and payment of any required fee(s) by the proposer, the city will determine whether to accept the unsolicited proposal for the purpose of publication and conceptual-phase consideration. If the city determines not to accept the proposal and not to proceed to publication and conceptual-phase consideration it will return the proposal together with all fees and accompanying documentation to the proposer. 
(b)  Notice. 
(1)  If the city chooses to accept an unsolicited proposal for conceptual-phase consideration, the city shall do the following: 
a.  Post a notice in a public area regularly used by the city for posting of public notices for a period of not less than 45; 
b.  Publish the same notice once for a period of not less than 45 days prior to deciding whether to proceed further with the proposal in one or more newspaper or periodicals of general circulation in the jurisdiction to notify any parties that may be interested in submitting competing unsolicited proposals; 
c.  Advertise the notice in Virginia Business Opportunities and on the Commonwealth's electronic procurement website. The notice shall state that the city (i) has received an unsolicited bid under the PPEA, (ii) intends to evaluate the proposal, (iii) may negotiate an interim or comprehensive agreement with the proposer based on the proposal, and (iv) will receive for simultaneous consideration any competing proposals that comply with the procedures adopted by the city and PPEA. Notice shall also summarize the proposed qualifying project or projects, and identify their proposed locations. Interested parties shall have at least 45 days from the date the notice is first published by the city to submit competing unsolicited proposals. 
(c)  Initial review by city at conceptual stage. 
(1)  Only proposals complying with the requirements of the PPEA that contain sufficient information for a meaningful evaluation and that are provided in an appropriate format will be considered by the city for further review at the conceptual stage. 
(2)  The city, acting through council, will determine by written findings, at this initial stage of review whether it will proceed using: 
a.  Standard procurement procedures consistent with the VPPA; or 
b.  Guidelines developed by the city that are consistent with procurement of other professional services through competitive negotiation section 2-422. The city may proceed using such guidelines only if it makes a written determination that doing so is likely to be advantageous to the city and public based upon: 
1.  The probable scope, complexity, or priority of need; 
2.  The risk sharing including guaranteed cost of completion guarantees, added value or debt, or equity investments proposed by the private entity; or 
3.  The increase in funding, dedicated revenue or other economic benefit that would otherwise not be available. 
(3)  After review of the original and competing proposals submitted during the notice period, the city may determine: 
a.  Not to proceed further with any proposal; 
b.  To proceed to the detailed phase of review with the original proposal; 
c.  To proceed to the detailed phase with a competing proposal; 
d.  To proceed to the detailed phase with multiple proposals; or 
e.  To request modifications or amendments to any proposals. 
(4)  In the event that more than one proposal will be considered in the detail phase of review, the city will consider whether the unsuccessful proposer should be reimburse for costs incurred in the detailed phase of review, and such reasonable costs may be assessed to the successful proposer in the comprehensive agreement. 
(d)  Ownership and use concepts. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to develop the project or aspects of it any manner it determines in its sole discretion and may incorporate into the project any concept that is included in any proposal submitted. 
(2)  By submitting a proposal, a proposer acknowledges that it is submitting merely a concept which as no monetary or intellectual property value, and disclaims any proprietary or other legal interests in any such concepts. 
(e)  Right to reject. The city retains the right to reject any proposal at any time prior to the execution of an interim or comprehensive agreement. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-496. - Proposal submission; format of proposals. 
    Conceptual phase proposals. At a minimum, conceptual phase proposals shall contain information in the following areas: 
(a)  Qualification and experience. Proposals shall: 
(1)  Identify the legal structure of the firm or consortium of firms making the proposal and identify the organizational structure for the project, the management approach and how each partner and major subcontractor in the structure fits into the overall team. 
(2)  Describe the experience of the firm or consortium of firms making the proposal and the key principals involved in the proposed project including experience with projects of comparable size and complexity and describe the length of time in business, business experience, public sector experience and other engagements of the firm or consortium of firms. 
(3)  Provide the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of persons within the firm or consortium of firms who may be contacted for further information. 
(4)  Provide a current or most recently audited financial statement of the firm or firms and each partner with an equity interest of 20 percent or greater. 
(b)  Project characteristics. Proposals shall: 
(1)  Provide a description of the project, including the conceptual design and, for transportation facilities, all proposed interconnections with other transportation facilities; describe the proposed project in sufficient detail so that type and intent of the project, the location, and the communities that may be affected are clearly identified; and describe all assumptions used in developing the project. 
(2)  Identify and fully describe any work to be performed by the city. 
(3)  Include a list of all federal, state and local permits and approvals required for the project and a schedule for obtaining such permits and approvals, and identify any permits, approvals or other rights that the city is to obtain, including, but not limited to, rights from railroads. 
(4)  Identify any anticipated adverse social, economic and environmental impacts of the project and specify the strategies or actions to mitigate known impacts of the project. 
(5)  Identify the projected positive social, economic and environmental impacts of the project. 
(6)  Identify the proposed schedule for the work on the project, including the estimated time for completion. 
(7)  Propose allocation of risk and liability for work completed beyond the agreement's completion date, and assurances for timely completion of the project. 
(8)  State assumptions related to ownership, legal liability, law enforcement and operation of the project. 
(9)  Provide information relative to phased or partial openings of the proposed project prior to completion of the entire work. 
(c)  Project financing. Proposals shall: 
(1)  Provide preliminary estimate and estimating methodology of the cost of the work by phase, segment, or both. 
(2)  Submit a plan for the development, financing and operation of the project showing the anticipated schedule on which funds will be required and describe proposed sources and uses for such funds. 
(3)  Include a list and discussion of assumptions underlying all major elements of the plan. 
(4)  Identify the proposed risk factors and methods for dealing with these factors. 
(5)  Identify any local, state or federal resources that the proposer contemplates requesting for the project and describe the total commitment, if any, expected from governmental sources and the timing of any anticipated commitment. 
(d)  Project benefit and compatibility. Proposals shall: 
(1)  Identify who will benefit from the project, how they will benefit and how the project will benefit the city, the overall community, region, or state. 
(2)  Identify any anticipated public support or opposition, as well as any anticipated government support or opposition, for the project. 
(3)  Explain the strategy and plans that will be carried out to involve and inform the general public, business community, and governmental agencies in areas affected by the project. 
(4)  Describe in detail the proposer's proposed commitments to facilitate participation by minority business enterprises in the project and identify joint ventures and subcontractors. 
(5)  Describe the anticipated significant benefits to the city, the community, region or state including anticipated benefits to the economic condition of the city and whether the project is critical to attracting or maintaining competitive industries and businesses to the city or the surrounding region. 
(6)  Describe the project's compatibility with the city's local comprehensive plan, local infrastructure development plans, local and statewide transportation plans, and the city's capital improvement program budget or other applicable government spending plans. 
    Detailed phase proposals . If the city decides to proceed to the detailed phase of review with one or more proposals, the following information shall be provided by the private entity which submitted such proposal unless waived by city in writing: 
(a)  A topographical map (1:2,000 or other appropriate scale) depicting the location of the proposed project. 
(b)  A list of public utility facilities, if any, that will be crossed by the qualifying project and a statement of the plans of the proposer to accommodate such crossings. 
(c)  A statement setting out the plans for securing all necessary property. The statement must include the names and addresses, if known, of the current owners of the subject property as well as a list of any property the proposer intends to request the city to condemn. 
(d)  A detailed listing of all firms that will provide specific design, construction and completion guarantees and warranties and a brief description of such guarantees and warranties. 
(e)  A total life-cycle cost specifying methodology and assumptions of the project or projects and the proposed project start date. The life-cycle cost analysis shall include anticipated commitment of all parties; equity, debt, and other financing mechanisms; and a schedule of project revenues and project costs. The life-cycle cost analysis shall include a detailed analysis of the projected return, rate of return, or both. 
(f)  A detailed discussion of assumptions about user fees or rates, and usage of the projects and, for transportation facilities, a detailed discussion of toll rates and traffic forecasts and assumptions. 
(g)  Identification of any known government support or opposition, or general public support or opposition for the project. Government or public support may be demonstrated through resolution of official bodies, minutes of meetings, letters, or other official communications. 
(h)  Demonstration of consistency with the appropriate city's local comprehensive, transportation or infrastructure development plans or indication of the steps required for acceptance into such plans. 
(i)  Explanation of how the proposed project would impact local development plans of the city and each affected local jurisdiction. 
(j)  Identification of any known conflicts of interest or other disabilities that may affect the city's consideration of the proposal. 
(k)  Such additional material and information as the city may reasonably request. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-497. - Posting of conceptual proposals; public comment; public access to procurement records. 
(a)  Conceptual proposals, whether solicited or unsolicited, shall be posted by the city within ten working days after acceptance of such proposals as follows: 
(1)  Posting shall be on the city's website or by publication, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the contract is to be performed, of a summary of the proposals and the location where copies of the proposals are available for public inspection. Posting may also be on the department of general service's web-based electronic procurement program. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the posting of conceptual proposals by additional means deemed appropriate by the city so as to provide maximum notice to the public of the opportunity to inspect the proposals. 
(b)  In addition to the posting requirements, at least one copy of the proposals shall be made available for public inspection. Trade secrets, financial records, or other records of the private entity excluded from disclosure under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq., shall not be required to be posted, except as otherwise agreed to by the responsible public entity and the private entity. Any inspection of procurement transaction records shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. 
(c)  The responsible public entity shall hold a public hearing on the proposals during the proposal review process, but not later than 30 days prior to entering into an interim or comprehensive agreement. 
(d)  Once the negotiation phase for the development of an interim or a comprehensive agreement is complete, but before an interim agreement or a comprehensive agreement is entered into, the city shall make available the proposed agreement in a manner provided in subsection (a). 
(e)  Once an interim agreement or a comprehensive agreement has been entered into, the city shall make procurement records available for public inspection, upon request. For the purposes of this subsection, procurement records shall not be interpreted to include (i) trade secrets of the private entity as defined in the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (§ 59.1-336 et seq.) or (ii) financial records, including balance sheets or financial statements of the private entity that are not generally available to the public through regulatory disclosure or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Virginia Code, § 56-575.17. 
Sec. 2-498. - Proposal review; evaluation and selection. 
    The following items shall be considered in the evaluation and selection of the PPEA proposals to determine whether the proposer possesses the requisite qualifications and experience. The city, however, reserves the right to reject any request or proposal at any time for any reason whatsoever. 
(a)  Qualifications and experience. 
(1)  Experience with similar infrastructure projects; 
(2)  Demonstration of ability to perform work; 
(3)  Leadership structure; 
(4)  Project manager's experience; 
(5)  Management approach; 
(6)  Financial condition; and 
(7)  Project ownership. 
(b)  Project characteristics. 
(1)  Project definition; 
(2)  Proposed project schedule; 
(3)  Operation of the project; 
(4)  Technology; technical feasibility; 
(5)  Conformity to laws, regulations, and standards; 
(6)  Environmental impacts; 
(7)  Federal, state and local permits; and 
(8)  Maintenance of the project. 
(c)  Project financing. 
(1)  Cost and cost benefit to the city; 
(2)  Financing and the impact on the debt or debt burden of the city; 
(3)  Financial plan; 
(4)  Estimated cost; and 
(5)  Life-cycle cost analysis. 
(d)  Project benefit and compatibility. 
(1)  City and community benefits; 
(2)  City and community support or opposition, or both; 
(3)  Public involvement strategy; 
(4)  Commitment to facilitate participation by minority business enterprises in the project; 
(5)  Use of transparent competitive procurement policies adequate to maximize competitive bidding opportunities for potential subcontractors and suppliers; 
(6)  Compatibility with applicable comprehensive, transportation and other governmental plans; 
(7)  Compatibility with existing city facilities; and 
(8)  Compatibility with city, local, regional, and state economic development efforts. 
(e)  Other factors. 
(1)  The proposed cost of the qualifying project; 
(2)  The general reputation, industry experience, and financially capacity of the private entity; 
(3)  The proposed design of the qualifying project; 
(4)  The eligibility of the project for accelerated documentation, review, and selection; 
(5)  Local citizen and government comments; 
(6)  Benefits to the public, including financial and nonfinancial; 
(7)  The private entity's compliance with a minority business enterprise participation plan or good faith effort to comply with the goals of such plan; 
(8)  The private entity's plans to employ local contractors and residents; 
(9)  The recommendation of a committee of representative members of the city and the appropriating body which may be established to provide advisory oversight for the project; and 
(10)  Other criteria that the city deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 2-499. - Interim and comprehensive agreement. 
    Prior to acquiring, designing, constructing, improving, renovating, expanding, equipping, maintaining, or operating the qualifying project, the selected proposer shall enter into a comprehensive agreement with the city. Prior to entering a comprehensive agreement, an interim agreement may be entered into that permits a private entity to perform compensable activities related to the project. The city's review committee will be responsible for negotiating the comprehensive agreement. Each comprehensive agreement shall define the rights and obligations of the city and the selected proposer with regard to the project. 
(a)  Interim agreement. 
(1)  The scope of an interim agreement may include, as deemed appropriate by the city, but is not limited to: 
a.  Project planning and development; 
b.  Design and engineering; 
c.  Environmental analysis and mitigation; 
d.  Survey; 
e.  Ascertain the ability of financing for the proposed facility through financial revenue analysis; 
f.  Allow the private entity to commence activities relating to the proposed qualifying project; 
g.  Establish the process and timing of the negotiation of the comprehensive agreement; and 
h.  Contain any other provisions related to any aspect of the development or operation of a qualifying project. 
(b)  Comprehensive agreement terms. The terms and conditions of the comprehensive agreement shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Delivery of maintenance, performance and payment bonds, letters of credit in connection with the development or operation of the qualifying project, in the forms and amounts satisfactory to the responsible public entity and in compliance with Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4337 for those components of the qualifying project that involve construction; 
(2)  Review of plans and specifications for the qualifying project by the responsible public entity and approval by the responsible public entity if the plans and specifications conform to standards acceptable to the responsible public entity. This shall not be construed as requiring the private entity to complete design of a qualifying project prior to the execution of a comprehensive agreement; 
(3)  Inspection of the qualifying project by the responsible public entity to ensure that the private entity's activities are acceptable to the responsible public entity in accordance with the provisions of the comprehensive agreement; 
(4)  Maintenance of a policy or policies of public liability insurance (copies of which shall be filed with the responsible public entity accompanied by proofs of coverage) or self-insurance, each in form and amount satisfactory to the responsible public entity and reasonably sufficient to ensure coverage of tort liability to the public and employees and to enable the continued operation of the qualifying project; 
(5)  Monitoring of the practices of the private entity by the responsible public entity to ensure that the qualifying project is properly maintained; 
(6)  The terms under which the operator will reimburse the city for services provided by the city; 
(7)  The terms under which the operator will file appropriate financial statements on a periodic basis; and 
(8)  Policies and procedures governing the rights and responsibilities of the responsible public entity and the private entity in the event the comprehensive agreement is terminated or there is a material default by the private entity, including the conditions governing assumption of the duties and responsibilities of the operator by the city and the transfer or purchase of property or other interests of the operator by the city. 
(9)  The policy and procedures that will govern the rights and responsibilities of the city and the operator in the event that the comprehensive agreement is terminated or there is a material default by the operator, including the conditions governing assumption of the duties and responsibilities of the operator by the city and the transfer or purchase of property or other interests of the operator by the city. 
(10)  The mechanism by which user fees, lease payments, or service payments, if any, may be established from time to time upon agreement of the parties. Any payments or fees shall be set at a level that are the same for persons using the facility under like conditions and that will not materially discourage use for the qualifying project. Provisions for the following shall also be included: 
a.  A copy of any service contract shall be filed with the city. 
b.  A schedule of the current user fees or lease payments shall be made available by the operator to any member of the public upon request. 
c.  Classifications according to reasonable categories for assessment of user fees may be made. 
(11)  The terms and conditions under which the city may contribute financial or in-kind resources, if any, for the qualifying project. 
(12)  The terms and conditions under which existing site conditions will be assessed and addressed, including identification of the responsible party for conducting the assessment and taking necessary remedial action. 
(13)  The terms and conditions under which the city will be required to pay money to the private entity and the amount of any such payments for the project. 
(14)  Other provisions that the Public-Private Transportation Act of 1995, codified in Chapter 22 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, or the Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, codified in Chapter 22.1 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, may require or that the city may deem necessary. 
(c)  Any changes in the terms of the interim or comprehensive agreement as may be agreed upon by the parties from time to time shall be added to the interim or comprehensive agreement by written amendment. 
(d)  The comprehensive agreement may provide for the development or operation of phases or segments of a qualifying project. 
(e)  Allow the private entity to commence activities relating to the proposed qualifying project. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-575.9, § 56-575.9:1. 
Sec. 2-500. - Affected local jurisdictions. 
(a)  Any private entity requesting approval from, or submitting a proposal to the city under section 2-493 shall notify each affected local jurisdiction by furnishing a copy of its request or proposal to each affected local jurisdiction. 
(b)  Each affected local jurisdiction that is not a responsible public entity for the respective qualifying project shall, within 60 days after receiving such notice, submit any comments it may have in writing on the proposed qualifying project to the city and indicate whether the facility is compatible with the local jurisdictions: 
(1)  Local comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Local infrastructure development plans; or 
(3)  Capital improvements budget, or other government spending plan. 
Comments will be given consideration by the city prior to entering a comprehensive agreement pursuant to section 2-499(b) with a private entity. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 56-575.3:1, 56-575.6. 
Sec. 2-501. - Dedication of public property. 
    The city may dedicate any property interest, including land, improvements, and tangible personal property that it has for public use in a qualifying project if it finds that so doing will serve the public purpose by minimizing the cost of a qualifying project to the city or reducing the delivery time of a qualifying project. In connection with such dedication, a public entity may convey any property interest that it has, to the private entity for such consideration as such public entity may determine. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-575.5. 
Sec. 2-502. - Sovereign immunity. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as or deemed a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the commonwealth, any responsible public entity or any affected local jurisdiction or any officer or employee thereof with respect to the participation in, or approval of all or any part of the qualifying project or its operation, including but not limited to interconnection of the qualifying project with any other infrastructure or project. The city shall possess sovereign immunity with respect to its design, construction, and operation. 
(Ord. No. 14-01, 1-7-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-575.15. 
Secs. 2-503-2-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY MARKET[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to operate markets, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-971. 

Sec. 2-541. - Application of article; definition. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to the public market place referred to in section 2-543 and, for the purposes of this article, the word "market" shall mean such market place. 
(Code 1981, § 17-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-542. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. In addition to any penalty imposed for such violation, a person convicted of violating any provision of this article may be barred from using the market. 
(Code 1981, § 17-2) 
Sec. 2-543. - Location. 
    The building situated at the eastern end of Old Street that is used as a public market place shall continue to be kept by the city for that purpose. 
(Code 1981, § 17-3) 
Sec. 2-544. - City manager to have charge. 
    The city manager or his authorized representative shall have charge of the market. 
(Code 1981, § 17-4) 
Sec. 2-545. - Display of posters and advertisements. 
    No posters or advertisements of any kind shall be displayed in the windows or in front of the market, except on billboards. 
(Code 1981, § 17-5) 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6. 
Sec. 2-546. - Standing of vehicles in front of market. 
    Vehicles shall not be allowed to congregate or stand in front of the market. The city manager shall require that vehicles be moved when, in his judgment, the street is being interfered with or traffic is being obstructed. 
(Code 1981, § 17-6) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 
Sec. 2-547. - Furniture for use of tenants; alterations in stalls or furniture. 
    The style and kinds of the market house furniture for the use of butchers, retailers and all other lessees shall be subject to the control of the city manager, and no alterations in any stall or furniture shall be made by any butcher, retailer or other lessee, except by special permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 17-7) 
Sec. 2-548. - Maintenance of stalls, stands, etc.; entrails and offal from animals and fish to be secured from air and view. 
(a)  Each lessee of a stand, arbor, booth or bench at the market shall keep such leased area, including his stall and refrigerator, in a thoroughly clean and sanitary condition at all times, and shall thoroughly clean his stall and the floor thereof immediately after the closing of the market, and shall leave nothing, except the necessary furnishings of the stall, on the floor. 
(b)  Any person using a stall, stand, arbor, booth or bench at the market for the sale of meats or fish shall wash and scrape off the same every day, immediately after market hours. The entrails and offal of animals and fish shall be secured from the air and from view. 
(Code 1981, § 17-8) 
Sec. 2-549. - Doors of refrigerators, boxes and counters to be kept closed. 
    The doors of all refrigerators, boxes and counters at the market shall be kept closed, except when articles are being placed therein or removed therefrom. 
(Code 1981, § 17-9) 
Sec. 2-550. - Littering. 
    No person shall deposit any rubbish, filth, dirt or offensive matter in or about the market house or any adjacent property or streets. 
(Code 1981, § 17-10) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 94. 
Sec. 2-551. - Damaging or defacing property. 
(a)  No person shall damage or deface any part of the market house or any of the counters, stalls, refrigerators or any fixtures used in connection therewith. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 17-11) 
Secs. 2-552-2-570. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SCHOOLS 

Sec. 2-571. - School districts; compulsory school attendance. 
(a)  The three school districts of the city in existence on the effective date of this Code shall continue to exist until the end of the existing terms of office of the members of the school board of the city. 
(b)  The provisions of Code of Virginia, § 22.1-254 et seq., relating to compulsory school attendance are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1) 
State Law reference- Education, Code of Virginia, tit. 22.1; school boards, Code of Virginia, § 22.1-28 et seq.; city school districts, Code of Virginia, § 22.1-49. 
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Display of posters and advertisements at city market, § 2-545; businesses, ch. 26; advertising, etc., obscene items, exhibitions or performances, § 74-310; storing or displaying merchandise or maintaining advertising signs on sidewalks, § 98-124. 
State Law reference- Outdoor advertising in sight of public highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-351 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Violations of chapter. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation or flight in the air. Such word shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
    Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information that is obscene; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state or under any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
    Handbill means any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill. 
    Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States postal service in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law, and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published, with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
    Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the definition of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Posting advertising matter on utility poles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon or attach to any public utility pole a sign, poster, handbill, flag or advertising device or material of any kind; provided, however, nothing contained in this section shall apply to any such sign, poster, handbill, flag or advertising device or material placed upon such poles by the United Way, with the permission of the owner of such poles, during and for a reasonable time preceding the annual financial campaign of the United Way; and, provided further, nothing contained in this section shall apply to permanent highway signs placed upon such poles by the city, or to temporary directional and other signs placed upon such poles, with permission of the city manager and the owner of such poles. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 114. 
Sec. 6-4. - Distribution of advertising matter on or in street, sidewalk or public parking lot. 
    No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any commercial handbill or circular, card, booklet, placard or other commercial or business advertising matter whatsoever, in or upon any street or sidewalk or upon any public parking lot; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the delivery of any such matter by the United States postal service or prohibit the distribution of newspapers. This section is not intended to prevent the lawful distribution of anything other than commercial and business advertising matter. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 6-5. - Deposit of advertising matter on street, sidewalk or public parking lot. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or otherwise deposit any handbill, poster or other advertising matter on any street, sidewalk or public parking lot in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 3-6) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 6-6. - Painting or marking advertisements, signs, etc., on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, print, stamp, stain or otherwise mark upon the paved portion of any street or sidewalk in the city any advertisement or any words, marks, figures or letters for any purpose whatsoever. Each day's failure to remove any such paint or mark, after notice thereof, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to traffic signals placed or painted on the streets and sidewalks under the direction of city authority. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any sign painted, printed, stamped or otherwise marked upon the paved portion of any street or sidewalk in the city by the proper authorities of the armed forces of the United States denoting and indicating "off limits" premises. Such signs are expressly permitted, provided the form, size and lettering are approved by the city manager. The placing of any such signs shall be done by the authorities of the armed forces of the United States. 
(Code 1981, § 3-7) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 6-7. - Posting advertisements on property of another. 
    No person shall put up any show bill, notice or advertisement, or brand or mark any sign, letters or characters, upon any wall, building or fence or other property of another person, without first obtaining the consent of such other person. 
(Code 1981, § 3-8) 
Sec. 6-8. - Operation of aircraft for commercial sound advertising purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any aircraft for commercial sound advertising purposes in or over the city. 
(Code 1981, § 3-12) 
Sec. 6-9. - Untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising generally. 
(a)  Any person who, with intent to sell or in anywise dispose of merchandise, securities, service or anything offered by such person, directly or indirectly, to the public for sale or distribution, or with intent to increase the consumption thereof, or to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation relating thereto, or to acquire title thereto, or any interest therein, makes, publishes, disseminates, circulates or places before the public, or causes, directly or indirectly, to be made, published, disseminated, circulated or placed before the public in this city, in a newspaper or other publication, or in the form of a book, notice, handbill, poster, blueprint, map, bill, tag, label, circular, pamphlet or letter or in any other way, an advertisement of any sort regarding merchandise, securities, service, land, lot or anything so offered to the public, which advertisement contains any promise, assertion, representation or statement of fact which is untrue, deceptive or misleading to induce the public to enter into any obligation shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The words "untrue, deceptive and misleading," as used in this section, shall be construed as including (i) the advertising in any manner by any person of any goods, wares or merchandise as a bankrupt stock, receiver's stock or trustee's stock, if such stock contains any goods, wares or merchandise put therein subsequent to the date of the purchase by such advertiser of such stock, and if such advertisement of any such stock fails to set forth the fact that such stock contains other goods, wares or merchandise put therein, subsequent to the date of the purchase by such advertiser of such stock in type as large as the type used in any other part of such advertisement, including the caption of the advertisement, it shall be a violation of this section; and (ii) the use of any writing or document which appears to be, but is not in fact a negotiable check, negotiable draft or other negotiable instrument notwithstanding the fact that its nonnegotiability is indicated on the writing or document. 
(Code 1981, § 3-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-216. 
Sec. 6-10. - Misrepresentation as to source of merchandise; penalty. 
(a)  No person, firm, corporation or association selling or offering for sale any article or merchandise, shall in any manner represent, contrary to fact, that the article was made for, or acquired directly or indirectly from, the United States government or its military or naval forces or any agency of the United States government, or that it has been disposed of by the United States government. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation or association violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 3-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-222. 
Secs. 6-11-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Depositing handbills on vacant premises. 
    No person shall throw or otherwise deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1981, § 3-9) 
Sec. 6-32. - Distributing handbills on occupied private premises. 
(a)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case inhabited private premises are not posted, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, except that mailboxes may not be so used, when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to the distribution of newspapers. 
(b)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested, by any person thereon, not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisements" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right to privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Code 1981, § 3-10) 
Sec. 6-33. - Dropping handbills from aircraft. 
    No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any handbill. 
(Code 1981, § 3-11) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 26; profane swearing and intoxication in public; penalty; transportation of public inebriates to detoxification center, § 74-242; drinking while operating motor vehicle, § 110-222. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, Code of Virginia, tit. 4.1; determining alcohol or drug content of blood, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-267 et seq.; incorporation by reference of certain offenses, traffic rules, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 

Sec. 10-1. - License taxes. 
(a)  Every person, firm or corporation engaged in manufacturing, bottling and/or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall become liable of license taxes as follows: 
(1)  For each distiller's license, if more than 5,000 gallons of alcohol or spirits, or both, are manufactured during such license year, including bottling, the license tax shall be $500.00. 
(2)  For each winery license, the license tax shall be $300.00. 
(3)  For each brewery, including bottling, the license tax shall be $300.00. 
(4)  For each bottler's license, the license tax shall be $120.00. 
(5)  For each wholesale beer license, the license tax shall be $250.00. 
(6)  For each wholesale wine license, the license tax shall be $50.00. 
(7)  For each retail on-premises wine license, the license tax shall be $48.00. 
(8)  For each retail on-premises beer license, the license tax shall be $48.00. 
(9)  For each retail off-premises wine and beer license, or wine or beer license, the license tax shall be $48.00. 
(10)  For each retail on and off-premise wine and beer license or beer license, the license tax shall be $60.00. 
(11)  Every person, firm or corporation holding a mixed beverage or mixed alcoholic beverage restaurant and caterer's license for establishments located within the city shall pay a local license tax as follows: 
a.  Persons operating restaurants, including restaurants located on premises of and operated by hotels or motels: 
1.  For each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for up to 100 persons, $200.00 per year. 
2.  For each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 100 but not more than 150 persons, $350.00 per year. 
3.  For each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons, $500.00 per year. 
4.  For each caterer, $500.00 per year. 
b.  A private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant on the premises of such club, $350.00 per year. 
(12)  For each mixed beverage special events license, the license tax shall be $10.00 for each day of each event. 
(13)  For each mixed beverage club events license, the license tax shall be $10.00 for each day of each event. 
(14)  For each equine sporting event license, the license tax shall be $10.00. 
(15)  For each museum license, the license tax shall be $10.00. 
(b)  The licenses described in subsection (a) of this section shall be as respectively defined by the Act of the General Assembly of Virginia, as heretofore and hereafter amended, known as the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, (Code of Virginia, tit. 4.1), and the terms "alcoholic beverage," "alcohol," "spirits," "beer" and "wine," wherever used in this section, shall have the meanings respectively prescribed to them by such act. 
(c)  No license shall be issued under this section to any person unless such person shall hold or shall secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, which state license shall be exhibited to the assessing official. 
(d)  Any such license may be amended to show a change in the place of business within the city. Any such license may be transferred from one person to another, provided that the person to whom transferred holds at the time a similar license from the state alcoholic beverage control board. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-13, 12-6-1996) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 4.1-205, 4.1-233. 
Sec. 10-2. - Unlawful possession of opened alcoholic beverage containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an opened alcoholic beverage container in any public park, playground or public street provided, however, that alcoholic beverages may be consumed at an event held at the following locations: Albert Jones Field and Lee Park when authorized and conditioned by the city council, and after authorization to sell or distribute beverages on premises and to consume same is granted by the appropriate alcoholic beverage control permit or license. 
(b)  The Dogwood Trace Golf Course and Sports Complex, shall be exempt from the operation of the prohibitions contained in subsection (a) of this section when authorized by the city manager and when authorization to sell or distribute beverages on premises and to consume same is granted by the appropriate alcoholic beverage control permit or license. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-15.1; Ord. No. 10-15, 4-6-2010) 
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to protect inhabitants and property and to preserve peace and good order, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1700; certain premises deemed common nuisance, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-258, 18.2-258.01; charitable gaming, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.15 et seq.; minors in public places of amusement, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-432, 40.1-100; public dancehalls, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Amateur boxing matches or exhibitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "amateur boxing match or exhibition" shall mean a match or exhibition in which both contestants are amateur boxers. An amateur boxer is one who engages in boxing solely for the pleasure and physical, mental or social benefits he derives therefrom and to whom boxing is nothing more than an avocation, and who neither directly nor indirectly receives any money, compensation or reward, other than a suitably inscribed memento, for his participation in any boxing match or exhibition. 
(b)  No single amateur boxing match or exhibition to which an admission fee is charged shall be for more than four rounds of three minutes each; provided, that no boxer shall be allowed to participate in more than four rounds of three minutes each with the same individual within 24 consecutive hours. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1(a), (c), (d)) 
State Law reference- Boxing and wrestling events, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-828 et seq. 
Sec. 14-2. - Minors prohibited in certain dancehalls. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to enter, be or remain in any public dancehall in the city or any other place in the city open to the public where dancing is permitted, where alcoholic beverages are consumed or are sold or dispensed for consumption therein or thereat, except on business, and when on business, such person shall be required to depart therefrom as soon as his business is transacted. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or person in charge of any public dancehall in the city or of any other place in the city open to the public where dancing is permitted, where alcoholic beverages are consumed or are sold or dispensed for consumption therein or thereat, to allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years to enter, be or remain in any such public dancehall or place, except on business, and when on business, such person shall be required to depart therefrom as soon as his business has been transacted. 
(c)  The presence of any person under the age of 18 years in any such public dancehall or such other place for the purpose of dancing or watching dancing shall not be considered as being therein on business. 
(d)  The term "alcoholic beverages," when used in this section, shall have the meaning prescribed by the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Code of Virginia, tit. 4.1). 
(e)  The owner, operator or person in charge of any such public dancehall or such other place open to the public where dancing is permitted, or where alcoholic beverages are consumed or are sold or dispensed for consumption therein or thereat, shall have and keep posted conspicuously at the entrance or entrances of such public dancehall or such other place a sign or signs in bold letters, not less than two inches in height, reading "NO MINORS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED." 
(f)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-5) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate the presence of minors in public places of amusement and to regulate dancehalls, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-432, 18.2-433. 
Sec. 14-3. - Exhibition of films in closed booths in a movie arcade. 
(a)  Point of observation not obscured. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, or cause to be operated, a movie arcade in the city, unless all viewing areas within such movie arcade are visible from a continuous main aisle, or other point of observation ordinarily accessible to the public, and are not obscured by any curtain, door, wall, or other enclosure. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context: 
    Movie arcade means any business establishment or other business facility to which the public is admitted and in which a moving picture, film or videotape viewing device is operated. 
    Viewing area means any location, designed for occupancy by no more than five persons, within a movie arcade where a patron, customer or employee of the movie arcade, or other person, would ordinarily be positioned while watching a moving picture, film or video viewing device in operation. 
(c)  Violation; penalty. Any person, upon conviction of an offense charged under this section, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 98-49, § 21-22.1, 3-3-1998; Ord. No. 99-91, 6-15-1999) 
Secs. 14-4-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POOL ROOMS OR BILLIARD ROOMS 

Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Pool room and billiard room mean any place that: 
(1)  Is operated commercially for profit as a pool or billiard parlor; and 
(2)  Contains more than one pool or billiard table. 
(Code 1981, § 5-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-32. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty imposed for a violation of any provision of this article, the judge of the general district court may revoke the license to operate a pool room or billiard room of any person found guilty of such violation. For a second conviction under this article, such license shall be revoked by such judge and no new license shall be issued to the offender for a period of one year. 
(Code 1981, § 5-17) 
Sec. 14-33. - Operation at other than street level. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any pool room or billiard room on any floor above or below the street level of any building in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 5-18) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 14-34. - Obstruction of view from street. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any screen, curtain or other thing of any nature which obscures a free and uninterrupted view of any pool room or billiard room from the street. 
(Code 1981, § 5-19) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 14-35. - To be closed between 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
    The proprietors of all pool rooms or billiard rooms shall close the pool rooms or billiard rooms not later than 2:00 a.m. every day, and keep the pool rooms or billiard rooms closed until 5:00 a.m. the same day, and shall not allow any pool, billiard or similar game to be played therein between those hours. 
(Code 1981, § 5-20; Ord. No. 99-04, § 5-20, 1-5-1999) 
Sec. 14-36. - Minors in establishment licensed under A.B.C. Act. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 1-13.42 and 18.2-432, no minor shall frequent, play in or loiter in any public pool room or billiard room operated in conjunction with any establishment licensed under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Code of Virginia, tit. 4.1), nor shall the proprietor of any such public pool room or billiard room or his agent permit any minor to frequent, play in or loiter in such place. 
(Code 1981, § 5-21) 
State Law reference- Age of majority, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.42; authority of city to regulate minors in public places of amusement, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-432. 
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 50; noise from animals, § 50-38; health and sanitation, ch. 62; slaughtering or butchering certain animals prohibited except at abattoirs or packinghouses, § 62-34; hunting and trapping in city limits, § 74-209; one-horse wagons, carts and similar vehicles, § 110-181 et seq. 
State Law reference- Penalties for offenses involving animals, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-403.1 et seq.; diseased animals, dead animals, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-323, 18.2-510; game, inland fisheries and boating, Code of Virginia, tit. 29.1; hunting near public schools and public parks, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-527; estrays, Code of Virginia, § 55-202 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandon means to desert, forsake, or absolutely give up on an animal without having secured another owner or custodian for the animal or by failing to provide the elements of basic care as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6503, for a period of five consecutive days. 
    Adequate feed means access to and the provision of food which is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain each animal in good health; is accessible to each animal; is prepared so as to permit ease of consumption for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal; is provided in a clean and sanitary manner; is placed so as to minimize contamination by excrement and pests; and is provided at suitable intervals for the species, age, and condition of the animal, but at least once daily, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species. 
    Adequate water means provision of and access to clean, fresh, potable water of a drinkable temperature which is provided in a suitable manner, in sufficient volume and at suitable intervals, but at least once every 12 hours, to maintain normal hydration for the age, species, condition, size and type of each animal, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species; and is provided in clean, durable receptacles which are accessible to each animal and are placed so as to minimize contamination of the water by excrement and pests or an alternative source of hydration consistent with generally accepted husbandry practices. 
    Agricultural animals means all livestock and poultry. 
    Ambient temperature means the temperature surrounding the animal. 
    Animal means any nonhuman vertebrate species except fish. 
    Animal control officer means a person appointed as an animal control officer or deputy animal control officer as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6555. 
    Animal shelter means provision of and access to shelter that is suitable for the species, age, condition, size, and type of each animal; provides adequate space for each animal; is safe and protects each animal from injury, rain, sleet, snow, hail, direct sunlight, the adverse effects of heat or cold, physical suffering, and impairment of health; is properly lighted; is properly cleaned; enables each animal to be clean and dry, except when detrimental to the species; and, for dogs and cats, provides a solid surface, resting platform, pad, floormat, or similar device that is large enough for the animal to lie on in a normal manner and can be maintained in a sanitary manner. Shelters whose wire, grid, or slat floors: 
(1)  Permit the animals' feet to pass through the openings; 
(2)  Sag under the animals' weight; or 
(3)  Otherwise do not protect the animals' feet or toes from injury are not adequate shelter. 
    Boarding establishment means a place or establishment other than where companion animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed, and watered in exchange for a fee. 
    Companion animals means any domestic or feral dog, domestic or feral cat, nonhuman primate, guinea pig, hamster, rabbit not raised for human food or fiber, exotic or native animal, reptile, exotic or native bird, or any feral animal or any animal under the care, custody, or ownership of a person or any animal that is bought, sold, traded, or bartered by any person. Agricultural animals, game species, or any animals regulated under federal law as research animals shall not be considered companion animals for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Dealer means any person who in the regular course of business for compensation or profit buys, sells, transfers, exchanges, or barters companion animals. The following shall not be considered dealers: 
(1)  Any person who transports companion animals in the regular course of business as a common carrier; or 
(2)  Any person whose primary purpose is to find permanent adoptive homes for companion animals. 
    Euthanasia means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death or by a method that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which causes painless loss of consciousness, and death during such loss of consciousness. 
    Exotic birds means any bird that is not a species native to the United States. 
    Housing facility means any room, building or area used to contain a primary enclosure or enclosures. 
    Humane society means any chartered, nonprofit organization incorporated under the laws of this commonwealth and organized for the purpose of preventing cruelty to animals and promoting humane care and treatment, or adoption of animals. 
    Livestock means all domestic or domesticated: bovine animals; equine animals; ovine animals; porcine animals; cervidae animals; capradae animals; animals of the genus Lama; ratites; fish or shellfish in aquaculture facilities, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-2600; enclosed domesticated rabbits or hares raised for human food or fiber; or any other individual animal specifically raised for food or fiber, except companion animals. 
    Other officer means all other persons employed or elected by the people of the commonwealth, or by the city, whose duty it is to preserve the peace, to make arrests or to enforce the law. 
    Owner means any person who: 
(1)  Has a right of property in an animal; 
(2)  Keeps or harbors an animal; 
(3)  Has an animal in his care; or 
(4)  Acts as a custodian of an animal. 
    Pet shop means an establishment where companion animals are bought, sold, exchanged or offered for sale or exchange to the general public. 
    Poultry includes all domestic fowl and game birds raised in captivity. 
    Primary enclosure means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such as a room, pen, cage, compartment, or hutch. For tethered animals, the term includes the shelter and the area within reach of the tether. 
    Public animal shelter means a facility operated by the commonwealth, or any locality, for the purpose of impounding or sheltering seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, unwanted, or surrendered animals or a facility operated for the same purpose under a contract with any locality. 
    Research facility means any place, laboratory, or institution licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture at which scientific tests, experiments, or investigations involving the use of living animals are carried out, conducted, or attempted. 
    Sanitize means to make physically clean and to remove and destroy, to a practical minimum, agents injurious to health. 
(Code 1981, §§ 6-23, 6-42, 6-68; Ord. No. 13-32, § 1, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 15-64, 10-20-2015) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6500. 
Sec. 18-2. - Violations of chapter. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1) 
Sec. 18-3. - Animal control officer. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of animal control officer. The animal control officer shall perform the duties imposed upon him by this chapter and by state law, as well as such other duties as shall be required of him by the city manager. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise specifically provided, and, to the extent that it shall be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter, the animal control officer shall have the powers of a police officer and, to that end, he shall have authority to enter upon private property in the city to the extent necessary. 
(c)  The city manager may appoint, upon the recommendation of the animal control officer, one or more deputy animal control officers, who shall be vested with the powers conferred, and the duties imposed, upon the animal control officer by the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  All fees and other funds received by the animal control officer under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid by the animal control officer into the city treasury on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month during which such fees and other funds shall have been received. There shall be paid to the animal control officer each month from the city treasury a sum sufficient to pay the cost of the food for animals kept in the pound during the preceding calendar month. The animal control officer shall keep an accurate account of all sums received and expended by him under the provisions of this chapter and a statement thereof shall be filed each month by the animal control officer with the director of finance. 
(Code 1981, § 6-2) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Appointment of animal control officer, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.104. 
Sec. 18-4. - Animal shelter or pound. 
    An animal shelter or pound, approved by the city health department in accord with guidelines issued by the state health department, shall be established at such place in the city as the city manager may designate. 
(Code 1981, § 6-3) 
State Law reference- Duty of city to maintain or cause to be maintained a pound, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.96. 
Sec. 18-5. - Keeping five or more cats. 
    Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of five or more cats over four months of age, must obtain a kennel license for such, and shall comply with all regulations promulgated by the animal warden regarding kennels. The amount to be paid each year for such license shall be $5.00 for each spayed or neutered cat, and $10.00 for each unspayed or un-neutered cat. 
(Code 1981, § 6-8; Ord. No. 00-26, § 6-8, 5-16-2000) 
Sec. 18-6. - Keeping of wild or vicious animals. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
    Circus means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
    Performing animal exhibition means any spectacle, display, act or event, other than circuses, in which performing animals are used. 
    Vicious animal means any domestic animal, including both agricultural and companion animals, known to be vicious or which have evidenced a disposition to attack human beings or other animals without provocation. 
    Wild animal means any member of the animal kingdom, except domestic animals, including without limitation any native, naturalized, or nonnative (exotic) mammal, fish, bird, amphibian, reptile, mollusk, crustacean, arthropod or other invertebrate, and includes any hybrid of them, except as otherwise specified in regulations of the board, or part, product, egg, or offspring of them, or the dead body or parts of them. 
    Zoological park means any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals operated by a person, partnership, corporation or government agency. 
(b)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild animal, for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This subsection shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses. 
(c)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild animal as a pet. If a person was keeping an adult wild animal prior to October 21, 1975, having raised it from infancy, this subsection shall not apply to that person and that animal; provided, however, that such person and animal shall be subject to the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(d)  No person shall keep within the limits of the city any animal which is known to be vicious or which has evidenced a disposition to attack human beings or other animals without provocation. Upon the report of an unprovoked attack by an animal upon a human being or other animal, or where the animal control officer has a reasonable belief that an animal is vicious, the animal control officer may forthwith take up and impound such animal. Any animal impounded under this subsection shall be kept at the animal shelter or other place as designated by the animal control officer pending a determination by a court of competent jurisdiction regarding the animal's return to the owner. Such hearing is to be conducted after serving notice to the owner by delivering a copy thereof in writing to the owner in person pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 8.01-296(1); or by delivering a copy of such notice by any method of substituted service as designated by Code of Virginia, § 8.01-296(2)(a), (b) and (c), or if service cannot be effected as heretofore outlined in this section, then by order of publication in appropriate cases under the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 8.01-316-8.01-320. The factors to be considered by the court in any prosecution under this subsection shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The nature of the attack. 
(2)  The severity of the injuries. 
(3)  The safety of the citizens of the city. 
(4)  The history of the animal and its owner as it reasonably relates to the vicious propensities of the animal. 
    Any person owning or harboring any vicious animal or an animal alleged to be vicious shall be summoned before the general district court of this city to show cause why such animal should not be disposed of, and upon proof that the animal is vicious, it shall be disposed of as such court shall order. 
    In addition to the disposition enumerated in this subsection, all costs related to the impoundment, care and shelter for the subject animal shall be borne by the owner or any person having in his possession or under his control such animal. 
    No animal shall be declared vicious if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person, who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No animal shall be declared vicious or dangerous if it attacks other animals which are trespassing on the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(e)  No person shall refuse to turn over to the animal control officer any animal that the animal control officer has reason to believe is vicious, or shall sell, remove, destroy, or secrete an animal with the intent to defeat impoundment of such animal. 
(f)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-9; Ord. No. 15-64, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 18-7. - Keeping of agricultural animals near residences. 
(a)  No agricultural animals, specifically livestock, shall be kept within 100 yards of any residence, except the residence of the owner of any such animal. 
(b)  No poultry shall be kept within the city by any person, except as provided below: 
(1)  An enclosure shall be provided on all premises, which poultry are kept. 
(2)  A house or shelter shall be provided in all enclosures in which poultry are kept. 
(3)  Such house or shelter shall be kept dry and well-ventilated and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free of offensive odors and excrement at all times. 
(4)  All enclosures shall be so constructed as to keep poultry secure from other animals. 
(5)  All enclosures shall be adequately enclosed and free from any rodents. The presence of rodents in any enclosure shall be prima facie evidence that such enclosure is maintained in violation of this section. 
(6)  All enclosures shall be located in the rear yard of the premises. 
(7)  No enclosure intended primarily for the keeping of poultry shall be constructed within ten feet of the property lines. 
(8)  No enclosure shall be located within 45 feet of a residential dwelling or 200 feet of any church or school building; except the residence of the owner of poultry. 
(9)  No more than four poultry, and no roosters shall be kept on any premises in the city. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to agricultural animals located within any of the city's agricultural zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 13-32, § 1, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 15-64, 10-20-2015) 
State Law reference- Regulation of keeping of animals or fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544. 
Sec. 18-8. - Handling dangerous snakes or reptiles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display, exhibit, handle or use any poisonous or dangerous snake or reptile in such a manner as to endanger the life or health of any person. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-68) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-313. 
Sec. 18-9. - Burial or cremation of animals or fowls which have died. 
(a)  When the owner of any animal or grown fowl which has died knows of such death, such owner shall forthwith have its body cremated or buried, and, if he fails to do so, any judge of a general district court, after notice to the owner if he can be ascertained, shall cause any such dead animal or fowl to be cremated or buried by an animal control officer or other person designated for the purpose. Such animal control officer or other person shall be entitled to recover of the owner of every such animal so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed $75.00, and of the owner of every such fowl so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed $5.00, to be recovered in the same manner as animal control officer's fees are recovered, free from all exemptions in favor of such owner, Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the burial or cremation of the whole or portions of any animal or fowl which is to be used for food or in any commercial manner. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a dead dog, the disposal of which is provided for in section 18-96. 
(Code 1981, § 6-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-510. 
Sec. 18-10. - Animals at large. 
    No person shall suffer or permit any animal belonging to him or under his control to go at large in the city, or be kept in the city at any time, except in strict confinement in such manner as to be safe for the public; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to dogs. 
(Ord. No. 13-32, § 1, 5-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Regulation of keeping of animals or fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544. 
Sec. 18-11. - Sanitary condition of stables, sheds, etc. 
    No person owning, occupying and having use of any stable, shed, pen, stall or other place wherein animals of any kind are kept shall permit such stable, shed, pen, stall or other place to become or remain filthy or unwholesome. 
(Ord. No. 13-32, § 1, 5-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6503. 
Sec. 18-12. - Storage and removal of manure. 
    Every person owning or occupying any building or part of a building in which any horse, mule, cow or similar animal is kept shall provide in connection therewith a flytight bin or pit for the reception of manure. Pending the removal from the premises, manure shall be kept in such bin or pit. Stable manure shall be removed by persons maintaining the stables. 
(Ord. No. 13-32, § 1, 5-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6503. 
Secs. 18-13-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 18-31. - Agricultural animals running at large. 
    No person shall permit agricultural animals which he owns, or which is within his possession, custody or control, to run at large in the city. Any animal found running at large in violation of this section shall be impounded until redeemed, and if not redeemed within five days after advertisement has been made in one of the city newspapers, it may be sold by the chief of police. The proceeds of such sale, after deducting therefrom any amounts for any fine, court costs, keeping and advertising, shall be held by the treasurer for the benefit of the owner. No such animal shall be advertised until it has been impounded 48 hours. 
(Code 1981, § 6-4; Ord. No. 13-32, § 2, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 15-64, 10-20-2015) 
State Law reference- Regulation of keeping of animals or fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544. 
Sec. 18-32. - Keeping hogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have or keep any live hog within 400 feet of any occupied or habitable dwelling house within the city, except for immediate shipment or slaughter. 
(Code 1981, § 6-5) 
Secs. 18-33-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOWL 

Sec. 18-61. - Fowl running at large. 
    No owner of fowl of any description shall fail to confine them so as to prevent their straying to the premises of others. 
(Code 1981, § 6-6; Ord. No. 13-32, § 3, 5-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Regulation of keeping of animals or fowl, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6544. 
Sec. 18-62. - Keeping of fowl and pigeons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or cause to be kept, on premises owned by him or under or subject to his control, any kind of domestic fowl or pigeons within 30 feet of any structure owned by another and used for human habitation, occupation or assemblage, whether such structure is in the same or an adjacent block or square. 
(b)  No domestic fowl or pigeons shall be kept within the city by any person otherwise than in compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  A house or shelter shall be provided in any enclosure in which such fowl or pigeons are kept. 
(2)  Such house or shelter shall be kept dry and well-ventilated and shall be cleaned at least once a week, between November 1 and May 1, and at least twice a week, between May 1 and November 1, of each year, and oftener if ordered by the health director. 
(3)  Drinking fountains or troughs shall be kept clean and supplied with clean water. 
(4)  The surface of the yard shall be kept clean and free from all decaying animal or vegetable matter or odors. 
(5)  All enclosures shall be so constructed as to keep the fowl or pigeons secure from dogs. 
(6)  The number of domestic fowl kept on any premises in the city shall not exceed 20, except in areas zoned agricultural. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall apply to fowl or pigeons confined in coops in provision stores or stores regularly established for the sale of fowl or pigeons or which are brought upon the premises and kept for a brief period for dressing and consumption. 
(Code 1981, § 6-7) 
Secs. 18-63-18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-91. - Leashes required for dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit such dog to be off the premises of the owner and not restrained by a leash. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of $150.00, which shall be in lieu of, not in addition to, any other penalties set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 6-24; Ord. No. 10-42, § 1, 6-15-2010) 
State Law reference- Authority for subsection (a) above and provisions similar to subsection (b), Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93. 
Sec. 18-92. - Confinement of diseased dogs. 
    The owner of a dog known to have a contagious or infectious disease shall keep such dog in an enclosure so constructed as to prevent the communication of disease from such dog to other dogs. 
(Code 1981, § 6-25) 
State Law reference- Permitting diseased dog to stray from owner's premises, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.128(A)(6). 
Sec. 18-93. - Confinement of female dogs in season. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of a female dog to permit such dog to be at large in the city or to be taken on a leash upon a street, sidewalk or public place in the city at any time when such dog is in season. Such dog shall be kept in a secure place or boarded in a kennel. 
(Code 1981, § 6-26) 
Sec. 18-94. - Impoundment and disposition of dogs found running at large. 
(a)  A dog found running at large in violation of any provision of this article shall be taken by the animal control officer and impounded in the animal shelter or pound and there confined in a humane manner. Such dog shall be kept for not less than five working days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the dog is initially confined, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner thereof. 
(b)  If, by a license tag or other means, the owner of an impounded dog can be identified, the animal control officer shall, immediately upon impoundment, notify the owner by telephone or by mail. 
(c)  An owner may reclaim a dog impounded under this section, within the five-day period referred to in subsection (a) of this section, by paying a fee of $30.00, plus $12.00 for each day the animal has been impounded. If such dog does not have a proper license tag, the animal control officer shall not release such dog until its owner procures a proper license tag and places it on the dog's collar. 
(d)  A custodian of a dog or individual who has found a dog may qualify as owner and may claim the dog by expressing his desire in writing to claim the dog at the expiration of the five-day period set out in this section; after payment of the required license fee and the other fees prescribed in subsection (c) of this section. If the rightful owner shall claim such dog at any time, the custodian or finder shall relinquish possession of such dog to the rightful owner. 
(e)  If a dog confined pursuant to this section has not been claimed upon expiration of the appropriate holding period as provided by subsection (a) of this section, it shall be deemed abandoned and become the property of the pound or shelter. If such abandoned dog did not, when delivered to the pound, bear a collar, tag, license, tattoo, or other form of identification, it may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by: 
(1)  Sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state, or a licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located within the commonwealth, provided that agency, institution or dealer agrees to confine the animal for an additional period of not less than five days; 
(2)  Delivery to any humane society or animal shelter within the commonwealth; 
(3)  Adoption by any person who is a resident of the city and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such dog; 
(4)  Adoption by a resident of an adjacent political subdivision of the commonwealth; 
(5)  Adoption by any other person, provided that no animal may be adopted by any person who is not a resident of the city, or of an adjacent political subdivision, unless the animal is first sterilized; or 
(6)  Delivery, for the purposes of adoption or euthanasia only, to a humane society or an animal shelter located in and lawfully operating under the laws of another state, provided that such humane society or animal shelter (i) maintains records which would comply with Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.105; (ii) requires that adopted dogs be sterilized; and (iii) has been approved by the state veterinarian or his designee as a facility which maintains such records, requires adopted dogs and cats to be sterilized, and provides adequate care and euthanasia. If such abandoned dog, when delivered to the pound, bore a collar, tag, license, tattoo, or other form of identification, it may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by the methods described in subsections (e)(2), (3), (4), or (5) of this section. No pound or shelter shall deliver more than two dogs during any 30-day period to any one person under subsections (e)(3), (4) or (5) of this section. If a dog is required to be sterilized prior to adoption pursuant to subsection (e)(5) of this section, the pound or animal shelter may require that the sterilization be done at the expense of the person adopting the dog. 
(f)  When any person purchases or adopts an impounded dog, he shall pay such price therefor as is prescribed by the city council, in addition to the fees referred to in this section. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance establishing such prices and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate destruction of a critically injured, critically ill, or unweaned dog for humane purposes. Any dog destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be euthanized by one of the methods prescribed or approved by the state veterinarian. 
(Code 1981, § 6-28; Ord. No. 02-32, 6-4-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.96. 
Sec. 18-95. - Issuance of summons when dog found at large; prepayment of penalty. 
    In addition to or in lieu of impounding a dog found at large in violation of this article, the animal control officer may issue a summons for a violation as a class 4 misdemeanor. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a scheduled violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the department of finance or the treasurer of the locality issuing the summons or ticket prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty of $150.00. 
(Code 1981, § 6-29; Ord. No. 15-64, 10-20-2015) 
State Law reference- Provisions similar to Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6538 and 3.2-6543. 
Sec. 18-96. - Disposal of dead dogs. 
    The owner of any dog which has died from disease or other cause shall forthwith cremate or bury the dog. If, after notice, any owner fails to do so, the animal control officer or other officer shall bury or cremate the dog and he may recover, on behalf of the city, from the owner his cost for this service. 
(Code 1981, § 6-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-510. 
Sec. 18-97. - Removal of dog defecation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, or having in his care or custody any dog, to fail, refuse, or neglect to remove any feces of such dog immediately and to dispose of it in a sanitary manner whenever such dog has defecated on city property, or on any private property without the consent of the property owner thereof or a person having control of such property. 
This section shall not apply to a person with a disability being accompanied by a guide dog; and provided further, that this section shall not allow any act of trespass upon public or private property. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10-42, § 1, 6-15-2010) 
Secs. 18-98-18-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 18-116. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog four months old or older in this city, unless such dog is licensed under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having custody of four or more dogs over the age of four months must obtain a special use exception as required under Article 27 of the Zoning Ordinance prior to obtaining a kennel license. Such person shall also comply with all regulations promulgated by the animal warden regarding kennels. 
(Code 1981, § 6-43; Ord. No. 00-26, § 6-43, 5-16-2000; Ord. No. 15-64, 10-20-2015) 
State Law reference- Provisions similar to subsection (a), Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.85. 
Sec. 18-117. - Application; applicant to be city resident. 
(a)  Any person may obtain a dog license by making oral or written application to the city treasurer, accompanied by the amount of the license tax and the evidence of vaccination required by section 18-121. The city treasurer shall only have authority to license dogs of resident owners or custodians who reside within the limits of the city, and may require information to this effect from any applicant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in or present any false evidence with an application submitted under this section, in order to secure a dog license to which such person is not entitled. 
(Code 1981, § 6-44) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.86, 3.1-796.128(A)(1). 
Sec. 18-118. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  A license tax is hereby imposed on dogs required to be licensed under this article in the following amounts: 
(1)  For a neutered male or spayed female dog ..... $ 5.00 
(2)  For an unneutered male or unspayed female dog ..... 10.00 
(b)  No license tax shall be levied under this section on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person or that is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person. As used in this subsection, the term "hearing dog" means a dog trained to alert its owner, by touch, to sounds of danger and sounds to which the owner should respond. 
(Code 1981, § 6-45; Ord. No. 96-58, § 6-45, 5-14-1996; Ord. No. 00-26, § 6-45, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference- Duty to impose dog license tax, limit on the amount thereof and provisions similar to subsection (b) above, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.87. 
Sec. 18-119. - When tax due and payable. 
    The license tax on dogs shall be due and payable as follows: 
(1)  On or before January 1st and not later than January 31st of each year, the owner of any dog four months old or older shall pay such tax. 
(2)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between January 1st and November 1st of any year, the license tax for the current calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner. 
(3)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between October 31st and December 31st of any year the license tax for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner, and such license shall protect such dog from the date of purchase. 
(Code 1981, § 6-46; Ord. No. 00-26, § 6-46, 5-16-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.88. 
Sec. 18-120. - Failure to pay tax when due. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to fail to pay the tax imposed by this article when the tax is due. Payment of such tax subsequent to a summons to appear before a court for failure to do so within the time required shall not operate to relieve such owner from the penalties provided for such failure. The court may fine such owner as authorized in this chapter and may order confiscation and the proper disposition of the dog. 
(Code 1981, § 6-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.128(A)(2). 
Sec. 18-121. - Issuance, composition and contents. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a proper application and the prescribed license tax, the city treasurer shall issue a dog license receipt; provided, that no such license shall be issued for any dog, unless there is presented to the city treasurer evidence satisfactory to the city treasurer that the owner has complied with section 18-231 with respect to such dog. 
(b)  Each dog license shall consist of a license tax receipt and a metal tag. Such receipt shall have recorded thereon the amount of tax paid, the name and address of the owner or custodian of the dog, the date of payment, the year for which the license is issued, the serial number of the tag, the word "dog" and whether the license is for a male, female or unsexed female dog or for a kennel. The metal tag issued under this section shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the name of the city, the sex of the dog and the calendar year for which issued and shall bear a serial number. 
(Code 1981, § 6-48) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.86, 3.1-796.90. 
Sec. 18-122. - Preservation and exhibition of license receipt; tag to be worn by dog; exceptions. 
(a)  A dog license receipt shall be carefully preserved by the person to whom it is issued and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by the animal control officer or other officer. Dog license tags shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such dog. The owner of the dog may remove the collar and license tag required by this section when the dog is engaged in lawful hunting; when the dog is competing in a dog show; when the dog has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar; when the dog is confined; or when the dog is under the immediate control of its owner. 
(b)  Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed, and in any proceedings under this article, the burden of proof of the fact that such dog has been licensed or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time shall be on the owner of the dog. 
(Code 1981, § 6-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.89, 3.1-796.92. 
Sec. 18-123. - Removal of tag. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except the owner or custodian, to remove a legally acquired license tag from a dog without the permission of the owner or custodian. 
(Code 1981, § 6-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.128(A)(8). 
Sec. 18-124. - Duplicate tags. 
    If a dog license tag shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the city treasurer for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the city treasurer that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, the city treasurer shall issue a duplicate license tag, which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. The city treasurer shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag for any dog shall be $1.00. 
(Code 1981, § 6-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.91. 
Sec. 18-125. - Record of tags issued. 
    The city treasurer shall maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all dog license tags issued and shall make this record available to the public, at reasonable times, during the period for which such tags are valid. 
(Code 1981, § 6-52) 
Sec. 18-126. - Substations and agents for collection of tax and issuance of license. 
    The city treasurer may establish substations at convenient locations in the city and appoint agents for the collection of dog license taxes and the issuance of dog licenses. 
(Code 1981, § 6-53) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.86. 
Secs. 18-127-18-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate dangerous or vicious dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93:1. 

Sec. 18-146. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal, other than a dog, or killed a companion animal. 
    Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has (i) killed a person; (ii) inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or (iii) continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-147. - Issuance of summons to appear; determination; compliance; appeals. 
(a)  Any animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate of the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. The animal control officer or owner shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this division. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.119. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the animal control officer may determine, after investigation, whether a dog is a dangerous dog. If the animal control officer determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, he may order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this division. If the animal's owner disagrees with the animal control officer's determination, he may appeal the determination to the general district court for a trial on the merits. 
Sec. 18-148. - Exceptions. 
    No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor shall the local governing body prohibit the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian, (ii) committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. No animal which, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, or its owner or owner's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
Sec. 18-149. - Registration certificate. 
(a)  Generally. The owner of any animal found to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the local animal control officer for a fee of $50.00 in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The local animal control officer shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this division shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. 
(b)  Insurance requirement. All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this division shall only be issued to persons who present satisfactory evidence that the owner has liability insurance coverage, to the value of at least $50,000.00, that covers animal bites. 
(c)  Issuance of certificates. 
(1)  All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this division shall only be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence that the animal has been neutered or spayed; and 
(2)  Present satisfactory evidence (i) of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable, and (ii) that the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that (i) their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property and (ii) the animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation. 
Sec. 18-150. - Confinement indoors or in secure structure; leash and muzzle requirements. 
    While on the property of its owner, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with shelter from the elements of nature. When off its owner's property, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(Code 1981, § 6-27) 
Sec. 18-151. - Responsibility if owner is a minor. 
    If the owner of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this division. 
Sec. 18-152. - Conditions for notification to animal control authority. 
    After an animal has been found to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of such finding, notify the local animal control authority if the animal: 
(1)  Is loose or unconfined; 
(2)  Bites a person or attacks another animal; 
(3)  Is sold, given away, or dies; or 
(4)  Has been moved to a different address. 
Sec. 18-153. - Payment of fees. 
    All fees collected pursuant to this division, less the costs incurred by the animal control authority in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by this division, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund in the treasury of the city for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.105. 
Sec. 18-154. - Penalty for violations. 
    The owner of any animal which has been found to be a dangerous dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this division shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
Secs. 18-155-18-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ANIMAL WELFARE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Animal welfare, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.68 et seq. 

Sec. 18-181. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
(a)  It is the policy and purpose of this article to ensure that animals are provided humane care and treatment by regulating the transportation, sale, purchase, housing, care, handling and treatment of animals. It is the purpose of this article to ensure that all animals, wherever found, and especially animals confined in pet shops, boarding establishments, animal shelters, auction markets, pounds, research facilities, transportation facilities and vehicles and in other similar places, are provided humane care and treatment. It is also the purpose of this article to protect the owners and purchasers of animals from misleading or fraudulent warranties regarding animals and from theft of their animals; to prevent the sale or use of stolen animals; and to ensure that only animals that appear to be free of infection, communicable disease and abnormalities are released for sale, trade or adoption, unless subsequent veterinary care is ensured. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare by controlling animals as items of commerce to prevent disease, fraudulent practices and inhumane treatment and conditions. 
(Code 1981, § 6-67) 
Sec. 18-182. - Exceptions from article. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to a place or establishment which is operated under the immediate supervision of a duly licensed veterinarian as a hospital or boarding establishment, where animals are harbored, boarded and cared for incident to the treatment, prevention or alleviation of disease processes during the routine practice of the profession of veterinary medicine or to animals boarded under the immediate supervision of a duly licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  The exception granted by this section shall not apply to sections 18-183, 18-184 and 18-185. 
(Code 1981, § 6-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.74. 
Sec. 18-183. - Cruelty to animals; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who (i) overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; or (ii) deprives any animal of necessary food, drink, shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; or (iii) willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; or (iv) carries or causes to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or (v) causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who abandons any dog, cat or other domesticated animal in any public place including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle. 
(Code 1981, § 6-70) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.94:1; cruelty to animals prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.122. 
Sec. 18-184. - Animal fighting; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly: 
(1)  Promote, prepare for, engage in, or be employed in, the fighting of animals for amusement, sport or gain; 
(2)  Attend an exhibition of the fighting of animals; 
(3)  Authorize or allow any person to undertake any act described in this section on any premises under his charge or control; or 
(4)  Aid or abet any such acts. 
Except as provided in subsection (b), any person who violates any provision of this subsection is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of subsection (a) in combination with one or more of the following is guilty of a Class 6 felony: 
(1)  When a dog is one of the animals; 
(2)  When any device or substance intended to enhance an animal's ability to fight or to inflict injury upon another animal is used, or possessed with intent to use it for such purpose; 
(3)  When money or anything of value is wagered on the result of such fighting; 
(4)  When money or anything of value is paid or received for the admission of a person to a place for animal fighting; 
(5)  When any animal is possessed, owned, trained, transported, or sold with the intent that the animal engage in an exhibition of fighting with another animal; or 
(6)  When he permits or causes a minor to: 
(i)  Attend an exhibition of the fighting of any animals; or 
(ii)  Undertake or be involved in any act described in this subsection. 
(c)  (1)  Any animal control officer shall confiscate any animal that he determines has been, is, or is intended to be used in animal fighting and any equipment used in training such animal or used in animal fighting. 
(2)  Upon confiscation of an animal, the animal control officer shall petition the appropriate court for a hearing for a determination of whether the animal has been, is, or is intended to be used in animal fighting. The hearing shall be not more than ten business days from the date of the confiscation of the animal. If the court finds that the animal has not been used, is not used and is not intended to be used in animal fighting, it shall order the animal released to its owner. However, if the court finds probable cause to believe that the animal has been, is, or is intended to be used in animal fighting, the court shall order the animal forfeited to the locality unless the owner posts bond in surety with the locality in an amount sufficient to compensate the locality for its cost of caring for the animal for a period of nine months. He shall post additional bond for each successive nine-month period until a final determination by the trial court on any criminal charges brought pursuant to subsections (a) or (b). 
(3)  Upon a final determination of guilt by the trial court on criminal charges brought pursuant to subsections (a) or (b), the court shall order that the animal be forfeited to the locality. Upon a final determination of not guilty by the trial court on the underlying criminal charges, a confiscated animal shall be returned to its owner and any bond shall be refunded to him. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of subsection (a) or (b) shall be prohibited by the court from possession or ownership of companion animals or cocks. 
(e)  In addition to fines and costs, the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this section to pay all reasonable costs incurred in housing, caring for, or euthanizing any confiscated animal. If the court finds that the actual costs are reasonable, it may order payment of actual costs. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties. This section shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Authorized wildlife management activities or hunting, fishing, or trapping authorized under any title of the Code of Virginia or regulations promulgated thereto; or 
(2)  Farming activities authorized under Title 3.2 of the Code of Virginia or regulations promulgated thereto. 
(Code 1981, § 6-72; Ord. No. 15-64, 10-20-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6571. 
Sec. 18-185. - Euthanization by high altitude decompression chamber. 
    No animal shall be euthanized pursuant to any provision of this chapter by means of a high altitude decompression chamber. 
(Code 1981, § 6-73) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.77. 
Sec. 18-186. - Leaving disabled or dead animal in road, or allowing dead animal to remain unburied. 
    If any person cast any dead animal into a road or knowingly permit any dead animal to remain unburied upon his property when offensive to the public or, having in custody any maimed, diseased, disabled or infirm animal, leave it to lie or be in a street, road or public place, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-74) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-323. 
Sec. 18-187. - Duty of vehicle driver upon striking animal. 
(a)  Any person who, as the operator or driver of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report the animal's injury or death to the animal's owner. If the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator or driver shall at once report the accident to the police department, the animal control officer or the local humane society. 
(b)  In addition to the duties specified in subsection (a) of this section, such operator or driver shall remove the animal from the street, if he can do so without endangering himself. 
(Code 1981, § 6-75) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 
Sec. 18-188. - Confinement of dogs by chain. 
    When a dog is confined by chain, the chain must be a minimum of ten feet in length, unless otherwise approved by the animal control officer. The chain, attached to a properly adjusted collar, shall be secured to a trolley or swivel device. 
(Code 1981, § 6-76) 
Sec. 18-189. - Cropping dog's ears or tail. 
    No person, except a licensed breeder or veterinarian, shall crop a dog's ears or tail. 
(Code 1981, § 6-77) 
Sec. 18-190. - Care of animals by owner; penalty. 
(a)  Each owner shall provide for each of his companion and agricultural animals: 
(1)  Adequate feed; 
(2)  Adequate water; 
(3)  Adequate shelter that is properly cleaned; 
(4)  Adequate space in the primary enclosure for the particular type of animal depending upon its age, size, species, and weight; 
(5)  Adequate exercise; 
(6)  Adequate care, treatment, and transportation; and 
(7)  Veterinary care when needed or to prevent suffering or disease transmission. 
    The provisions of this section shall also apply to every animal shelter, pound, dealer, pet shop, exhibitor, kennel, groomer, and boarding establishment. This section shall not require that animals used as food for other animals be euthanized. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(c)  If an investigation provided for in section 18-201 discloses that a violation of this section has occurred, the investigator shall notify the owner or custodian of the complaint and of what action is necessary to comply with this section. The owner or custodian shall have a maximum of 48 hours in which to take corrective action. If, at the end of that period, corrective action has not been taken, legal action shall be instituted. However, the owner can extinguish their ownership rights without penalty by turning the animal over to the city or any licensed care organization. 
(Code 1981, § 6-78; Ord. No. 13-32, § 4, 5-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6503. 
Sec. 18-191. - Failure of dealer or pet shop to provide adequate care, etc.; penalty. 
    Any dealer or pet shop that fails to adequately house, feed, water, exercise or care for animals in his or its possession or custody as provided for under this chapter shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Such animals shall be subject to seizure and impoundment, and upon conviction of such person the animals may be sold, euthanized, or disposed of as provided by Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.96, for licensed, tagged, or tattooed animals. Such failure shall also constitute grounds for revocation of a permit or certificate of registration after public hearing. Any funds that result from such sale shall be used first to pay the costs of the city for the impoundment and disposition of the animals, and any funds remaining shall be paid to the owner, if known. If the owner is not found, the remaining funds shall be paid into the literary fund. 
(Code 1981, § 6-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.71. 
Sec. 18-192. - Transporting animals; penalty. 
(a)  No owner, railroad or other common carrier when transporting any animal shall allow that animal to be confined in any type of conveyance more than 24 consecutive hours without being exercised, properly rested, fed and watered as necessary for that particular type and species of animal. A reasonable extension of this time shall be permitted when an accident, storm or other act of God causes a delay. Adequate space in the primary enclosure within any type of conveyance shall be provided each animal depending upon the particular type and species of animal. 
(b)  No person shall carry or cause to be carried, in or upon any vehicle, vessel or other conveyance, any animal in a cruel, brutal or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering. 
(c)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.69. 
Sec. 18-193. - Importing or exporting animal, for purpose of sale, without dam. 
    No person shall import into this city, nor export from this city, for the purpose of sale or offering for sale, any dog or cat under the age of eight weeks without its dam. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.69. 
Sec. 18-194. - Sale, etc., of unweaned or certain immature animals; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall sell, raffle, or offer for sale as pets or novelties, or offer or give as a prize, premium, or advertising device any living chicks, ducklings, or other fowl under two months old in quantities of less than six or any unweaned mammalian companion animal or any dog under the age of seven weeks without its dam, or any cat under the age of seven weeks without its queen. Dealers may offer immature fowl, unweaned mammalian companion animals, dogs or cats under the age of seven weeks for sale as pets or novelties with the requirement that prospective owners take possession of the animals only after fowl have reached two months of age, mammalian companion animals have been weaned, and dogs and cats are at least seven weeks of age. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale of an unweaned animal (i) as food for other animals or (ii) with the lactating dam or queen or a lactating surrogate dam or queen that has accepted the animal. 
(b)  A violation of this section is punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.70. 
Sec. 18-195. - Protection of performing animals. 
(a)  No performing animal exhibition or circus, as defined in section 18-6, shall be permitted in which animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical, mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause or is likely to cause physical injury or suffering. All equipment used on such a performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition. 
(b)  This section shall apply to wild animals, as defined in section 18-6, as well as to animals defined in section 18-1. 
(Code 1981, § 6-83) 
Sec. 18-196. - Misrepresentation of animal's condition; penalties. 
(a)  No person shall misrepresent the physical condition of any animal at the animal's sale, trade, delivery, or other method of transfer. For the purpose of this section, misrepresentation shall include selling, trading, delivering or otherwise transferring an animal to another person with the knowledge that the animal has an infection, communicable disease, parasitic infestation, abnormality or other physical defect that is not made known to the person receiving the animal. However, sale of an agricultural animal that has external or internal parasites that are not made known to the person receiving the animal shall not be a violation of this section unless the animal is clinically ill or debilitated due to such parasites at the time of sale, trade, delivery or transfer of the animal. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-84) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.72. 
Sec. 18-197. - Abandonment of animal; penalty. 
    No person shall abandon any animal. Violation of this section is a class 3 misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the release of an animal by its owner to an animal shelter, pound, or humane society establishment. 
(Code 1981, § 6-85) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.73. 
Sec. 18-198. - Procedure for animals left unclaimed with veterinarian or boarding establishment after public notice; lien; sale. 
    Any animal not claimed by its owner from a licensed veterinarian or boarding establishment within 14 days after a letter of notice has been sent to the owner, by the veterinarian or boarding establishment, may be sold by the veterinarian or boarding establishment. The animal may be sold at public or private sale for fair compensation to a person capable of providing care consistent with this chapter. Any expense incurred by the veterinarian or boarding establishment becomes a lien on the animal and the proceeds of the sale shall first discharge this lien. Any balance of the proceeds shall be paid to the owner. If the owner cannot be found within the next ensuing 30 days, the balance shall be paid to the state treasury. If no purchaser is found, the animal may be offered for adoption or euthanized. 
(Code 1981, § 6-86) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.75. 
Sec. 18-199. - Injured or sick animal; action by veterinarian. 
(a)  If a licensed veterinarian is called or by his own action comes upon an animal that is sick or injured and the owner of such animal cannot be immediately located, then the licensed veterinarian, in his professional judgment, may treat, hospitalize or euthanize the animal without the permission from the owner. The veterinarian shall make such reports and keep such records of such sick or injured animals as may be prescribed by the state board of veterinary medicine, including the information required under Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.105(B). 
(b)  In no event shall a licensed veterinarian who has acted in good faith and properly exercised professional judgment regarding an animal be subject to liability for his actions in (i) acting in accordance with subsection (a) of this section or (ii) reporting cases of suspected cruelty to animals. 
(Code 1981, § 6-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.76. 
Sec. 18-200. - Violations of article generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided in other sections of this article, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 6-88) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.128. 
Sec. 18-201. - Complaint of suspected violation; investigation. 
(a)  Upon receiving a complaint of a suspected violation of this article or any law for the protection of domestic animals, any animal control officer, law enforcement officer, or state veterinarian's representative may, for the purpose of investigating the allegations of the complaint, enter upon, during business hours, any business premises, including any place where animals or animal records are housed or kept, of any dealer, pet shop, groomer, or boarding establishment. Upon receiving a complaint of a suspected violation of any law or ordinance regarding care or treatment of animals or disposal of dead animals, any humane investigator may, for the purpose of investigating the allegation of the complaint, enter upon, during business hours, any business premises, including any place where animals or animal records are housed or kept, of any dealer, pet shop, groomer, or boarding establishment. Upon obtaining a warrant as provided for in Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.113, the law enforcement officer, animal control officer, state veterinarian's representative, or humane investigator may enter upon any other premises where the animal or animals described in the complaint are housed or kept. The attorney for the commonwealth and law enforcement officials shall provide such assistance as may be required in the conduct of such investigations. 
(b)  If the investigation discloses that a violation of section 18-190 has occurred, the investigating official shall notify the owner or custodian of the complaint and of what action is necessary to comply with this article. 
(Code 1981, § 6-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.107. 
Sec. 18-202. - Impoundment; disposition of animal. 
    When an animal control officer, humane investigator, law enforcement officer or state veterinarian's representative finds that an apparent violation of this article has rendered an animal in such a condition as to constitute a direct and immediate threat to its life, safety or health which the owner or custodian has failed or refuses to remedy, such animal control officer, humane investigator, law enforcement officer or state veterinarian's representative may impound the animal pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.115, in a facility which will provide the elements of good care as set forth in section 18-190 and shall then proceed to take such steps as are required to dispose of the animal pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.115. 
(Code 1981, § 6-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.108. 
Sec. 18-203. - Impoundment records. 
(a)  The animal control officer or the custodian of the pound, upon taking custody of any animal in the course of his official duties, shall immediately make a record thereof. The record shall include a description of the animal, including color, breed, sex, approximate weight, reason for seizure, location of seizure, the owner's name and address, if known, and all license or other identification numbers, if any. Complete information relating to the disposition of the animal shall be added to the record, immediately after its disposition. 
(b)  Humane societies shall keep accurate records of all animals handled, which records shall include the information required for records kept pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 6-91) 
Sec. 18-204. - Sale or gift of animals released from pound or shelter generally. 
(a)  No animal impounded at the city's pound and not claimed as provided for by law shall be sold or given away other than by sale or gift directly to federal agencies, state-supported institutions, agencies of the commonwealth, agencies of other states or licensed federal dealers, or by delivery to a local humane society shelter or to any person who is a resident of the city and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal. Such animal may also be delivered to any person who proposes to adopt it as a pet and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal; provided that, no more than two animals or a family of animals shall be delivered, during any 30-day period to any one such person. Any proceeds deriving from the gift, sale or delivery of animals pursuant to this subsection shall be paid directly to the city treasurer and no part of such proceeds shall accrue to any individual. 
(b)  The board of directors of an incorporated humane society shall determine the method of disposition of animals released by its animal shelter in accord with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.96. Any proceeds deriving from the gift, sale or delivery of such animal shall be paid directly to the clerk or treasurer of the humane society for the expenses of the society and expenses incident to any agreement concerning the disposing of such animals and no part of such proceeds shall accrue to any individual except for such purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 6-92) 
Sec. 18-205. - Animal control officers and humane investigators; limitations; penalty. 
    No animal control officer, humane investigator, humane society or custodian of any pound or animal shelter shall (i) obtain the release or transfer of an animal by the animal's owner to such animal control officer, humane investigator, humane society or custodian for personal gain or (ii) give or sell or negotiate for the gift or sale to any individual, pet shop, dealer, or research facility of any animal which may come into his custody in the course of carrying out his official assignments. No animal control officer, humane investigator or custodian of any pound or animal shelter shall be granted a dealer's license. Violation of this section shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall preclude any animal control officer or humane investigator from lawfully impounding any animal pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.115. 
(Code 1981, §§ 6-93, 6-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.105. 
Sec. 18-206. - Sale of dogs or cats prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, trade, barter, lease, or display for a commercial purpose any dog or cat on or in any roadside, public right-of-way, parkway, median, park, or recreation area; flea market or other outdoor market; or commercial parking lot, regardless of whether such act is authorized by the landowner. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The display of dogs or cats by or the adoption of dogs or cats from a humane society or private or public animal shelter as those terms are defined in § 3.2-6500; 
(2)  The display of dogs or cats as part of a state or county fair exhibition, 4-H program, or similar exhibition or educational program; 
(3)  The sale, exchange, or trade of dogs that are sold primarily for use in commonly-accepted hunting or livestock farming activities; or 
(4)  A prearranged sale between a dog breeder and a specific individual purchaser. Such prearranged sale shall not take place at a regularly-occurring event such as a flea market or other organized trade venue. 
(Ord. No. 15-64, 10-20-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6508.1. 
Secs. 18-207-18-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RABIES CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Authority of city council to adopt ordinances to prevent spread of rabies, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.100. 

Sec. 18-231. - Rabies inoculation of dogs and domesticated cats; availability of certificate. 
(a)  The owner or custodian of all dogs and domesticated cats four months of age and older shall have them currently vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian or licensed veterinary technician who is under the immediate and direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian on the premises. The supervising veterinarian on the premises shall provide the owner of the dog or the custodian of the domesticated cat with a certificate of vaccination. The owner of the dog or the custodian of the domesticated cat shall furnish within a reasonable period of time, upon the request of an animal control officer, humane investigator, law enforcement officer, state veterinarian's representative, or official of the state department of health, the certificate of vaccination for such dog or cat. The vaccine used shall be licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that species. 
(b)  The certificate provided under this section shall show the date of vaccination, the sex and breed of the dog or cat, the amount and kind of vaccine injection, the method of injection, the weight, color and markings of the dog or cat, and the name of the owner thereof. 
(c)  No person shall present to the city treasurer or any officer or agent of the city such a certificate for a dog or domesticated cat other than that for which it was issued. 
(d)  Any person owning or having in his possession a dog or domesticated cat brought into the city from some other jurisdiction shall have a period of 30 days from the date on which such dog or domesticated cat was brought into the city within which to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1981, §§ 6-106, 6-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.97:1. 
Sec. 18-232. - Emergency ordinance requiring confinement or restraint of dogs and cats when rabid animal at large. 
    When there is sufficient reason to believe that a rabid animal is at large, the city council shall have the power to pass an emergency ordinance, which shall become effective immediately upon passage, requiring owners of all dogs and cats in the city to keep such dogs and cats confined on their premises, unless leashed under restraint of the owner in such a manner that persons or animals will not be subject to the danger of being bitten by the rabid animal. Any such emergency ordinance enacted pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be operative for a period not to exceed 30 days, unless renewed by the city council. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of any such ordinance. 
(Code 1981, §§ 6-107, 6-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.98. 
Sec. 18-233. - Report of existence of rabid animals. 
    Every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal apparently afflicted with rabies shall report immediately to the city health department the existence of such animal, the place where seen, the owner's name, if known, and the symptoms suggesting rabies. 
(Code 1981, § 6-108) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.98. 
Sec. 18-234. - Confinement or destruction of dogs or cats showing signs of or suspected of having rabies. 
    Dogs or cats showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies shall be immediately taken into custody by the animal control officer or a police officer and confined under competent observation for such a time as may be necessary to determine a diagnosis. If confinement is impossible or impracticable, such dog or cat shall be euthanized by one of the methods approved by the state veterinarian as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.96. 
(Code 1981, §§ 6-109, 6-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.98. 
Sec. 18-235. - Euthanization of dog or cat exposed to rabies. 
    Any dog or cat, for which no proof of current rabies vaccination is available, and which is exposed to rabies through a bite, or through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane, by all animal believed to be afflicted with rabies, shall be confined in a pound, kennel or enclosure approved by the health department for a period not to exceed six months at the expense of the owner; however, if this is not feasible, the dog or cat shall be euthanized by one of the methods approved by the state veterinarian as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.96. A rabies vaccination shall be administered prior to release. Inactivated rabies vaccine may be administered at the beginning of confinement. Any dog or cat so bitten, or exposed to rabies through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane with proof of a valid rabies vaccination, shall be revaccinated immediately following the bite and shall be confined to the premises of the owner, or other site as may be approved by the local health department, for a period of 90 days. 
(Code 1981, §§ 6-110, 6-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.98. 
Sec. 18-236. - Confinement or destruction of animal which has bitten person. 
    At the discretion of the health director, any animal which has bitten a person shall be confined under competent observation for ten days, unless the animal develops active symptoms of rabies or expires before that time; provided, that a seriously injured or sick animal may be humanely euthanized as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.96, and its head sent to the state division of consolidated laboratory services of the state department of general services, or the local health department, for evaluation. 
(Code 1981, § 6-111) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.98. 
Sec. 18-237. - Concealing or harboring animal to prevent its destruction or confinement under article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or harbor any dog, cat or other animal to keep the dog, cat or other animal from being destroyed or confined in accord with this article. 
(Code 1981, §§ 6-112, 6-113) 
Secs. 18-238-18-244. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BREEDING AND TRANSFER OF DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 18-245. - Animal ownership defined; application. 
    Animal owner, for purposes of this section, shall mean any person harboring, keeping or providing care or sustenance to a domestic animal on property that he/she owns, rents or leases. Such a person shall be subject to the requirements of this article. This definition does not apply to government agencies, animal rescue organizations which have demonstrated to the animal control officer or his/her designee that they have implemented an ongoing spay/neuter program as well as an adoption program, or humane societies or societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals if such societies are incorporated under the provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 18-246. - Unsupervised cats; penalty. 
(a)  No person who owns a cat over the age of four months shall cause, permit, or allow such animal to be in a public place unsupervised, unless the cat is sterilized. The term "public place" shall include, but not be limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, parks, carnivals, shopping malls, flea markets, and areas in front of commercial establishments. This requirement applies to all cats that are not sterilized, whether or not their owner(s) have obtained breeding permits pursuant to section 18-247 herein. 
(b)  The failure to comply with any of the requirements mentioned in subsection (a) is an infraction punishable by a $50.00 fine for the first occurrence, $75.00 for the second occurrence and $100.00 for each subsequent occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 18-247. - Breeding permit. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow any dog or cat owned, harbored or kept by such person within the City of Petersburg to breed without first obtaining a breeding permit, as described below. The term "breeding permit" means a written authorization, issued annually by the animal control officer, giving its lawful holder permission to breed a dog or a cat. 
(b)  Each breeding permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed annually before its expiration date. Each applicant for such a permit shall pay an annual fee of $100.00 per dog or cat. A separate permit must be obtained for each owned dog or cat which is allowed to breed. The permit fee shall be due on or before January 1 st and not later than January 31 st of each year. The fee for any permit purchased after June 30 th of any year shall be $50.00. 
(c)  The animal control officer shall administer an animal breeding permit program to allow the breeding of dogs and cats consistent with criteria and according to procedures established by the animal control officer. Under no circumstances shall such a permit be issued to a person who has been convicted of animal cruelty or neglect. In addition to the criteria and procedures established by the animal control officer pursuant to this subsection, all breeding permits shall contain the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The owner of a female dog or cat shall not allow the whelping of more than one litter per animal in any household within the permit year. Notwithstanding this provision, the animal control officer is hereby authorized, upon application of a permittee, to allow on a one time basis the whelping of up to two dog or cat litters per breeding animal within any domestic household within a permit year, if the permittee establishes, according to regulations promulgated by the animal control officer, that such breeding is required to protect the health of the animal or to avert a substantial economic loss to the permittee. In the event that a permittee is forced to euthanize a litter of dogs or cats for medical reasons, the animal control officer may authorize the whelping of one additional litter of dogs or cats within the same permit year by the permittee without penalty; 
(2)  No offspring may be sold, adopted, bartered, or otherwise transferred, whether for compensation or otherwise, until it has reached the age of at least seven weeks; 
(3)  No offspring may be sold, adopted, bartered or otherwise transferred until immunized against common diseases. The sale, adoption, bartering or transfer of a dog or cat shall include a statement signed by the seller or adopter attesting to the signatory's knowledge of the animal's health, and the animal's immunization history; 
(4)  Any holder of a breeding permit who advertises to the public the availability of any dog or cat for sale, adoption, or transfer, whether for compensation or otherwise, must prominently display the permit number in any such advertisement. Further, the breeding permit holder must provide the permit number to any person who purchases, adopts or receives any animal from the permit holder and include the permit number on any receipt of sale or transfer document; 
(5)  Commercial establishments that sell dogs or cats bred within the City of Petersburg shall prominently display the breeding permit number(s) of the breeder(s) whose dogs and cats are sold in said establishments and any other pertinent information required by the animal control officer. Commercial establishments that sell dogs and cats which were not bred within the City of Petersburg shall prominently display the name and address of the breeder(s) of such dogs and cats and any other pertinent information required by the animal control officer 
(6)  Any breeding permit holder selling or otherwise transferring a dog or a cat, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall submit to the city's animal control officer the name, address and telephone number of the animal's new owner within five days from the sale or other transfer on a city approved form; and 
(7)  Any breeding permit holder or commercial establishment which sells or otherwise transfers a dog or cat, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall provide to the new animal owner city application(s) for a license and breeder's permit as well as written information regarding the license and permit requirements of the City of Petersburg applicable to such animal. 
(d)  The following animals are exempt from the breeding permit requirements: 
(1)  Dogs documented as having been appropriately trained and actively used by law enforcement agencies for law enforcement and rescue activities; 
(2)  Dogs documented as guide, signal, or service dogs pursuant to state law; 
(3)  Dogs and cats certified by a licensed veterinarian as not being suitable subjects for spaying and neutering due to medical reasons; 
(4)  Dogs and cats under the care of governmental animal control agencies; animal rescue organizations which have demonstrated to the animal control officer that they have implemented an ongoing spay/neuter plan, as well as an adoption plan; or humane societies or societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals, if such societies are incorporated under the provisions of Virginia law; and 
(5)  Dogs documented as enrolled in a guide dog, signal dog or service dog breeding program administered by a person licensed under state law. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 18-248. - Penalties for breeding violations. 
(a)  Any cat or dog owner in violation of the breeding permit requirements of section 18-247 shall correct the violations by (i) having the dog or cat sterilized and providing to the animal control officer conclusive proof thereof; (ii) authorizing the animal control officer, when the dog or cat is in the custody of that officer, to have the animal sterilized at the owner's expense prior to the animal's release; or (iii) obtaining a breeding permit as required by section 18-247. No animal in violation of this article in the custody of the animal control officer shall be released to its owner until the violation is corrected. Should the owner fail, after receiving reasonable notice, to correct a violation as provided above, there shall be imposed a $150.00 fine on such dog or cat owner. 
(b)  The animal control officer may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this section upon a finding that the permit holder has violated its terms and conditions. Such a finding shall be made only after giving the owner of the animal in question notice of the violations and an opportunity to explain such violations to the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 18-249. - Sale, adoption and other transfers of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Any person who offers or provides, whether for compensation or otherwise, any dog or cat for sale or other type of transfer, shall disclose to the transferee information regarding the license and permit requirements of the City of Petersburg applicable to the transferred animal. 
(b)  No person shall present any dog or cat for sale, adoption, barter, or exchange, whether for compensation or otherwise, in any public place, without first obtaining a breeding permit pursuant to section 18-247. This prohibition shall not apply to: 
(1)  Government agencies; nonprofit animal rescue organizations exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3); or humane societies or societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals if such societies are incorporated under the provisions of state law; 
(2)  Permitted dog or cat shows; 
(3)  Permitted pet stores which sell or otherwise transfer dogs or cats, whether for compensation or otherwise, within the store; or 
(4)  Any dog or cat that has been sterilized. 
(c)  No person shall give away any dog or cat as a prize or as an inducement to enter into any contest, lottery, drawing, game, or competition. 
(d)  No person shall give away any dog or cat as an inducement to enter a place of business, or to enter into a business arrangement. 
(e)  No person shall sell, barter, exchange or offer for adoption, whether for compensation or otherwise, any dog or cat to any minor under the age of 18 years, without the written permission of one of the minor's parents or legal guardians. 
(f)  Commercial establishments that sell dogs and cats that were not bred within the City of Petersburg shall prominently display the name and address of the breeder(s) of such dogs and cats and any other pertinent information required by the animal control officer. 
(g)  The failure to display the breeding permit number or include it in any advertisement for sale, adoption or other transfer of dogs and cats is an infraction punishable by a $50.00 fine for the first occurrence, $75.00 for the second occurrence and $100.00 for each subsequent occurrence. 
(h)  The possession of a valid permit under this section of the Code does not entitle the permit holder to engage in an activity that is otherwise prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, 2-4-2003) 
ARTICLE VIII. - SEVERABILITY 

Sec. 18-250. - Severability. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of Articles I, II, III, IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of these articles shall be declared void, ineffective or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such voidness, ineffectiveness or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this chapter, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation herein of any such void, ineffective or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. No. 13-32, § 5, 5-7-2013) 
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07-53, adopted June 19, 2007, amended chapter 22 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 22, §§ 22-1-22-3, 22-31-22-37, 22-56-22-65, 22-91-22-93, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from § 9-1, 9-16-9-21, 9-31-9-40, 9-81-9-83, 9-126 of the 1981 Code; Ord. No. 97-122, § 21-44.1, 9-16-1997; Ord. No. 00-70, 10-17-2000. 
Charter reference- Adoption of ordinances or codes by reference, § 1-6. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance relating to building lines or setback lines saved from repeal, § 1-7(9); environment, ch. 50; fire prevention and protection, ch. 54; floods, ch. 58; health and sanitation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 82; solid waste, ch. 94; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; street numbers for buildings, § 98-91 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 114; waterways, ch. 122. 
State Law reference- Access to and use of buildings by handicapped, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-517; removal, repair, etc., of buildings and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-906 et seq.; light, ventilation, sanitation and use and occupancy of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1117; limitation of prosecutions of building code violations, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-8; Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97; effect of building code on other building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 36-98; enforcement of building code, appeals from decisions of local building department, inspection of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 36-105; voluntary apprenticeship, Code of Virginia, § 40.1-117 et seq.; contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1100 et seq.; local licensing of certain contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1117. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
    In order to preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and to assure the proper construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures and their service equipment within the city, the enactment of this chapter is deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-2. - Violations of chapter. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter, including any portion of the building code adopted by section 22-31 below, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any owner or any other person, firm or corporation convicted of such a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. In addition, each day the violation continues after conviction or the court ordered abatement period has expired shall constitute a separate offense. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five to ten years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter, after having been at least twice previously convicted, shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten days and a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $5,000.00, either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(b)  The imposition of a penalty for a violation of this chapter or any lawful order issued hereunder shall not preclude the city attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation or prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or stop an illegal act, conduct, business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises. 
(c)  Any owner or any other person, firm or corporation, or agent who shall retaliate against a tenant by increasing rent or decreasing services or by terminating a rental agreement because the tenant reported a violation of the provisions of this chapter to either the building code official or the building maintenance code official or because the tenant cooperated with either the building code official or the building maintenance code official in an investigation shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be punished as provided in this chapter. 
(d)  As an alternative to the criminal penalties provided in section 22-2(a) of this chapter, and in addition to any other remedy allowed by law, the following violations of the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended, or any successor thereto, are hereby declared to be civil violations and are subject to the schedule of civil penalties provided for in subsection (e) of this section: 
(1)  Violations of Section 302.4 of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(2)  Violations of Section 305.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(e)  Any person who, having been served with a notice of violation to abate or remedy a violation of a kind provided in subparagraph (d) of this section, shall fail to comply with such order within ten days after such service or shall continue the violation with respect to the violation named in such notice shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for the initial summons or violation, and $150.00 for each additional summons or violation. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. Specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, and a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $3,000.00. Utilization of the civil penalty provided by this subsection shall preclude criminal sanctions for the same offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-3. - Notice of order to abate violations of chapter. 
    The building code official, building maintenance code official and any of their technical assistants who are assisting them in the administration and enforcement of the USBC shall have the authority to serve a written notice of violation and to order the abatement of such violation. Such written notices of violation and orders to abate violations of this chapter and the USBC shall be served by delivering a copy to the person by mail to the last known post office address, or by delivering it in person, or by delivering it to and leaving it in the possession of any person in charge of the premises, or by posting it in a conspicuous place at the entrance door or access way if such persons cannot be found on the premises. The building code official and the building maintenance code official are each hereby granted the authority to issue a summons to the general district court to any person in the city who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such notice of violation or order to abate such violations. The building code official and the building maintenance code official are further authorized to issue a civil summons or other civil process to any person in the city who shall fail to obey a lawful order contained in such notice of violation or order to abate such violations for those violations specifically identified as civil violations in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-4. - Abatement by city; assessment of costs. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, wherever this chapter authorizes the city to take action to remedy, abate, repair, remove or take other action to correct a condition which exists on property located within the city, in violation of a provision of this chapter, the costs and expenses incurred by the city in taking such action shall be assessed and billed to, and paid by, the owner of the property. The city may take such action through any employees or agents, subject to applicable public procurement laws. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 143(g) of this chapter, amounts in excess of $200.00 which have been assessed and billed to a property owner and which remain unpaid for 30 days shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a priority with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Articles 3 (Section 58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (Section 58.1-3895 et seq.) of Chapter 39, Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. The city may waive such liens in order to facilitate a sale of such property; however, such liens may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner and who has no business association with the owner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property at the time the liens were imposed. 
(c)  The remedies set forth within this chapter may be cumulative and shall be in addition to any other remedies that may be authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-5. - Conflict of chapter with certain ordinances. 
    Ordinances or parts thereof in force at the time this chapter shall take effect and inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed; provided, however, that the zoning ordinance shall in no way be nullified by the provisions of this chapter, except as may be specifically required by the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code as hereinafter adopted. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 22-6-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-31. - Uniform Statewide Building Code adopted. 
    The Uniform Statewide Building Code, including the property maintenance provisions, as adopted and promulgated by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia (1950), § 36-98, as amended, along with its associated referenced standards hereby are adopted by the City of Petersburg as a comprehensive body of law which is and shall hereafter be cited as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, USBC, or the Building Code of the City of Petersburg. Pursuant to Code of Virginia (1950), § 1-220, as amended, all future additions and amendments to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be automatically adopted into City Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-32. - Availability of copies. 
    Copies of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code adopted by this article may be obtained at the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development, Richmond, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-33. - Responsibility of building code official and building maintenance code official. 
(a)  The building code official shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all regulations adopted as part of the building code of the city. The building maintenance code official shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the property maintenance provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. The building code official and building maintenance code official shall each have the qualifications, experience and certifications required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended, and shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  The building code official and building maintenance code official shall be responsible for the appointment of technical assistants and other employees in order to assist them in the administration and enforcement of the USBC. Such technical assistants and employees shall have the qualifications, experience and certifications required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended. 
(c)  The building code official and the building maintenance code official are authorized to establish regulations and procedures as required to aid in the implementation and enforcement of the USBC. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-34. - Restrictions on employees. 
    No official or employee connected with the division of code enforcement, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this chapter, shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or in the making of plans or specifications therefore, unless he is the sole owner of such building. No such official or employee shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the best interest of the division of code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-35. - Annual written report. 
    The building code official and the building maintenance code official shall submit to the city manager, in the month of July of each year, a joint written statement of the operations of the city's division of code enforcement during the previous fiscal year and shall forward a copy of such report to the city council and the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development. Such report shall set forth, in concise tabular form, at least the following information: 
(1)  Number of each type or kind of permit issued. 
(2)  Number of plan reviews conducted. 
(3)  Number of inspections made. 
(4)  Number of certificates of occupancy issued. 
(5)  Number of complaints of violations received. 
(6)  Number of violations found. 
(7)  Number of notices of violations issued. 
(8)  Number of appeals to the board of building code appeals. 
(9)  Number of modifications issued by the board of building code appeals. 
(10)  Number of modifications granted by the building code official. 
(11)  Total amount of fees collected. 
(12)  Total amount of fees refunded. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-36. - Fee schedules. 
    As provided for by Code of Virginia (1950), § 36-105, as amended, a fee schedule, which shall include, but not be limited to, fees for plan examination, permits, inspections and appeals shall be established and amended by the city manager with the approval of the city council. Fee schedules shall be published and available to the public from the office of the clerk of council and the city's division of code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 22-37-22-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 22-46. - Notice of violation-Failure to comply. 
    If any person fails to comply with a properly issued notice of violations, either the building code official or building maintenance code official is authorized by the city to obtain a summons or warrant for failure to correct the violation(s) as allowed by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-47. - Refusal to issue certificate of occupancy. 
    The building code official shall have the authority to refuse a certificate of occupancy to any person who fails to correct any violation of this chapter within the time prescribed in a written notice from the building code official. If such violation shall continue beyond the time specified in said notice, the building code official shall have authority to revoke all licenses and permits of such person. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-48. - Revocation of certificate of occupancy. 
    The building maintenance code official shall have the authority to revoke a permanent or temporary certificate of occupancy for the repeated failure to correct property maintenance violations. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-49. - Emergency repairs. 
    The building maintenance code official shall have the authority to make emergency repairs to existing structures as expeditiously as possible, and bring an action against the responsible party to recover the necessary costs incurred for the provision of public emergency services reasonably required to abate any such unsafe structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-50. - Public removal. 
    Whenever the owner of a structure fails to comply with the requirements of the notice of unsafe structure, the building maintenance code official may cause the structure to be razed or removed. If the unsafe structure presents an imminent and immediate threat to life or property, then the building maintenance code official may abate, raze, or remove such unsafe structure, and bring an action against the responsible party to recover the necessary costs incurred for the provision of public emergency services reasonably required to abate any such unsafe structure. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 22-51-22-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 22-61. - Requisite permits and fees. 
(a)  Application for any permits required pursuant to the USBC ("requisite permit") shall be made to the building code official. At the time an application or other request for approval is submitted to the city, it shall be accompanied by the required fees and charges as designated in the most recent fee schedule approved by city council. Fees shall be made payable to the collector of city taxes. No requisite permit shall be issued until all required fees have been paid. 
(b)  The fee for issuance of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall have added to it any surcharge levied by the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Code of Virginia (1950), § 36-137, as amended, as set forth within the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, which surcharge shall be remitted to the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development on a quarterly basis. 
(c)  If any person commences any work on a building or structure before obtaining the necessary permit from the city, he shall be subject to the penalty prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 22-62. - Building valuations. 
(a)  The owner or his duly authorized agent shall, upon making application for a building permit, furnish the building code official with his best estimate of the total cost of the construction. Upon the completion of the work, the owner, or his duly authorized agent, shall report to the building code official on a form furnished by the division of code enforcement the final total cost of construction, including heating, plumbing and lighting of said structure, alteration, addition, improvement or repair. This final cost shall be submitted prior to receiving the certificate of occupancy for the structure. 
(b)  Total cost of construction is defined as the actual cost incurred by the owner, all contractors, subcontractors and other parties for labor, material, equipment, profit, and incidental expenses for the entire project. This does not include the cost of design services unless those services are included in a construction contract. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-63. - Demolition permits. 
    A demolition permit shall carry with it the following requirements: 
(a)  Demolition projects shall be commenced without undue delay and shall be diligently carried on to satisfactory completion and, in any event, shall be completed within 90 days from the date the permit is issued. 
(b)  When a building has been demolished and no building operation has been projected or approved, the vacant lot shall be cleared of all rubbish and materials, and all excavations shall be filled to existing grade at the original building site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. The lot shall be maintained free from the accumulation of rubbish and all other unsafe or hazardous conditions which endanger the life or health of the public; and provision shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water or damage to any foundation on the premises or the adjoining property. 
(c)  All sewer lines or connections must be permanently sealed by plugging them with concrete or concrete mortar, and all gas, water and electric services shall be disconnected at the property lines. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of every person who shall make contracts for the demolition of buildings for which a permit is required to give good and sufficient bond as required by section 22-106 herein. 
(e)  It is required that the division of code enforcement be notified upon completion of the demolition project in order that the premises be inspected for compliance with the above requirements. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-64. - Master tradesman in control of work. 
    Where any electrical, plumbing, mechanical, gas or other trades work requiring a permit is being done, a master tradesman in the appropriate trade who holds a valid and current trades card recognized by the Commonwealth of Virginia, shall at all times be in control of the work being performed. Homeowners are exempt if they comply with section 22-101 of the City Code and demonstrate a working knowledge of the trade being performed. The building code official may require a homeowner to obtain the services of a master tradesman where work has been repeatedly rejected for non-compliance. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-65. - Building code official may refuse permits for non-compliance. 
    If any contractor fails to comply with the rules and regulations of this article or any other rules and regulations governing the work which from time to time may be enacted by the city council, then he shall be notified in writing by the building code official wherein the rules and regulations are not being observed, and if after the notice has been sent to the contractor, a reoccurrence of noncompliance to the rules and regulations exists, the building code official shall file an official complaint with the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation and the Virginia Board for Contractors and may, after consultation with the city attorney, refuse any permits for future work to be done by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-66. - When issuance prohibited. 
    No permit shall be issued to any person while he refuses to comply with any lawful requirements of the city's division of code enforcement nor while he refuses to pay any fees or charges lawfully assessed against him by the city's division of code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-67. - Permits not transferable; responsibility for work. 
    No work authorized by a permit shall be undertaken except by the person to whom such permit is issued or by authorized persons in his employ. The person in whose name the permit is issued shall assume complete responsibility for the work. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-68. - Permits and inspections in historical areas within the city. 
(a)  No permit required under this article shall be issued for any building or structure subject to view from any public street, right-of-way, or place within a historic area established pursuant to article 35 of the city's zoning ordinance, as amended, until the zoning administrator has certified to the building code official that such exterior alteration either does not require the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to article 35, section 6 of the city's zoning ordinance, or that such certificate has been issued by the architectural review board or, on appeal, by the city council. 
(b)  No final inspection involving a permit required under this article for any building or structure subject to view from any public street, right-of-way, or place within a historic area established pursuant to article 35 of the city's zoning ordinance, as amended, or any certificate of occupancy for such building or structure, for which a certificate of appropriateness has been approved by the architectural review board or, on appeal, by the city council, shall be approved by the building code official until the zoning administrator has inspected the exterior alterations covered by the permit or certificate of occupancy to determine whether they comply with the applicable provisions of the certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-69. - Miscellaneous conditions of permits-Curb, gutter and sidewalk construction required. 
(a)  Before any building permit is issued for the erection of a building or the alteration of a building which will increase the fair market value of the building by more than 50 percent, the applicant shall be required to provide for the installation of, at his own expense, the curbs, gutters and sidewalks, where they do not exist, in the streets abutting the property subject to the building permit. The installation of the curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall conform to the applicable requirements of the City Code. The above-mentioned values shall be ascertained by the city assessor and shall be computed as of the time of application. This section shall not apply when curb, gutter and sidewalk construction is required by any other law of the city. 
(b)  The director of public works may waive the application of this section whenever he finds that curb, gutter or sidewalk construction will not be compatible with the character of the neighborhood or serve a substantial useful purpose. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-70. - Inspections under building code generally. 
(a)  Either the building code official or one or more of his certified technical assistants, or a third party designated by the building code official shall, upon notification from the permit holder or such holder's agent, make the following inspections of buildings and such other inspections as may be required under the provisions of the USBC, and shall either approve that portion of the work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or such holder's agent where such work fails to comply with the USBC or Building Code of the City of Petersburg: 
(1)  Inspection of footing excavations and reinforcement material for concrete footings prior to the placement of concrete. 
(2)  Inspection of foundation systems during phases of construction necessary to assure compliance with the building code. 
(3)  Inspection of structural members and fasteners (framing) prior to concealment. 
(4)  Inspection of electrical, mechanical and plumbing materials and systems prior to concealment. 
(5)  Inspection of energy conservation material (insulation) prior to concealment. 
(6)  Final inspection to be made and approved after the building, or portion thereof to be occupied under a temporary certificate of occupancy, is ready for occupancy. 
The building code official may designate additional inspections and tests for the above enumerated items to be conducted during the construction or repair of a structure and so notify the permit holder. 
(b)  No work shall be done on any part of a building or structure beyond the point indicated above in each successive inspection, without first verifying that either the building code official or at least one of his technical assistants has approved the work in place. 
(c)  No reinforcing steel, structural framework, plumbing, electrical wiring, gas piping, standpipe or sprinkler system piping, ductwork, or required insulation or fire-proofing material shall be covered or concealed in any manner whatsoever, without first verifying that such work or materials have been inspected and approved by an inspector employed by the city authorized to perform such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-71. - Plumbing inspections. 
(a)  Inspections of plumbing work covered by the provisions of the USBC and required under this section shall be performed by a certified plumbing inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or such holder's agent. Such inspector shall either approve that portion of the plumbing work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or such holder's agent wherein such work fails to comply with the USBC. 
(b)  Completion of a final inspection of the plumbing system within a building shall not constitute final approval of such system where sanitary sewer or septic tank system connections have not been inspected and approved, or where the public sanitary sewer serving the premises has not been accepted for service by the department of public works 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-72. - Electrical inspections. 
(a)  Inspections of electrical work covered by the provisions of the USBC and required under this section shall be performed by a certified electrical inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or such holder's agent. Such inspector shall either approve that portion of the electrical work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or holder's agent wherein such work fails to comply with the USBC. 
(b)  As a minimum, the following inspections of electrical work shall be required. 
(1)  Rough inspection. To be made after wiring and electrical equipment has been installed but not yet covered or concealed. 
(2)  Service inspection. To be made after the electrical work is ready to be energized. The certificate of inspection provided for in section 22-73 shall be based on this inspection. 
(3)  Final inspection. To be made after all electrical work, including the installation of all electrical fixtures has been completed. The certificate of inspection provided for in section 22-73 below shall be based on this inspection. 
(c)  Additional inspections may be required by the electrical inspector where, in such inspector's judgment, such inspections are necessary because of the scope or complexity of the electrical work to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-73. - Certificate of electrical inspection. 
    The certificate of inspection required by the building code shall be issued by an electrical inspector. Notice of the issuance of such certificate shall be furnished to the electric power company providing service to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-74. - Mechanical inspections. 
(a)  Inspections of mechanical work covered by the provisions of the USBC and required under this section shall be performed by a certified mechanical inspector, upon notification from the permit holder or such holder's agent. Such inspector shall either approve that portion of the mechanical work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or such holder's agent wherein such work fails to comply with the building regulations. 
(b)  Additional inspections may be required by a mechanical inspector where, in such inspector's judgment, such inspections are necessary because of the scope or complexity of the mechanical work to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-75. - Certificate of mechanical inspection for gas piping. 
    A mechanical inspector or plumbing inspector shall issue a certificate of inspection after a final inspection has determined that all gas piping on any premises has been found to be in compliance with the building regulations. Notice of the issuance of such certificate shall be furnished to the gas company providing service to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-76. - Inspection and approval of electrical and gas installations prerequisite to service. 
    It shall be unlawful for any public utility company to furnish electricity or gas and to make or permit to be made any connections with its electric or gas supply lines to any building, unless such electrical or gas piping installation in such building has been inspected and a certificate of inspection has been issued, as provided for in this division, or to reconnect such services when they have been disconnected for a period of 90 days or more, until a permit has been obtained for such reinspection, and the electrical or gas installation has been reinspected and approved by an authorized city inspector. If such public utility company shall disconnect its electric supply lines from the building upon the request of the owner of such building, for the purpose of performing electrical work in or upon such building, such company shall not reconnect its electric supply lines until such electrical work has been inspected and approved by a city electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-77. - Notification or request for inspection; inspector's access. 
    It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit has been issued under the several provisions of the building code to arrange for each inspection as may be required in this division. Such person may designate an agent in his or her employ to notify an appropriate inspector that specific construction work is ready for inspection. Receipt of such notification or request for a specific type of inspection shall be taken to mean that such work to be inspected has been completed to the degree required for such inspection, and that reasonable access to the work has been provided to the inspector. Reasonable access for inspection of an attic space shall be taken to mean the placement of a ladder to access hatches, unless a permanent means for such access has been installed. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-78. - Service charge for additional inspections due to faulty work, premature inspection requests, etc. 
    Whenever the building code official, certified electrical inspector, certified plumbing inspector or certified mechanical inspector shall determine that inspections, in addition to those required in this division, are necessary, due to the failure of a contractor to properly correct faulty work, or where a contractor has requested an inspection before the work to be inspected has been completed to the degree required, or where the inspector cannot obtain reasonable access to the work to be inspected, the inspector shall assess a service charge. Such charge shall be chargeable to the holder of the permit covering such work and shall be paid to the collector of city taxes prior to final approval of such work. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 22-79. - Inspections in addition to those required by division. 
    The building code official shall prescribe such inspections, in addition to those provided for in this division, as may be necessary to secure compliance with the USBC, the Virginia Industrialized Building and Manufactured Home Safety Regulations or its successor, the zoning provisions of the City Code and such other regulations as shall properly fall within the enforcement responsibility of the division of codes compliance. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 22-80-22-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 22-91. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a board of building code appeals in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), § 36-105, as amended, and pursuant to USBC, Part I, Chapter 1, Section 119, as amended. It shall have such powers and duties as set forth in the USBC and the Virginia Fire Protection Code, as amended from time to time. The board shall have the power to set time and place for meetings. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-92. - Appointment. 
    Board members shall be selected by city council on the basis of their ability to render fair and competent decisions regarding application of the code. The board shall consist of five members and three alternates. Members shall be qualified in one of building related trades as directed by USBC, Part I, Chapter 1, Section 119, as amended from time to time, to the extent such persons are available. Members and alternate members of the board shall be appointed to serve for a term of four years and shall remain in office until their successors are appointed. They shall be appointed in accordance with the USBC. No member shall be appointed to serve more than two consecutive four-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-93. - Expert opinions on technical matters. 
    On any appeal case forwarded to the board established by this article, the chairperson shall have the authority to secure expert opinion from any recognized person, authority, or agency on any technical matter relevant to the subject of the appeal. Nominal fees or stipends shall be authorized to be paid by the city for such purposes in any amount not to exceed a total of $100.00 in any particular appeal case. Any expert opinion secured by the board under this section shall be given during the conduct of the public hearing required in the USBC and shall be made part of the record of proceedings of the board. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-94. - Application for appeal; filing fee. 
    Applications for appeal to the board shall be made at the office of the division of code compliance and shall be accepted upon proper completion and payment of a filing fee of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 22-95-22-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONTRACTOR AND BONDING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-101. - Applicability of article provisions to homeowners. 
    Nothing contained within this article shall prevent any homeowner from construction, repair, improvements, or re-improvements on his own residence or a residence of his immediate family, provided the owner does the work himself or with his own employees and the homeowner complies with the requirements of Code of Virginia (1950), §§ 54.1-1100 and 54.1-1101, as amended, and signs an owner/builder affidavit as provided by the city's division of code enforcement when obtaining a permit. This provision does not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, neither is it to be construed as exempting any property owner from obtaining a permit and having the work inspected nor from paying the required fees. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-102. - Required registration by contractors; information required. 
    Every contractor, builder or subcontractor who desires to make contracts for the erection, construction, alteration, addition or repair of buildings, structures or service equipment located therein on any premises in the city shall register annually with the building code official. Such registration shall be renewed not later than June 30 of each year and shall not be renewable until the contractor has paid all applicable city business license fees for such year. Such registration shall be recorded on a form provided by the building code official. Information required shall include: 
(1)  Name of the contractor including proprietary or corporate identification if any. 
(2)  Current business address and telephone number. 
(3)  Jurisdiction in the state in which a current business license has been issued. 
(4)  Registration number issued by the state registration board for contractors, if any. 
(5)  Type or class of contract services to be performed. 
(6)  Names of persons authorized to apply for and obtain permits for the contractors. 
(7)  Names of persons holding current certificates of qualification as a master electrician or as a master plumber or as a qualified pipe layer, to include the jurisdiction in which such person was examined for qualification. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-103. - Expiration of registration; invalidation. 
    Registration of any contractor, builder or subcontractor pursuant to section 22-102 herein shall expire as of June 29 of the year following the year in which such registration was filed. The building official shall have the power to declare invalid any registration of any contractor at any such time that he shall determine that: 
(1)  There exists a false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application upon which such registration was based; 
(2)  A contractor has failed to renew his business license, state registration, or local registration. The failure of any contractor to accomplish such renewal shall be sufficient reason for the building official to deny issuance of permits to such contractor until such renewal is accomplished. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-104. - Licenses required. 
    Notwithstanding section 22-102 herein, all contractors shall, in order to obtain permits in the city, provide the building code official with proof of licensure by the state board of contractors and proof of having obtained a business license either in the city or other locality unless the contractor is headquartered in a locality without business licensing provisions; provided, however, that the contractor shall obtain a city business license if the total revenue for work done in the city shall exceed $15,000.00 in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-105. - Use of name or license by other persons prohibited. 
    No licensed contractor shall allow the use of his name or license by any person, directly or indirectly, either for the purpose of obtaining a permit, or to do any work under his license, unless the person is regularly employed by the licensed contractor. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-106. - Surety bond required. 
    It shall further be the duty of every such person holding a Class "C" or Class "B" contractor's license to give good and sufficient bond in the sum of $5,000.00 to be approved by the city attorney or his designee, conditioned to conform to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code regulations, the regulations of this Section, and other ordinances of the city in reference to buildings. Class "A" contractors are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-107. - Bond renewal. 
    The city attorney or his designee, through the division of code enforcement, shall require that all bonds as required by section 22-106 above shall be renewed upon the expiration of the term for which they may be given and the failure on the part of any person to renew such bond immediately upon the expiration of such term shall have the same effect as if no bond had been given. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-108. - Limit of liability. 
    Nothing contained in section 22-106 above shall be construed to limit the liability of the principal obligor in any bond as referred to in such section to the amount named as the penalty therein, either to any person injured or to the city. Nothing contained in such sections shall be construed as recognizing on the part of the city any claim or right of action against the city growing out of this section in favor of any person. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 22-109-22-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL HOUSING INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 22-116. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city council finds that residential rental dwelling units, when not the subject of regular inspections to ensure compliance with applicable occupancy, building maintenance, and property maintenance regulations, may become unsafe, a public nuisance, and unfit for human habitation. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare in residential rental dwelling units located within those areas of the city determined by city council herein to be in need of a special program of inspections of residential rental dwelling units. This special program is designed and intended to prevent property deterioration and neighborhood blight in designated rental inspection districts and to promote safe, decent and sanitary residential rental dwelling units for residents by requiring proper building maintenance and continued compliance with applicable building regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-117. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to residential rental dwelling units located within the designated rental inspection districts identified in section 22-119 of this article and shall further apply to certain structures located outside of such districts but meeting the requirements of section 22-119(b) herein below. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-118. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance is a written document issued by the division of code enforcement confirming that a residential rental dwelling unit has been inspected. A certificate of compliance will be issued after a residential rental dwelling unit has been inspected by the division of code enforcement and has no violations outstanding. Once a certificate of compliance has been issued the residential rental unit may be rented. 
    Dwelling unit. A building or structure or part thereof that is used for a home or residence by one or more persons who maintain a household. 
    Owner. Shall mean the person or persons shown on the current real estate assessment books or current real estate assessment records. An owner shall include the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee or lessee in control of a building or structure. 
    Property. The word "property" shall mean dwelling units which are leased or rented in whole or in part, to tenants for valuable consideration. The word "property" shall include residential rental dwelling units occupied under a lease/purchase agreement. 
    Residential rental dwelling unit. A dwelling unit that is leased or rented to one or more tenants. Residential rental dwelling units shall include, but not be limited to, trailers, mobile homes, and modular homes used for residential rental purposes. Residential rental dwelling units shall not include travel trailers, recreational vehicles, hotel and motel rooms, and state licensed nursing homes, retirement homes or assisted living facilities. However, a dwelling unit occupied in part by the owner thereof, shall not be construed to be a residential rental dwelling unit unless a tenant occupies a part of the residential rental dwelling unit which has its own cooking and sleeping areas, and a bathroom. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-119. - Designation of rental inspection districts. 
(a)  The city council finds that (i) there is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection districts that are designated below, (ii) the residential rental dwelling units within the rental inspection districts that are designated below are either (a) blighted or in the process of deteriorating, or (b) in need of inspection by the division of code enforcement to prevent deterioration, taking into account the number, age and condition of the residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection districts designated below, and (iii) the inspection of residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection districts designated below is necessary to maintain safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants and other residents living in the rental inspections districts designated below. Therefore, the areas described in this section are hereby designated as rental inspection districts as provided by Code of Virginia (1950), § 36-105.1:1, as amended, for the purpose of conducting periodic inspections at specific time intervals in order to determine that the buildings are in compliance with current building code regulations. The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all residential rental dwelling units, whether occupied or not, that are located in the following areas of the city: 
(1)  The ________ Rental Inspection District. There is hereby created a ________ Rental Inspection District with boundaries as follows: all of the land lying and situate in the City of Petersburg bounded on the north by _______, on the south by _______, on the west by _______, and on the east by _______. 
(2)  The ________ Rental Inspection District . There is hereby created a ________ Rental Inspection District with boundaries as follows: all of the land lying and situate in the City of Petersburg bounded on the north by _______, on the south by _______, on the west by _______, and on the east by _______. 
(b)  An individual residential rental dwelling unit outside of the above designated rental inspection districts will be subject to the rental property inspection ordinance based upon a separate finding for each individual dwelling unit by city council that (i) there is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of that individual residential rental dwelling unit; (ii) the individual residential rental dwelling unit is either (a) blighted or (b) in the process of deteriorating; or (iii) there is evidence of violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants living in such individual residential rental dwelling unit. 
(c)  A map showing the rental inspection districts described in section 22-119(a) above is hereby adopted as a part of this article, and shall be available for public inspection in the division of code enforcement office. Said districts are hereinafter referred to collectively as "inspection districts" and individually as an "inspection district." 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-120. - Alteration or expansion of rental inspection districts. 
    City council may alter the boundaries of the rental inspection districts, provide for additional rental inspection district areas, or provide for the inspection of residential rental dwelling units outside of designated rental inspection districts, in compliance with section 22-119(b) above and Code of Virginia (1950), § 36-105.1:1, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-121. - Notification by city to owners of residential rental dwelling units. 
    Upon designation of a rental inspection district by the city council, the building maintenance code official shall give written notice by either personal delivery or first class U.S. mail to all owners of residential rental dwelling units in the designated rental inspection district, or their designated managing agents, and to the owners of any individual dwelling units subject to the rental inspection ordinance, not located in a rental inspection district, or their designated managing agents. The notice shall contain a plain language explanation of the requirements of this article. For purposes of this section, notice sent by the division of code enforcement, by regular first class mail to the last known address of the current owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed compliance with this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-122. - Notification by owners of residential rental dwelling units to city. 
(a)  Within 60 days of the designation of a rental inspection district by the city council, the owners of any residential rental dwelling units in the city's designated rental inspection districts, or their designated managing agents, shall notify the building maintenance code official in writing, of any residential rental dwelling units that they own or manage in any of the city's designated rental inspection districts. Thereafter, the owners of any dwelling units in the city's designated rental inspection district, or their designated managing agents, shall notify the building maintenance code official in writing, when a dwelling unit begins to be used for residential rental purposes at least 60 days prior to the commencement of the use. 
(b)  Within 30 days of the transfer of ownership of any residential rental dwelling unit in the city's designated rental inspection districts, the new owner shall notify the building maintenance code official in writing of his ownership interest in the residential rental dwelling unit. 
(c)  The notifications shall be submitted on information forms provided by the building maintenance code official and shall contain the following information: the address and a brief description of the residential rental dwelling unit; the name, street address and telephone number of the owner of the property; the name, street address and telephone number of the managing agent, if any. The owner or managing agent, or a duly authorized representative acting on behalf of the owner or managing agent, shall complete such forms and return them to the division of code enforcement within the designated time period. 
(d)  Any owner or managing agent of a residential rental dwelling unit or duly authorized representative acting on behalf of the owner or managing agent who fails to comply with the notification requirements of this section or who provides false or misleading information after having been provided with personal or written notice of the notification requirements shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-123. - Inspection of residential rental dwelling units. 
(a)  Initial and periodic inspections. The building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agent, shall, in conjunction with the provisions of this article, proceed to conduct initial and periodic inspections of residential rental dwelling units in the designated rental inspection districts to determine if the dwelling units are being used as residential rental property and for compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such property. 
If a multifamily development has more than ten dwelling units, in the initial and periodic inspections the building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agent, shall inspect only a sampling of dwelling units, of not less than two units and not more than ten percent of the dwelling units, whichever is greater, which includes all of the multifamily buildings that are part of that multifamily development. If the building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agent, determines upon initial or periodic inspection of the sampling of dwelling units in a multifamily development that there are violations of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such development, the division of code enforcement has the authority to inspect as many dwelling units as necessary to enforce the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, in which case the fee, if any, for each dwelling unit inspected shall be prescribed in section 23-36 of this chapter. 
Following the initial inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article, the building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agent, may inspect such unit, not otherwise exempted in accordance with this article, no more than once each calendar year, except as provided under subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  [Outside a designated district.] The building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agent, shall inspect any individual residential rental dwelling unit that is outside a designated rental inspection district within 90 days of the date the residential rental dwelling unit is made subject to this article. 
(c)  Follow-up inspections. Upon inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article, the building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agent, has the authority under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code to require the owner of the dwelling unit to submit to such follow-up inspection of the dwelling unit as the building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agent, deems necessary, until such time as a follow-up inspection reveals that the dwelling unit has been brought into compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants. 
(d)  Scheduling of inspection. Any owner of a residential rental dwelling unit in a rental inspection district who is notified by the division of code enforcement that the unit is subject to inspection under this article shall, within ten days from such notification, contact the division of code enforcement to schedule such inspection. 
(e)  Exemption. After the initial or periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit for compliance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, provided that there are no violations of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such residential rental dwelling unit, the division of code enforcement shall provide, to the owner of such residential rental dwelling unit, an exemption from the rental property inspection ordinance for four years. Upon the sale of a residential rental dwelling unit, the division of code enforcement may perform a periodic inspection, subsequent to such sale. If a residential rental dwelling unit has been issued a certificate of occupancy within the last four years, an exemption shall be granted for a minimum period of four years from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy by the division of code enforcement. If the residential rental dwelling unit becomes in violation of the building code during the exemption period, the division of code enforcement may revoke the exemption previously granted under this section. 
(f)  [Inspection pursuant to complaint.] Nothing in this article shall prohibit an inspection of any residential rental dwelling unit for a possible violation of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code pursuant to a complaint. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-124. - Inspection fees. 
    There shall be an inspection fee paid to cover the cost of the initial, follow-up, and periodic inspections of each residential rental dwelling unit located in those areas of the city covered by this article. For multi-family developments the division of code enforcement shall not charge a fee for more than ten residential rental dwelling units, unless violations of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code are found affecting the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants of such multi-family development, the division of code enforcement may inspect as many residential rental dwelling units as necessary to enforce the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, in which case, the fee shall be based upon a charge per residential rental dwelling unit inspected. The inspection fees will be as established by city council from time to time by resolution and a copy of the schedule of fees will be kept in the office of the division of code enforcement and shall be available for review upon request. No certificate of compliance shall be issued until all inspection fees have been paid and all violations have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-125. - Entry. 
    For the purpose of enforcing provisions of this article, the building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agent, shall have the right to inspect any residential rental dwelling unit within designated areas identified in section 22-119 of this chapter at any reasonable time. No inspection shall be conducted without the consent of the tenant, occupant, property owner or managing agent (if the property owner or managing agent have reserved a right of re-entry in order to inspect the premise) or pursuant to a duly issued administrative inspection warrant or as authorized by other lawful means. In the event the building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agents, shall be denied access to a residential rental dwelling unit, he or she may apply for an administrative inspection warrant in order to gain access to the premises. It shall be a violation of this article for any owner, managing agent, tenant, or other person, to deny the building maintenance code official, or his duly authorized agent, access to any residential rental dwelling unit within the areas covered by this article after the building maintenance code official or his duly authorized agent have obtained an administrative inspection warrant for such residential rental dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-126. - Permits. 
    The owner is responsible for complying with all permit and licensing requirements required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and other ordinances in effect for the City of Petersburg. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-127. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or managing agent to fail to comply with the requirements contained in this article and to fail to comply with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided herein, the penalties imposed for a violation of this article shall be the penalties provided in Code of Virginia (1950), § 36-106, as amended. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate punishable offense. 
(c)  If any violation remains uncorrected at the time of conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation and to bring the property into compliance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-128. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building maintenance code official and his authorized agents are hereby empowered to enforce all of the provisions of this article, to act pursuant to the authority contained herein and to perform all the duties required thereby. The building maintenance code official may establish such administrative procedures as may be necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not, in any way, alter the rights and obligations of landlords and tenants pursuant to the applicable provisions of Chapter 13 (Sections 55-217 et seq.) or Chapter 13.2 (Sections 55-248.2 et seq.) of Title 55 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not alter the duties or responsibilities of the division of code enforcement to enforce the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(d)  Appeals concerning the application of the rental property inspection program shall be heard by the board of building code appeals as provided in sections 22-91 through 22-94 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-129. - Temporary waiver. 
    Any owner or managing agent whose residential rental dwelling unit is inspected and found not to be in compliance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code may petition the building maintenance code official, in writing, for a temporary waiver of compliance. The petition shall be on a form provided by the building maintenance code official and shall contain the information therein requested and which may be reasonably necessary to its decision, and shall include a written statement signed by the applicant, acknowledging the actions needed, specifying the anticipated date of beginning and completion of the work, and if known, the name of the person or company that will perform the work. If the building maintenance code official finds that: 
(a)  The delay in the correction of the violation is reasonable, taking into consideration the availability of qualified persons to do the work and the current work load; and 
(b)  The work can be reasonably undertaken and completed while the premises are occupied or that appropriate provision has been made for housing the tenant elsewhere while the residential rental dwelling unit will not be habitable because of the work of correcting violations; the building maintenance code official may issue a temporary waiver of compliance which will allow a reasonable period of time to achieve compliance. This period shall not be less than 30 days nor more than 60 days. The applicant shall, on or before such date, request an inspection and pay any inspection fee that may be required by section 22-36 of this chapter. 
(c)  No waiver granted under this section shall be valid unless in writing and signed both by the building maintenance code official or his designee and the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-130. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are intended to be severable, and if any such provision be deemed or adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining portions of this article shall remain in full force and effect with their validity unimpaired. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 22-131-22-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BLIGHTED PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - VACANT, ABANDONED AND UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-140. - Vacant building registration. 
(a)  The owner of a building which has been continuously vacant for a period of 12 months or more must register the building with the building code official; provided, that a building shall be deemed "continuously vacant," as that term is used in this subsection, even if it is sporadically or intermittently occupied during the twelve-month period. 
(b)  To register a building, the owner, or the owner's agent for the building, shall provide the following information to the building code official: 
(1)  The address of the vacant building; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and the owner's agent; 
(3)  A detailed statement which estimates how long the building is likely to remain vacant, and the reasons for it remaining vacant during that period; 
(4)  A description of the measures that will be taken while the building is vacant to ensure that the property is maintained in compliance with all applicable building and health codes; 
(5)  Proof that the owner or agent has implemented an on-going rodent abatement and prevention plan for the interior and exterior of the building; and 
(6)  If the building is located in an historic area established pursuant to article 35 of the city's zoning ordinance, as amended, or in any conservation or rehabilitation district established by city council, or in an area that has been declared blighted by city council, a description of the measures that will be taken to ensure that the building does not sustain significant structural damage due to neglect. 
(c)  The building owner shall pay an annual registration fee of $100.00. The fee shall be paid at the time that the building is initially registered. For each subsequent year, or any part of such year, that the building remains continuously vacant, an annual and non-refundable fee of $100.00 shall be paid within 15 days of the anniversary date of the building's initial registration. 
(d)  The building code official shall develop and make available a standardized form for registration. Completed forms shall be filed with and maintained by the building code official. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-38, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 22-141. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Failure to register a vacant building as required by this article shall be a civil violation punishable by a civil penalty of $200.00; provided, that failure to register a vacant building in an historic area established pursuant to article 35 of the city's zoning ordinance, or in a conservation or rehabilitation district established by city council, or in an area that has been designated as blighted by city council, shall be punishable by a civil penalty of $400.00. 
(b)  The building code official shall mail to the owner of a registered vacant building notice of the upcoming anniversary of the initial registration date and of the need to renew the registration of the building if it remains vacant. The notice shall warn the owner that a civil penalty will be imposed pursuant to this section if the owner fails to renew the registration within 15 days of the anniversary of the building's initial registration. 
(c)  Notice of the imposition of a civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be mailed to the owner, at the address to which property tax notices are sent, at least 30 days prior to the imposition of the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-38, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 22-142. - Sale of abandoned real estate. 
(a)  Upon a finding by the court, on real estate with an assessed value of $50,000.00 or less located within the city, that: 
(1)  Any taxes on such real estate are delinquent on December 31 following the second anniversary of the date on which such taxes have become due, and 
a.  The land or structure on it has been declared a nuisance by the building code official due to unresolved code violations, and 
b.  The owner of record of the property has failed to abate the nuisance after proper notice has been given by code enforcement officials, and 
c.  The city has taken steps to abate the nuisance condition and has placed a lien on the property for the cost of such abatement, and the lien has remained unpaid; or 
(2)  Any taxes on such real estate are delinquent on December 31 following the fifth anniversary of the date on which such taxes have become due; 
then the property shall be deemed abandoned and subject to sale by public auction, through institution by the collector of city taxes of judicial proceedings in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia (1950), § 58.1-3965, as amended. 
(b)  In addition to the authority provided by section 22-142(a) above, the city may also, by ordinance, institute proceedings to sell in accordance with section 106-65 of the City Code any real estate when any taxes on such real estate are delinquent on December 31 following the first anniversary of the date on which such taxes have become due provided proper notice is given in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), § 58.1-3965(A), as amended. 
(c)  With respect to any parcel of real estate located within the city which meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The parcel has delinquent real estate taxes or the locality has a lien against the parcel for: removal, repair or securing of a building or structure; removal of trash, garbage, refuse, or litter; or the cutting of grass, weeds or other foreign growth; 
(2)  The parcel has an assessed value of $50,000.00 or less; and 
(3)  Such taxes and liens, together, including penalty and accumulated interest, exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the parcel or taxes alone exceed 25 percent of the assessed value of the parcel; 
The city may petition the circuit court to appoint a special commissioner to execute the necessary deed(s) to convey such parcel of real estate to the city in lieu of a sale at public auction. All such judicial proceedings initiated by the city shall be brought in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia (1950), § 58.1-3970.1, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 22-143. - Unsafe structures. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
(1)  Owner shall mean and include: the owner of record of the freehold of the premises, or of a lesser estate therein; a mortgagee or vendee in possession of the premises; an assignee of rents; a receiver, executor, or trustee; and a lessee in control of a building or structure. 
(2)  USBC shall mean the Uniform Statewide Building Code as adopted and promulgated by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development, and any amendments thereto and regulations adopted and promulgated by such board from time to time. 
(3)  Unsafe structure shall mean an existing building, wall or other structure which fails to comply with the USBC through damage, deterioration, infestation, improper maintenance, or for other reasons, and which thereby has become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient in adequate exit facilities; or an existing building, wall or other structure which is otherwise dangerous to human life, health or safety, or the public welfare. 
(b)  All structures which fall within the definition of an unsafe structure, as defined in subsection (a)(3), above, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and unfit for human habitation. A property owner shall remove, repair or secure any unsafe structure located on his property, as follows: 
(1)  By repairing and making the unsafe structure safe, through compliance with the USBC, or such other means or methods as will abate the conditions that present a danger to human life, health or safety, or the public welfare; 
(2)  By vacating the unsafe structure and securing it against public entry, or 
(3)  By taking down and removing the unsafe structure. 
(c)  Whenever it shall come to the attention of the city's building maintenance code official that any building, wall or structure likely constitutes an unsafe structure, the building maintenance code official shall inspect or cause an inspection to be made thereof and shall determine whether the building, wall or other structure is in fact unsafe. The building maintenance code official shall prepare a report, to be filed in the records of the city's division of code enforcement. A copy of such report shall be issued to the property owner. The report shall include the use of the structure, a description of conditions found and the nature and extent of the conditions. 
(d)  If a building, wall or other structure is determined by the building maintenance code official to be an unsafe structure, the building maintenance code official shall issue a notice of unsafe structure to the owner of the unsafe building, wall or structure, as well as to any lienholder whose interest is of record in the land records of the Petersburg Circuit Court. The notice shall give the owner and lienholder of record 30 days in which to make the necessary repairs. Whenever possible, notice of an unsafe structure should also be given to the tenants, if any, of the unsafe building. The notice of unsafe structure shall be given as follows: 
(1)  To an individual who can be found within the city, by hand-delivering a copy of the notice to such person. Where hand-delivery is utilized, the building maintenance code official shall prepare an affidavit certifying the hand-delivery. If the person named in the notice cannot be found after a diligent search, then notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person and a copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises; this latter procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. 
(2)  To an individual under the age of 18 years ("infant"), or who is otherwise legally incompetent, then notice shall be provided by hand-delivering a copy thereof to such person's parent, guardian or committee. If such parent, guardian or committee cannot be found after a diligent search, the notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such parent, guardian or committee and a copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. If there be no guardian or committee, notice shall be given by delivering a copy thereof to any person found at the infant's or incompetent's usual place of abode who is a member of his or her family and who is 16 years of age or older. If such infant or incompetent resides at a residential or other treatment facility, adult care facility or nursing home, notice shall be given by delivering a copy to the officer or official who is in charge of such facility. If a family member or an officer or official cannot be located after reasonable efforts to do so, then a copy of the notice shall be posted at the front door of the infant's or incompetent's usual abode and a copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the unsafe premises. Compliance with the procedure(s) set forth in this paragraph shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. 
(3)  To a corporation, bank, trust company, or other corporate or business entity, then notice shall be provided by hand-delivering a copy thereof to its president or other officer, director, manager, managing partner or agent thereof who is located in the city; or, if an individual cannot be found at the regular office or place of business in the city, by hand-delivering a copy to any employee thereof found at such office or place of business; or, if no such employee is found at such office or place of business, by leaving a copy of the notice posted at the front door of such office or place of business and sending a copy thereof by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the corporate or business entity. A copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the unsafe premises. Compliance with the procedure(s) set forth in this paragraph shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. 
(4)  To a person whose identity is unknown or who has no place of abode, office or place of business in the city, and if, after reasonable efforts, the city cannot locate a last known address for such person, notice shall be given by publishing a copy of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, once per week, for two successive weeks. 
(e)  If the owner and lienholder after notice and a reasonable opportunity to act has failed to remove, repair or secure the unsafe structure, then the city may remove, repair or secure the unsafe structure. Where certified mail or notice of publication is utilized, no action shall be taken by the city to remove, repair or secure any unsafe structure for at least 30 days following the later of the return of a certified mailing receipt or newspaper publication. 
(f)  When in the opinion of the building maintenance code official there is immediate danger of collapse or failure of an unsafe structure, or any part thereof, which would endanger life, or when a violation of the USBC results in a hazard that creates an immediate, serious and imminent threat to the life and safety of the occupants thereof, then in addition to any other action authorized by the USBC (including, without limitation, issuance of an order requiring occupants to vacate the premises), the building maintenance code official is hereby vested with the authority: 
(1)  To take immediate action to secure the unsafe structure, and to make emergency repairs, to the extent reasonably necessary to make such unsafe structure, or part thereof, temporarily safe. Emergency repairs may include maintenance to the exterior of a building to prevent deterioration of the building or of adjacent buildings. If the unsafe structure, or a portion thereof, presents an imminent and immediate threat to life or property, then the corrective action authorized by this section may include the razing or removal of such structure, or a portion thereof. Notice of the emergency action(s) taken shall be given to the owner, in the same manner as provided in section 22-143(d) above, except that the thirty-day advance notice period shall not be applicable where emergency corrective action, securing of the unsafe structure or emergency repairs are necessary; and/or 
(2)  To placard the unsafe structure as being unfit or unsafe for human occupancy or use. The placard shall be posted at all normal means of egress to the structure, building or facility. As soon as possible after placarding, the building maintenance code official shall mail or deliver a notice to the owner(s) or occupant(s) of the unsafe structure, informing such person(s) of the reason for placarding and the penalty for occupancy or use while placarded. Notice shall be given in the same manner as provided in section 22-143(d) above. Once an unsafe structure is placarded, the occupancy or use is thereby prohibited. Occupancy or use of a placarded structure shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided by this chapter. Once an unsafe structure is placarded, no occupancy or use shall recommence until the building maintenance code official approves such in writing. Removal of a placard without permission of the building maintenance code official shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided by this chapter. 
(g)  In the event the city removes, repairs, or secures any unsafe structure, then all of the costs or expenses incurred by the city shall be assessed and billed to and paid by the owner of the property, and the building maintenance code official shall prepare an affidavit certifying the costs and expenses incurred by the city. If the charges billed to the property owner remain unpaid for more than 30 days, such charges shall constitute a lien against such property enforceable in the same manner as provided by section 22-4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 22-144-22-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPOT BLIGHT ABATEMENT 

Sec. 22-155. - General. 
    The city, in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), §§ 36-49.1:1 et seq., as amended, may acquire or repair any blighted property, as defined in section 22-157(a) below, by exercise of the powers of eminent domain provided in Code of Virginia (1950), tit. 25, as amended, and further, shall have the power to hold, clear, repair, manage, or dispose of such property for purposes consistent with this division. In addition, the city may recover the cost of any repair or disposal of such property from the owner, or owners of record at their last known address as contained in the records of the collector of city taxes or the current real estate tax assessment records. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 22-156. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to set forth the powers of the city and procedures for the acquisition, repair, or other disposal of blighted property, as defined herein, which are located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-157. - Definition(s). 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed below: 
    Blighted property shall mean and refer to any property with buildings or improvements which, by reason of dilapidation, obsolescence, overcrowding, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, excessive land coverage, deleterious land use or obsolete layout, or any combination of these or other factors, are detrimental to the safety, health, morals, or welfare of the community. 
    City manager shall mean and refer to the city manager, or a person designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities that this division places on the city manager. 
    Dilapidation shall mean the condition of property resulting from inadequate maintenance that contributes to unsafe site or building conditions, or that gives the appearance of unsafe site or building conditions. 
    Excessive land coverage shall mean a land development that overly restricts the access of adjacent properties to light and air, or that has extensive impervious surfaces which create stormwater run-off that regularly and adversely impacts adjacent properties. 
    Lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities shall mean the absence from a building of one or more systems that provide ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, as required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-158. - Preliminary determination of blight. 
(a)  The city manager shall make a preliminary determination that a property is a blighted property under this division. The manager shall provide written notice to the owner of such property that the property has been determined to be blighted. The notice shall describe the conditions of the property, and shall provide any other reasons, which form the basis for this determination. 
(b)  The owner of property that has been preliminarily determined to be blighted shall have 30 days from the date of the notice in which to present to the city manager a plan to eliminate or otherwise cure, within a reasonable period of time, the conditions and other reasons that form the basis for the determination that the property is blighted. 
(c)  If the owner of property that has been preliminarily determined to be blighted fails to respond within the 30 day period with a plan that is acceptable to the city manager, the city shall (i) request the planning commission to conduct a public hearing and make findings and recommendations concerning the repair or other disposition of the property in question; and (ii) in the event a public hearing is scheduled, shall prepare and present to the planning commission a plan for the repair or other disposal, or for the acquisition and repair or other disposal, of the property. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-159. - Hearing before planning commission; commission findings. 
    In the event a public hearing is scheduled by the planning commission: 
(1)  Notice of public hearing. 
a.  Not less than three weeks prior to the date of the public hearing before the planning commission, the city manager shall cause a notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing to be sent, by regular and certified mail, to the owner of the blighted property or the agent designated by him for receipt of service of notices concerning the payment of real estate taxes, to the owners of all properties abutting the blighted property (including the properties located immediately across the street or road from the blighted property), and to the citizens or neighborhood association, if any, for the immediate area. The notice shall include the plan that the city has prepared for the repair or other disposal, or for the acquisition and repair or other disposal, of the property. Any persons affected by the condition of the property or by the acquisition and/or repair or other disposal of the property, as proposed in the city's plan, may present their views at the hearing. 
b.  The city manager shall also cause notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing to be published at least twice, with not less than six days elapsing between the first and second publication, in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The public hearing shall be held not less than six, nor more than 21, days after the second publication of this notice. 
c.  The city manager shall further cause notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing to be posted on the property. 
(2)  Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall determine: 
a.  Whether the owner of the property has failed to eliminate or otherwise cure the property's blighting conditions or to present a reasonable plan to do so; 
b.  Whether the property is blighted, as defined within section 22-157 of this chapter; and 
c.  Whether the plan submitted by the city for the repair or other disposal, or for the acquisition and repair or other disposal, of the property is in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance and other applicable land use laws and regulations, and should, in whole or part, be implemented. 
If the property is located within a historic area established pursuant to article 35 of the city's zoning ordinance, as amended, the planning commission, in determining the appropriateness of the city plan, shall consult with the city's architectural review board regarding the activities described for the property in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-160. - Review of planning commission findings and recommendations by city council. 
    The planning commission shall report its findings and recommendations concerning the property to city council. City council, upon receipt of such findings and recommendations, may after an advertised public hearing, affirm, modify or reject the planning commission's findings and recommendations. If the repair or other disposition of the property is approved, the city manager or his designee may carry out the approved plan to repair or acquire and dispose of the property in accordance with the approved plan, the provisions of this division, and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-161. - Displacement of residents at blighted property. 
    If the blighted property is occupied for personal residential purposes, city council, in approving the spot blight abatement plan, shall not acquire by eminent domain such property if it would result in a displacement of the person or persons living in the premises. The provisions of this section shall not apply to acquisitions, under an approved spot blight abatement plan, by the city of property which has been condemned for human habitation for more than one year. In addition, if the city is exercising the powers of eminent domain in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), tit. 25.1, as amended, it may provide for temporary relocation of any person living in the blighted property provided the relocation is within the financial means of such person. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-162. - Recovery of city's costs; lien. 
    The city shall have a lien on all property repaired or acquired under an approved plan, to cover the cost of improvements made by the city to bring the blighted property into compliance with applicable building codes and the cost of disposal, if any. The city manager shall prepare an affidavit certifying the amount of such costs. The lien shall be filed in the circuit court and shall be subordinate to any prior liens of record. The city may recover its costs of repair from the owner of record of the property when the repairs were made, at such time as the property is sold or disposed of by such owner. If the property is acquired by the city through eminent domain, the cost of repair may be recovered when the city council sells or disposes of the property. In either case, the costs of repair shall be recovered from the proceeds of any sale of the property. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-163. - Alternative remedies available to the city. 
(a)  In lieu of the acquisition of a blighted property by the exercise of the city's powers of eminent domain, and in lieu of the exercise of other powers listed in this division, the city council may, by ordinance, make findings that a property constitutes a blighted property, as defined within City Code section 22-157, declare such blighted property a nuisance and thereupon abate the nuisance pursuant to Code of Virginia (1950), § 15.2-900 or § 15.2-1115, as amended. 
(b)  Such ordinance shall be adopted only after written notice by certified mail to the owner(s) of the property, at the last known address of such owner(s) as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records. The notice shall advise the property owner that corrective action must be taken by the property owner by the date(s) on which the ordinance will be considered by council, and a copy of the proposed ordinance shall be attached to the notice. In addition, a copy of such notice and proposed ordinance shall also be sent by certified mail to any lienholder(s) of record. Copies of certified mail receipt(s) shall be sufficient evidence of mailing. 
(c)  The abatement process shall be as follows: if the property owner fails to abate the blight prior to the date on which an ordinance is adopted by council, the city manager shall give a final notice to the owner and shall also send a copy of the final notice to any lienholder(s) of record. A copy of the ordinance adopted by council shall be attached to the final notice. The final notice shall state that, no fewer than 15 days from the mailing thereof, the city will commence to abate the blight, taking any corrective action the city deems appropriate, including, without limitation, removal of the building or other structure so as to abate the blight on the property. In the event the city manager determines that a removal of a building or structure is necessary to abate the blight on the property, the final notice shall give the owner and any lienholder of record at least 30 days in which to abate the blight. The property owner shall have the right, upon reasonable notice to the city, to seek equitable relief, and the city shall initiate no corrective action while a proper petition is pending before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The final notice shall be given to the owner and any lienholder(s) of record, as follows: 
(1)  To an individual who can be found within the city, by hand-delivering a copy of the notice to such person. Where hand-delivery is utilized the city manager shall prepare an affidavit certifying the hand-delivery. If the person named in the notice cannot be found after a diligent search, then notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person and a copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises; this latter procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. Copies of certified mail receipt(s) shall be sufficient evidence of mailing; an affidavit of the city manager shall be sufficient evidence of hand-delivery. 
(2)  To an individual under the age of 18 years ("infant"), or who is otherwise legally incompetent, then notice shall be provided by hand-delivering a copy thereof to such person's parent, guardian or committee. If such parent, guardian or committee cannot be found after a diligent search, the notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such parent, guardian or committee and a copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. If there be no guardian or committee, notice shall be given by delivering a copy thereof to any person found at the infant's or incompetent's usual place of abode who is a member of his or her family and who is 16 years of age or older. If such infant or incompetent resides at a residential or other treatment facility, adult care facility or nursing home, notice shall be given by delivering a copy to the officer or official who is in charge of such facility. If a family member or an officer or official cannot be located after reasonable efforts to do so, then a copy of the notice shall be posted at the front door of the infant's or incompetent's usual abode and a copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the unsafe premises. Compliance with the procedure(s) set forth in this paragraph shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. Copies of certified mail receipt(s) shall be sufficient evidence of mailing; an affidavit of the city manager shall be sufficient evidence of hand-delivery. 
(3)  To a corporation, bank, trust company, or other corporate or business entity, then notice shall be provided by hand-delivering a copy thereof to its president or other officer, city manager, manager, managing partner or agent thereof who is located in the city; or, if an individual cannot be found at the regular office or place of business in the city, by hand-delivering a copy to any employee thereof found at such office or place of business; or, if no such employee is found at such office or place of business, by leaving a copy of the notice posted at the front door of such office or place of business and sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the corporate or business entity. A copy of the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the unsafe premises. Compliance with the procedure(s) set forth in this paragraph shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. Copies of certified mail receipt(s) shall be sufficient evidence of mailing; an affidavit of the city manager shall be sufficient evidence of hand-delivery. 
(4)  To a person whose identity is unknown or who has no place of abode, office or place of business in the city, and if, after reasonable efforts, the city cannot locate a last known address for such person, notice shall be given by publishing a copy of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, once per week, for two successive weeks, in a newspaper having general circulation within the city. A certificate of publication provided by the newspaper shall be sufficient evidence of the required publication. 
(5)  Where the final notice is sent by certified mail, or notice of publication is utilized, no action shall be taken by the city to remove any building or structure for at least 30 days following the later of the return of a certified mailing receipt or newspaper publication. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-164. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
    The city manager may issue regulations consistent with this division and Code of Virginia (1950), § 36-49.1:1, as amended; provided, that such regulations are reviewed and approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Sec. 22-165. - Other laws and ordinances. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to relieve an owner of blighted property, or any other person or entity from complying with other applicable laws relating to the development, use, rehabilitation, condition, maintenance or taxation of real property. The provisions of this division shall be in addition to any other remedies for blight abatement set out in state law or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-53, 6-19-2007) 
Secs. 22-166-22-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3 - DERELICT PROPERTY 

Sec. 22-196. - Authority to require removal, repair, etc., of buildings that are declared to be derelict. 
(a)  Any owner of property located in the City of Petersburg shall, at such time or times as the city may prescribe, submit a plan to demolish or renovate any building that has been declared a "derelict building." For purposes of this section, "derelict building" shall mean a residential or nonresidential building or structure, whether or not construction has been completed, that might endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare and for a continuous period in excess of six months, it has been (i) vacant, (ii) boarded up in accordance with the building code, and (iii) not lawfully connected to electric service from a utility service provider or not lawfully connected to any required water or sewer service from a utility service provider. 
(b)  If a building qualifies as a derelict building pursuant to this section, the city shall notify the owner of the derelict building that the owner is required to submit to the city a plan, within 90 days, to demolish or renovate the building to address the items that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare as listed in the written notification provided by the city. Such plan shall be on a form provided by the city and shall include a proposed time within which the plan will be commenced and completed. The plan may include one or more adjacent properties of the owner, whether or not all of such properties may have been declared derelict buildings. The plan shall be subject to approval by the city. The city shall deliver the written notice to the address listed on the real estate tax assessment records of the city. Written notice sent by first-class mail, with the city obtaining a U.S. Postal Service Certificate of Mailing shall constitute delivery pursuant to this section. 
(c)  If the city delivers written notice and the owner of the derelict building has not submitted a plan to the city within 90 days as provided in subsection (b), the city may exercise such remedies as provided in this section or as otherwise provided by law. 
(d)  The owner of the building may apply to the city and request that such building be declared a derelict building for purposes of this section. 
(e)  The city upon receipt of the plan to demolish or renovate the building, at the owner's request, shall meet with the owner submitting the plan and provide information to the owner on the land use and permitting requirements for demolition or renovation. 
(f)  If the property owner's plan is to demolish the derelict building, and such plan is approved by the city, the building permit application of such owner shall be expedited. If the owner has completed the demolition within 90 days of the date of the building permit issuance, the city shall refund any building and demolition permit fees. This section shall not supersede any ordinance adopted relative to historic districts. 
(g)  If the property owner's plan is to renovate the derelict building, and no rezoning is required for the owner's intended use of the property, and such plan is approved by the city, the site plan or subdivision application and the building permit, as applicable, shall be expedited. The site plan or subdivision fees may be refunded, all or in part, but in no event shall the site plan or subdivision fees exceed the lesser of 50 percent of the standard fees established by the ordinance for site plan or subdivision applications for the proposed use of the property, or $5,000.00 per property. The building permit fees may be refunded, all or in part, but in no event shall the building permit fees exceed the lesser of 50 percent of the standard fees established by the ordinance for building permit applications for the proposed use of the property, or $5,000.00 per property. 
(h)  Prior to the commencement of a plan to demolish or renovate the derelict building, at the request of the property owner, the real estate assessor shall make an assessment of the property in its current derelict condition. On the building permit application, the owner shall declare the costs of demolition, or the costs of materials and labor to complete the renovation. At the request of the property owner, after demolition or renovation of the derelict building, the real estate assessor shall reflect the fair market value of the demolition costs or the fair market value of the renovation improvements, and reflect such value in the real estate tax assessment records. Real estate taxes on an amount equal to the costs of demolition or an amount equal to the increase in the fair market value of the renovations shall be abated for a period of 15 years, and is transferrable with the property. 
(i)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city may proceed to make repairs and secure the building under section 50-61 of the City Code, or the city may proceed to abate or remove a nuisance under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-900, et seq. In addition, the city may exercise such remedies as may exist under the Uniform Statewide Building Code and such other remedies available under general and special law. 
(Ord. No. 12-86, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; charitable and religious solicitations, ch. 34; community development, ch. 38; exceptions to business taxes in urban enterprise zone, § 38-81; food and food establishments, § 62-31 et seq.; secondhand goods, ch. 86; charges for use of city landfill by commercial establishments, § 94-81; taxation, ch. 106; utilities, ch. 114; vehicles for hire, ch. 118. 
State Law reference- Sale of ice cream and similar products, state preemption, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-562.4; going-out-of-business sales, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-223, 18.2-224; licensing of bail bondsmen, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-152.1; professions and occupations, Code of Virginia, tit. 54.1; regulation of precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4111; records of firearms dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4200 et seq.; local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq.; enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Guest registers at hotels and similar establishments. 
(a)  Every person who operates a hotel where rooms or units are let to the public shall at all times keep and maintain a guest register which shall be inscribed with, ink or indelible pencil, or entered into a computer or other electronic-based guest registry, either the name and home or business address of each guest renting or occupying a room or the name of the organization making the reservation for the guest. The proprietor shall obtain identification which confirms the name by which the person is registered. 
(b)  The proprietor of such hotel, or the proprietor's agent shall write with ink or indelible pencil or enter into a computer or other electronic-based entry system opposite such name so registered, the number of each room assigned to and occupied by such guest, together with the date when such room is rented. Until all of the entries have been made in such register, no guest shall be permitted to occupy privately any room in such hotel. 
(c)  When the occupant of a room so rented pursuant to this section shall quit and surrender the same, it shall be the duty of the proprietor of the hotel, or his agent, to enter that time in the register, opposite the name of such occupant in either ink, indelible pencil, computer, or other electronic-based system. 
(d)  Each hotel shall retain guest registration records for a period of one year from the date the record is made. The guest register required by this section shall be subject to inspection at any and all reasonable times by the chief of police or any police officer in the performance of such officer duties. 
(e)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(f)  Upon a second conviction of a violation of this section, in addition to any penalty that may be imposed, the license to conduct the hotel in question shall be revoked. 
(g)  Definitions. 
    Hotel means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse or lodginghouse, within the city designed for transient occupancy up to 30 consecutive days, providing temporary living, sleeping and bathroom facilities. 
    Lodging means a room or space furnished any transient. 
    Transient means any person who, for no longer than 30 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging at any hotel. 
(Code 1981, § 21-64; Ord. No. 14-13, 3-4-2014) 
State Law reference- Guest registers, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-1, § 27-97, § 35.1-9. 
Sec. 26-2. - Length of stay in hotel. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put up or stay at any hotel, designated as R-1 by the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code (VSFPC), for longer than 30 days in a 60-day period. It shall also be unlawful for the owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of a hotel to permit or allow a person to stay at a hotel in excess of 30 days in a 60-day period. 
(1)  The person or persons shall remove all personal belongings from the hotel after the 30-day period. 
(2)  The 30-day period shall include days when personal belongings remain in a room, even if the owner of those belongings is not physically at the hotel. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), a stay in excess of 30 days in a 60-day period may occur in the following situations: 
(1)  Where there is a written contract or document between a hotel and a business, corporation, firm, individual or governmental agency to house employees or individuals on valid work orders; 
(2)  Where there is a written contract between the hotel and a governmental, charitable or insurance agency to house families in crisis who are receiving temporary housing assistance from said governmental, charitable or insurance agency; or 
(3)  Where the zoning administrator authorizes in writing, after consultation with the human services director, a stay for an additional period of up to 90 days to prevent residents from becoming homeless. In the event that the department of social services is unable to identify appropriate alternative housing within 90 days, this 90-day period may be extended in writing by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  The written contract, document, and authorization noted above shall be kept on file and must be available for inspection. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
    "Personal belongings" shall mean personal property and personal effects. Any movable or intangible thing that is subject to ownership and not classified as real property. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, 3-4-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-13, adopted March 4, 2014, renumbered the former §§ 26-2-26-4 as §§ 26-5-26-7 and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 27-97, 27-100, 35.1-1. 
Sec. 26-3. - Access to premises. 
    The local fire official, upon presenting appropriate credentials to the owner, operator, or agent in charge, is authorized, with the consent of the owner, operator, or agent in charge to enter a building, structure, property or premises for the purpose of conducting an inspection, examination, testing, or collection of samples for testing, during regular working hours and at other reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner, to determine if the building, structures, systems, machines, apparatus, devices, equipment, and materials stored, used or handled, and all pertinent conditions therein, are in compliance with the requirements, regulations or standards set forth in the VSFPC. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, 3-4-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 27-98.1. 
Note- See the editor's note to § 26-2. 
Sec. 26-4. - Severability. 
    Severability is intended throughout and within all the provisions of this chapter. If any provision (including inter alia any word, phrase, sentence, paragraph, subsection or section), or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is judicially declared to be invalid, the remaining provisions and their application shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 14-13, 3-4-2014) 
Note- See the editor's note to § 26-2. 
Sec. 26-5. - Closing hours for self-service laundries or dry cleaners. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of coin-operated or self-service laundry or dry cleaning to keep open his place of business or to permit such business to be kept open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless a responsible adult attendant is on duty at such place of business during such hours. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-63; Ord. No. 14-13, 3-4-2014) 
Note- See the editor's note to § 26-2. 
Sec. 26-6. - Physical contact with member of opposite sex at massage parlor or similar establishment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person responsible for the operation of any establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon or parlor, bath parlor or any similar type business where any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, naturopath or physical therapist duly licensed by the commonwealth, or to a licensed nurse acting under the direct prescription and direction of any such physician, surgeon chiropractor, osteopath, naturopath or certified massage therapist. Also, this section shall not apply to barbershops or beauty parlors in which massage is given to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulders. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-27; Ord. No. 14-13, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. 14-104, 11-25-2014) 
Note- See the editor's note to § 26-2. 
Sec. 26-7. - Sale of stink bombs or itching and sneezing powders. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, within the city, any stink bombs, itching powders or sneezing powders. Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. The possession of such stink bombs, itching powders or sneezing powders shall be prima facie evidence of the intention to sell such stink bombs, itching powders or sneezing powders. 
(Code 1981, § 21-66; Ord. No. 14-13, 3-4-2014) 
Note- See the editor's note to § 26-2. 
Secs. 26-8-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-31. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the city council, whether or not compiled in this Code, as amended, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein in the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-1, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One or more chains of corporations subject to inclusion connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is a corporation subject to inclusion if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the corporations subject to inclusion, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other corporations subject to inclusion; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other subject to inclusion corporations. As used in this subdivision, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends; the phrase "corporation subject to inclusion" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock of ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the corporations subject to inclusion, including the common parent corporation, is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this division shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Assessing official means the commissioner of the revenue. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
    Broker means an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Commodity means staples such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
    Contractor means the same as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714(D), whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
    Dealer means any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not subject to licensure as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities or other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this chapter. Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
Buying installment receivables. 
Chattel mortgage financing. 
Consumer financing. 
Credit card services. 
Credit unions. 
Factors. 
Financing accounts receivable. 
Industrial loan companies. 
Installment financing. 
Inventory financing. 
Loan or mortgage brokers. 
Loan or mortgage companies. 
Safety deposit box companies. 
Security and commodity brokers and services. 
Stockbrokers. 
Working capital financing. 
    Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Personal services means the rendering for compensation of any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this chapter, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this chapter unless exempted from local license tax by Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1. 
    Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the state department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701. The state department of taxation shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study, is used in its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
    Purchases means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. A wholesale merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine the cost of manufacture or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
    Real estate services means providing a service for compensation with respect to the purchase, sale, lease, rental, or appraisal of real property, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate. 
Escrow agents, real estate. 
Fiduciaries, real estate. 
Lessors of real property. 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
Real estate selling agents. 
Rental agents for real estate. 
    Retailer and retail merchant mean any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
    Security means the same in the Securities Act (Code of Virginia, § 13.1-501 et seq.), or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
    Services means things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise. 
    Wholesale and wholesale merchant mean any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, government and industrial users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-2, 12-6-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700.1. 
Sec. 26-33. - License inspector. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall employ a license inspector for such time as he may see fit, at a salary to be fixed by the state compensation board. 
(b)  The license inspector shall see that the provisions of this chapter are enforced and perform any services required by the commissioner of the revenue in connection with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the license inspector to keep a book, in which he shall classify all branches of businesses or occupations upon which a license tax is imposed by this chapter. In such book there shall be shown the amount paid for each license, the name of each person taking out such license, the period for which such license was issued, and in any case where the license tax paid by any person is based upon the amount of his actual or probable purchases or his actual or probable commissions or the gross receipts from the person's business or profession, or is graded in any other way, the book shall further show, in the case of each license issued, the amount of the actual or probable purchases or actual or probable commissions or gross receipts from the business or profession, or such other matter as may be pertinent to the assessment of the tax on such license. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-18, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-34. - License requirement. 
(a)  Generally. Every person shall apply for a license for each business or profession when engaging in a business in this city if (i) the person has a definite place of business in this jurisdiction; (ii) there is no definite place of business anywhere and the person resides in this city; or (iii) there is no definite place of business in this jurisdiction but the person operates amusement machines or is classified as an itinerant merchant, peddler, carnival, circus, contractor subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715, or public service corporation. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business and for each business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business or profession is subject to licensure at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this city; (ii) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and (iii) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(b)  Due dates and penalties. 
(1)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business if he was not subject to licensure in this city on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the assessing official. 
(2)  The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before March 1 or a later date, including installment payment dates, or 30 or more days after beginning business, at the locality's option. 
(3)  The assessing official may grant an extension of time in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension may be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax; the tax is then subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension, together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, with a penalty of ten percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(4)  A penalty of ten percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within 30 days, the treasurer or other collecting official may impose a ten percent late payment penalty. If the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer, the penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. For the purposes of this section: the term "acted responsibly" means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. The term "events beyond the taxpayer's control" include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(5)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and any penalties charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any BPOL tax from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from the date of the payment that created the refund or the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-3, 12-6-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(A)(1), (2). 
Sec. 26-35. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this chapter is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a privilege subject to licensure at a definite place of business within this city. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The status of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715; 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the state department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality; 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then to the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed; and 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then to the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this city solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)  Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of the commonwealth concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. If an agreement cannot be reached, either the assessor or taxpayer may seek an advisory opinion from the state department of taxation pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701; notice of the request shall be given to the other party. Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3993, when a taxpayer has demonstrated to a court that two or more political subdivisions of the commonwealth have assessed taxes on gross receipts that may create a double assessment within the meaning of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3986, the court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as may be necessary to ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments even though it is not then known which assessment is correct and which is erroneous. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-4, 12-6-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(A)(3). 
Sec. 26-36. - Limitations; extensions. 
(a)  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, both the assessing official and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3903, the assessing official shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six preceding license years. 
(c)  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940, two years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this article, two years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to subsection 26-37(b) or (d) or two years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984 or a similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-5, 12-6-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(A)(4). 
Sec. 26-37. - Appeals and rulings. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a local license tax as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days from the date of such assessment to the assessor for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, a further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the application. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the jurisdiction (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
(b)  Provided a timely and complete application is made, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the assessor, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of subsection 26-34(b)(5), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires to (i) depart quickly from the locality, (ii) remove his property therefrom, (iii) conceal himself or his property therein, or (iv) do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(c)  Any person assessed with a local license tax as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days of the determination by the assessing official on an application pursuant to subsection (a) of this section to the state tax commissioner for a correction of such assessment. The state tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within 90 days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1821, and the state tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1822. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the state tax commissioner is erroneous. Neither the state tax commissioner nor the state department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the state tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(d)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the state tax commissioner under subsection (c) of this section, the assessing official shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the state tax commissioner, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of subsection 26-34(b)(5), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of a local license tax to a specific situation from the assessor. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or the guidelines issued by the state department of taxation upon which the ruling was based or (ii) the assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-6, 12-6-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(A)(5). 
Sec. 26-38. - Recordkeeping and audits. 
    Every person who is assessable with a local license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the city. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. If the records are maintained outside the city, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-7, 12-6-1996) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(A)(6). 
Sec. 26-39. - Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)  Exclusions. The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or town for the commonwealth retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer. 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(c)  Deductions. The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity provided that such property was purchased within two years of the sale to such entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal governmental entity in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(2)  Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-8, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-40. - Failure to make applications; record. 
    Any person, firm or corporation prosecuting, conducting or engaging in any business, trade, profession, occupation, vocation or calling and any person, firm or corporation who shall open an office for a place of business or who shall by the use of signs or otherwise advertise any business, trade, profession, occupation, vocation or calling within the city shall make application to the assessing official for a license pursuant to this article, and any person, firm or corporation failing to make such application shall be punished as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.1. It shall be the duty of the assessing official to keep a record of all such applications. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-16, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-41. - Failure to pay license tax. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation prosecuting, conducting or engaging in any business, trade, profession, occupation, vocation or calling for which a license tax is required under this chapter without obtaining such license shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Such conviction shall not relieve any such person, firm or corporation from the payment of any license tax, penalty or interest imposed by this chapter. 
(c)  Failure to pay the license tax within 60 days after the due date will result in automatic revocation of such license and the business, trade, profession, occupation, vocation or calling shall be immediately discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-17, 12-6-1996) 
Charter reference- Civil warrants for collection of city taxes, § 3-19. 
Sec. 26-42. - Permit from chief of police prerequisite to issuance of certain licenses. 
(a)  A license permitting the conduct of the following businesses, occupations or activities shall be granted only after the applicant shall have obtained a written permit therefor from the chief of police: 
(1)  Billiard or pool tables. 
(2)  Carnivals and similar shows, exhibitions or performances. 
(3)  Houses of private entertainment. 
(4)  Lodginghouses. 
(5)  Tattoo parlors. 
(6)  Shoeshine parlors. 
(7)  Shows, exhibitions, dances, displays and exhibitions. 
(8)  Skating rinks. 
(9)  Massage parlors. 
(b)  Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this section, the chief of police shall give the applicant ten days' notice of a hearing thereon and shall then proceed to investigate the character, reputation and record of such applicant and his fitness to engage in the business, occupation or activity referred to in the application and the suitability of the location where such applicant proposes to conduct such business, occupation or activity. At such hearing, the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard on the matters required by this section to be investigated and the chief of police shall grant or refuse the application on the basis of his findings relative to such matters. 
(c)  If a majority of the owners or lessees of property fronting on both sides of the street on which a carnival or similar show, exhibition or performance is proposed to be held, and between the two nearest intersecting streets, file their objections, in writing, with the chief of police prior to the time of the hearing provided for in this section, a permit shall not be issued under this section. 
(d)  No application for a permit required under this section shall be accepted or considered by the chief of police unless the person applying for the permit pays to the city a fee of $25.00 to aid in defraying the cost involved in considering the application of the permit and taking action with respect thereto, which fee shall not be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-19, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-43. - Revocation of permits required for granting of license. 
(a)  Any permit required to be obtained from the chief of police, city manager, or other city official, as a condition precedent to the granting of a license to carry on a business, profession or employment, shall be subject to revocation by the official by whom such permit was granted. In any case where such official shall deem it proper, he shall, after ten days' notice to the person to whom such permit was granted, conduct a hearing on the character and reputation of such person and his fitness to continue to engage in the business, profession or employment which he has been licensed to conduct. At such hearing, such person shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. On the basis of his findings at such hearing, the official involved shall determine whether or not the permit previously granted to such person should be revoked. If it is determined, at such hearing, that such permit should be revoked, the official shall revoke the permit. 
(b)  The revocation of any permit pursuant to this section shall operate to cancel the license granted upon the issuance of such permit, but there shall be refunded to the person whose license is so canceled a pro rata part of the tax paid upon such license, based upon the number of full months remaining in the year for which such license was granted. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-20, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-44. - Contractors to report names of subcontractors. 
    All contractors licensed by the city shall report to the commissioner of the revenue or to the license inspector the names of all persons to whom any part of their contracts may be sublet. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-21, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-45. - When tax payable; requiring evidence of payment of other taxes. 
(a)  The license tax imposed by subsection 26-61(2)b on retail merchants shall be paid when the license is issued. In any case where the license tax is $200.00 or more for the year, it may, at the option of the merchant, be paid in equal quarterly installments in advance on January 30, April 30, July 30 and October 30. 
(b)  No business license under this article shall be issued until the applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all delinquent business license, personal property, meals, transient occupancy, and admissions taxes owed by the business to the city have been paid which have been property assessed against the applicant by the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-23, 12-6-1996) 
Secs. 26-46-26-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FEES AND TAXES 

Sec. 26-61. - License fee and tax. 
(a)  Every person or business subject to licensure under this article shall be assessed and required to pay annually: 
(1)  A fee in the amount of $50.00 for persons and businesses included in sub-paragraphs (a)(2)a., b., c., d., and e. of this section, whose gross receipts are less than $50,000.00 in a license year; and 
(2)  Except as may be otherwise provided in Va. Code §§ 58.1-3712, 58.1-3712.1, 58.1-3713, and the last paragraph of this section, every person or business shall be assessed and required to pay annually a license tax on all the gross receipts of such persons includable as provided in this chapter at a rate set forth below for the class of enterprise listed: 
a.  For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, $0.16 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
b.  For retailers, $0.20 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
c.  For financial, real estate and professional services, $0.58 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
d.  For repair, personal and business services and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this chapter or otherwise by law, $0.32 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
e.  For wholesalers, $0.25 per $100.00 of purchases not over $100,000.00, plus $0.15 of purchases over $100,000.00 but not over $100,000.00, plus $0.10 per $100.00 of purchases over $200,000.00. 
f.  For carnivals, circuses and speedways, $240.00 for each performance held in the city; except no license tax shall be imposed on any activity conducted or sponsored by a department of the city government or for charitable purposes; 
g.  For fortune tellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, $800.00 per year; 
h.  For itinerant merchants, $500.00 per year, except as otherwise provided herein: 
1.  No license tax shall be imposed on any itinerant merchant who sells or offers for sale in person or by his employees only the following items, or any of them, if such items were grown or produced by him or by his employees and were not purchased by them for sale: ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm, domestic or nursery products. 
2.  A license tax of $50.00 for each location used during the tax year shall be imposed on any itinerant merchant who sells or offers for sale in person or by his employees only the following items, or any of them, if such items were not grown or produced by him or his employees: wood, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, fish, oysters, seafood, game, vegetables, fruits or other edible family supplies of a perishable nature. 
3.  A license tax of $50.00 for each location used during the tax year shall be imposed on any itinerant merchant who sells or offers for sale Christmas trees or Christmas greens not grown or produced by him. 
4.  An itinerant merchant whose activities are conducted solely for charitable purposes and who is not paid for his services shall not be required to pay any license tax hereunder. 
5.  No license tax shall be imposed on an itinerant merchant whose activities are conducted as part of an event conducted or sponsored by any department of the city government. 
6.  For peddlers, $500.00 per year, except as otherwise provided herein: 
i.  Any person who sells or offers to sell goods, wares or merchandise to licensed dealers, other than at a definite place of business operated by the seller, and at the time of such sale or exposure for sale delivers or offers to deliver the goods, wares or merchandise to the buyer is a "peddler at wholesale." Any delivery on the day of sale shall be construed as a delivery at the time of sale. Each peddler at wholesale shall pay a license tax for the tax year. The license tax rate for each peddler at wholesale shall be the same as the license tax rate applicable to a wholesale merchant selling similar goods, wares or merchandise at one definite place of business. 
ii.  No license tax shall be imposed on any peddler who sells or offers for sale in person or by his employees only the following items, or any of them, if such items were grown or produced by him or by his employees and were not purchased by them for sale: ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm, domestic or nursery products. 
iii.  A license tax of $50.00 for the tax year shall be imposed on any peddler who sells or offers for sale in person or by his employees only the following items, or any of them, if such items were not grown or produced by him or his employees: wood, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, fish, oysters, seafood, game, vegetables, fruit or other edible family supplies of a perishable nature. 
iv.  A license tax of $50.00 for the tax year shall be imposed on any peddler who sells or offers for sale Christmas trees or Christmas greens not grown or produced by him. 
v.  A peddler whose activities are conducted solely for charitable purposes and who is not paid for his services shall not be required to pay any license tax hereunder. 
vi.  No license tax shall be imposed on any peddler whose activities are conducted or sponsored by any department of the city government. 
i.  For direct sellers as defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3719.1, $0.20 per $100.00 of total annual retail sales or the applicable wholesale tax rate as established by the aforementioned Code of Virginia section, whichever is applicable. 
j.  For savings and loan associations having their principal offices in the city, $50.00 per year. 
(b)  No license tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this section upon gross receipts, shall be imposed on any person whose gross receipts from a business, profession or occupation subject to licensure are less than $50,000.00 in a license year. This limitation shall not be applicable to license taxes on wholesalers, public service companies, carnivals, circuses and speedways, fortune-tellers, massage parlors, itinerant merchants or peddlers, savings institutions and credit unions, photographers, and direct sellers. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-9, 12-6-1996; Ord. No. 97-157, § 16.1-9, 12-2-1997; Ord. No. 00-78, § 16.1-9, 11-21-2000; Ord. No. 03-79, 11-18-2003) 
State Law reference- Fortunetellers, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3726. 
Sec. 26-62. - Electricity, heat or gas. 
    Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of furnishing heat, light and power (except electric suppliers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-400.2) for domestic, commercial and industrial consumption in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of the business accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer within the city, excluding, however, such service furnished federal, state and local public authorities, their offices or agencies and sales for resale to other electric utilities. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-10, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-63. - Telegraph companies. 
    Each and every telegraph company having a place of business in the city and delivering messages without additional charge to any point within the city limits, for the business done exclusively within the city, and not including any business done for the United States government or its officers and agents, shall pay an annual license tax equal to one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of the business accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-11, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-64. - Telephone companies. 
(a)  Each and every telephone company conducting a telephone business in the city and using and occupying the streets, avenues and alleys in the city and conducting or maintaining the works of the telephone company, or any part thereof, along, over and under such streets, avenues and alleys in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of one-half of one percent of the gross receipts of the business accruing from sales to the ultimate customer within the city, excluding, however, such service furnished federal, state and local public authorities and their offices and agencies. Charges for long distance telephone calls shall not be included in gross receipts for purposes of license taxation. 
(b)  This license is for the privilege of doing business for local services in the city and does not include any license charge for business done to and from points outside the commonwealth and does not include any license charge for any business done for the government of the United States or its officers or agents and does not include any license charge for any interstate business. This license charge is restricted exclusively for local services and is no attempt to tax, regulate or hinder interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-12, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-65. - Coin-operated machines; exemptions. 
(a)  Every person, firm or corporation leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated machine or device operated on the coin-in-the-slot principle shall be deemed to be a coin machine operator; provided, however, that the term "operator" shall not include a person, firm or corporation owning less than three coin machines and operating such machines on property owned or leased by such person, firm or corporation. 
(b)  Every operator operating ten or more coin machines shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $200.00. Every operator operating more than two and fewer than ten coin machines shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $175.00. The license tax on an operator shall not be prorated and an operator's license shall not be transferred. 
(c)  The coin machine operator's license tax imposed by this section shall not be applicable to operators of weighing machines, automatic baggage or parcel-checking machines or receptacles, nor to operators of vending machines which are so constructed as to do nothing but vend goods, wares and merchandise or postage stamps or provide service only, nor to operators of viewing machines or photomat machines, nor to operators of devices or machines affording rides to children or for the delivery of newspapers. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-14, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 26-66. - Yard, garage and backyard sales. 
(a)  Any person who shall offer for sale any items of tangible personal property at sales, commonly known as yard sales, garage sales, or backyard sales, whereby such items are offered for sale on property classified as residential by the zoning ordinance, shall pay a specific license tax of $5.00 for the privilege of conducting such sale. No more than four licenses for one day each shall be issued in any 12-month period to the same person or for a sale on the same property. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this section, except upon a sworn statement or affidavit of the applicant that only secondhand or used items owned by such applicant shall be offered for sale. No person shall give a false statement or affidavit in order to obtain such license. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-15, 12-6-1996) 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
Sec. 26-67. - Rummage sales for charity. 
(a)  Any person conducting a rummage sale shall pay a specific license tax of $2.40 for the privilege of conducting such sale for a period not exceeding two consecutive days within any 30-day period. No such license shall be issued, except upon the sworn statement or affidavit of the applicant that only secondhand or used goods donated or given to the applicant free of charge shall be sold by the applicant, that no person, whether participating in such sale or not, is to receive any profit or financial benefit from such sale and that the entire proceeds of such sale are to be used for charitable purposes only. 
(b)  A license under this section shall not be required for sales held in any church or on church property, for the sole benefit of such church. 
(c)  A retail merchant's license tax shall be paid by any such person offering goods or merchandise for sale to the public at a rummage sale conducted other than in conformity with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-22, 12-6-1996) 
Secs. 26-68-26-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TATTOO PARLORS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city regulate tattoo parlors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912; tattooing minors, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-371.3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Tattoo means a design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol or any other mark upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin, and also means to place such a mark as provided in this definition. 
    Tattoo artist means any person who actually performs the work of tattooing. 
    Tattoo operator means any person who controls, operates, conducts or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. 
    Tattoo parlor means any room or space where tattooing is practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-92. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to medical doctors, veterinarians, registered nurses or any other medical services personnel licensed pursuant to Code of Virginia, tit. 54.1 in performance of their professional duties. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912. 
Sec. 26-93. - Physical examinations of and health requirements for tattoo artists. 
    Each tattoo artist shall have an annual physical examination reported on a form to be prescribed by the department of health, which physical examination shall include laboratory tests as may be deemed necessary by the department of health. A report of such physical examination and laboratory tests shall be presented with the application for each permit for a tattoo parlor or for any renewal thereof. No persons shall engage in tattooing as a tattoo artist while in the communicable stage of any disease, including the common cold. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-5) 
Sec. 26-94. - Records. 
    Records for each patron or customer shall be kept and maintained by the tattoo operator of each tattoo parlor, which record shall include the patron or customer's name, address, date and signature. All records shall be available for inspection at reasonable times upon request of the department of health. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-6) 
Sec. 26-95. - Minors. 
    No person shall tattoo a person less than 18 years of age, knowing or having reason to believe such person is less than 18 years of age except (i) in the presence of the person's parent or guardian, or (ii) when done by or under the supervision of a medical doctor, registered nurse or other medical services personnel licensed pursuant to Code of Virginia, tit. 54.1, in the performance of their duties. A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-371.3. 
Sec. 26-96. - Removal of tattoo. 
    No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall remove or attempt to remove any tattoo. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-8) 
Sec. 26-97. - Operating room, toilet, etc., facilities. 
    Each tattooing parlor shall have an operating room, which operating room shall be separate and apart from a waiting room or such other room or rooms as may be used. Patrons or customers shall be tattooed only in such operating room. The operating room shall be equipped with hot and cold running water, together with such sinks and basins as may be necessary. Sufficient toilet, urinal and hand-washing facilities shall be accessible to patrons, customers, tattoo operators and tattoo artists within the tattoo parlor or the building in which the tattoo parlor is located. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-9) 
Sec. 26-98. - Personal cleanliness of tattoo artist; equipment. 
    There shall be available within the tattoo parlor adequate hot and cold running water, soap, germicidal solution approved by the health director, individual hand brushes and fingernail files for each tattoo artist. Each tattoo artist shall clean the artist's fingernails with an individual file, wash the artist's hands with soap and hot water using an individual hand brush, and thoroughly rinse the artist's hands in a germicidal solution to be approved by the department of health before working on each patron or customer. An individual paper towel or napkin shall be used for drying the tattoo artist's hands after rinsing. Each tattoo artist shall wear sterile rubber gloves and a clean gown or coat while actually engaged in tattooing. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-10) 
Sec. 26-99. - Cabinets for storage of equipment. 
    Adequate cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, carbon and stencils shall be provided for each tattoo operator and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-11) 
Sec. 26-100. - Floors; disposition of waste material. 
    The floor of tattoo parlors shall be of impervious material and shall be at all times maintained in a clean condition. The tattoo parlor shall have proper facilities for the disposition of waste material. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-12) 
Sec. 26-101. - Ventilation; walls and ceilings. 
    Tattoo parlors must have adequate light and ventilation, and all walls and ceilings shall be painted a light color. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-13) 
Sec. 26-102. - Instructions as to care of skin after tattooing. 
    Printed or photocopied instructions, approved by the health director, shall be given to each patron or customer on the care of the skin after tattooing as a precaution to prevent infection after each tattooing. A copy of these instructions shall also be posted in a conspicuous place in the tattoo parlor, clearly visible to the person being tattooed. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-14) 
Sec. 26-103. - Preparation of area to be tattooed. 
    When it is necessary to shave the area to be tattooed, a new blade for each patron or customer shall be used when a safety razor is employed, and the permanent parts of such safety razor shall be treated as provided in this section for the treatment of a straight razor. If a straight razor is used, it shall be cleansed with soap and water, rinsed in clean water and then sterilized by being immersed for 15 minutes in an approved germicidal solution or by boiling for a period of at least five minutes before the razor is used again on another patron or customer. After shaving the area to be tattooed, the area shall be cleaned with an approved germicidal solution in a sanitary manner before the design is placed on the skin. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-15) 
Sec. 26-104. - Stencil for transferring design. 
    The stencil for transferring the design to the skin shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in a germicidal solution approved by the health director. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-16) 
Sec. 26-105. - Removal of excess dye; bandages. 
    The excess dye originally applied to the skin shall be removed with individual sterile gauze or sterile cotton only. The area tattooed shall then be allowed to dry and the entire area covered with a piece of sterile gauze only, which may in turn be covered with a piece of tissue and fastened with adhesive. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-17) 
Sec. 26-106. - Needles. 
    A sterile set of needles must be used for each patron or customer. Needles used in tattooing shall be sterilized by being placed in boiling water for a period of at least five minutes, shaken dry, and if not immediately used, stored in sterile containers. The open end of the needle tube of the tattooing machine shall be cleaned and sterilized in a similar manner before each use. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-18) 
Sec. 26-107. - Sterilizing device required. 
    Each tattoo parlor shall be equipped with a sterilizing device approved by the health director. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-19) 
Sec. 26-108. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall conduct a tattoo parlor or engage in business as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist without first securing a permit therefor, or when such permit previously issued has been revoked or suspended, or who shall violate any of the other provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. The health director shall revoke the permit of any person who shall be convicted on two separate occasions within a 24-month period of violating any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-20) 
Secs. 26-109-26-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 26-126. - Permits; application therefor; inspections. 
(a)  No person shall operate a tattoo parlor or engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or as a tattoo artist unless such person shall first secure a permit from the health director or his duly authorized assistant. 
(b)  Applications for any such permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the health director, wherein the applicant shall agree to conform to all ordinances, rules and regulations governing such places and to permit such examination and inspections as may be deemed necessary by the health director. 
(c)  Before such permit is granted, it shall be the duty of the health director to cause an inspection to be made, at a reasonable time, of the premises or tattoo parlor in which the business is to be conducted and to refuse such permit if the condition of the premises, its equipment or the health of the applicant shall not conform to the requirements of this article; but if the premises and applicant do conform to the requirements of this article, the health director shall issue the permit requested. It shall be the further duty of the health director to cause inspections to be made from time to time of all tattoo parlors and the equipment thereof, and if such place of business is not maintained, conducted or operated in conformity with the requirements of this article, then the health director may suspend the permit of the tattoo operator or tattoo artist until such tattoo parlor and the operation thereof is made to conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-2) 
Sec. 26-127. - Term of permits; renewal of permits. 
    All permits issued pursuant to this article shall, unless sooner revoked, expire on April 30 following their date of issue. Applications for the renewal of permits shall be made on or before April 1 following their date of issue and the requirements for the renewal thereof shall be the same as for new permits, as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-3) 
Sec. 26-128. - Form and transfer of permits. 
    All permits granted shall be issued in the name of the individual person applying therefor, shall give the location of the tattoo parlor where such applicant will operate and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1981, § 33.1-4) 
Secs. 26-129-26-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUCTIONS; TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of the sale of property at auction, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1114, 15.2-600 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant merchants, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-151. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 31-16) 
Sec. 26-152. - Sales by trustees, executors, etc. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the sale of any goods by an assignee, trustee, executor, fiduciary, officer in bankruptcy or other officer appointed by any court of this state or of the United States. 
(Code 1981, § 31-17) 
Sec. 26-153. - Warranties. 
    Every person offering property for sale pursuant to a permit issued under this article shall, in describing such property, be truthful with respect to the kind, quality and description of the property, which, for the purposes of this article, shall be considered as warranties, and any breach of the warranties shall be sufficient to vitiate such sale and the person making such false representation shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 31-18) 
Sec. 26-154. - Auctions prohibited on streets and sidewalks. 
    No person shall sell or offer for sale, at public auction, any articles of tangible personal property upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 31-19) 
Sec. 26-155. - Sale of jewelry, plated ware, rugs, etc., at auction prohibited during certain hours. 
    No person holding a permit under this article shall sell at auction any jewelry, diamonds or other precious stones, watches, clocks, gold or silverware, gold or silver plated ware, rugs, curtains, carpets, tapestries, statuary, porcelains, chinaware, pictures, paintings, bric-a-brac or articles of virtu during the following hours: 
(1)  Between 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., from April 1 through September 30; or 
(2)  Between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., from October 1 through March 30. 
(Code 1981, § 31-20) 
Secs. 26-156-26-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 26-171. - Required; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either for himself or for another, to conduct in the city a transient retail business or to sell at public auction any stock of merchandise, in whole or in part, without obtaining a permit to do so from the commissioner of the revenue; provided, however, that no such permit shall be required for the sale of any wagon, automobile, mechanics' tools, used farming implements, livestock, poultry (dressed or undressed), seafood, vegetables, fruits, melons, berries, flowers, leaf tobacco or for the sale of secondhand furniture and household effects, when being sold at the residence of the housekeeper desiring to dispose of such items. 
(Code 1981, § 31-31) 
Sec. 26-172. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a permit required by this division shall be in writing, verified by oath of the applicant, and shall state: 
(1)  The applicant's name and residence address. 
(2)  The address of the applicant's place of business, and that such place is adequately illuminated in the daytime without the aid of artificial light. 
(3)  In detail, the goods to be sold and what statements or representations are to be made or advertised as to such goods. 
(4)  The length of time for which the permit is desired. 
(5)  Whether or not the applicant has previously engaged in a like or similar business and, if so, all the places where such business has been conducted within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The applicant shall furnish to the commissioner of the revenue, if demanded, such evidence as shall be deemed necessary by the commissioner of the revenue to establish the truth of the statements made in the application. 
(Code 1981, § 31-32) 
Sec. 26-173. - Fee. 
    Before a permit required by this division shall be issued, the applicant therefor shall pay to the city the sum of $100.00 as a fee for such permit, in addition to the license tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 31-33) 
Sec. 26-174. - Term. 
    No permit required by this division shall be issued for a period extending beyond the fiscal license year in which the application is made. The day and hour of its expiration shall be stated in the permit. 
(Code 1981, § 31-34) 
Sec. 26-175. - Assignment or transfer. 
    A permit required by this division shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Code 1981, § 31-35) 
Secs. 26-176-26-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Going out of business sales, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-223, 18.2-224. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-201. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any person who shall advertise, represent or hold out in the city that any sale at retail of goods, wares or merchandise (referred to in this article as "goods") is an insurance, bankruptcy, insolvent, liquidation, assignee's, receiver's, trustee's, adjuster's, wholesale, manufacturer's, going-out-of-business or closing-out sale or a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water or otherwise. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to trustees selling under deeds of assignment or mortgages or to sheriffs, constables or other public or court officers or to any other persons acting under the license, direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling goods in the course of their official duties. 
(Code 1981, § 31-47) 
Sec. 26-202. - Violations of article. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 31-48) 
Sec. 26-203. - Limitation on goods to be sold. 
    At a sale conducted pursuant to a permit issued under this article, no goods other than those listed in the inventory required by section 26-222 shall be sold and it shall be unlawful for any person to add to, supplement or replenish such goods from any source whatsoever, after the filing of the inventory, and thereafter to advertise the sale as being of the character set out in the application filed under this article and each and every addition to such stock of goods and each sale of goods added thereto shall constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(Code 1981, § 31-53) 
Secs. 26-204-26-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 26-221. - Required; license. 
    No person shall advertise, represent, hold out, conduct, hold or carry on any sale of the character referred to in subsection 26-201(a), without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 31-49) 
Sec. 26-222. - Application. 
(a)  The applicant for a permit required by section 26-221 shall make application therefor to the commissioner of the revenue, in writing and under oath, giving all the facts in regard to such sale and particularly the place and manner of conducting such sale, a complete inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale, the names of the persons from whom such goods were obtained, the date of delivery thereof to the person applying for the permit, the place from which the goods were last taken and any and all of the details necessary to fully identify the goods to be sold. Such application shall also specify the proposed period of time during which such sale shall continue. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the applicant to list on the inventory required by subsection (a) of this section any goods which are not part of the regular stock of the store or business, the goods of which are to be closed out at such sale, or which have been purchased by the applicant with return privileges or on consignment. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue shall, upon request, allow any person to inspect an application filed pursuant to this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in an application filed pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 31-50) 
Sec. 26-223. - Issuance; effect. 
(a)  If the commissioner of the revenue shall be satisfied from the application for a permit filed pursuant to section 26-222 that the proposed sale is of the character, as to all goods to be sold, which the applicant desires to advertise and conduct, and the applicant pays the license tax required by this chapter, the commissioner of the revenue shall issue a permit to the applicant, authorizing him to advertise and conduct a sale of the particular kind mentioned in the application in accordance with the requirements of this article, for the period of time stated in the application and for which the license tax is paid. 
(b)  A permit issued under this section shall be valid only for a sale of the goods in the manner and at the time and place set forth and described in the application. 
(c)  Each permit issued under this section shall be valid for a period of no longer than 60 days, and any extension of that time shall constitute a new sale under this article and shall require an additional permit and inventory. A maximum of one permit beyond the initial 60-day permit may be granted solely for the purpose of liquidating only those goods contained in the initial inventory list which remain unsold. 
(Code 1981, § 31-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224. 
Sec. 26-224. - Assignment. 
    A permit issued under this article shall not be assignable. 
(Code 1981, § 31-52) 
Chapter 30 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Municipal powers as to cemeteries and burials, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-972, 15.2-1111, 15.2-1121; offenses relating to cemeteries, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-125 et seq.; advertising near public cemetery, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-369(1); lot in burial ground exempt from levy and distress, Code of Virginia, §§ 34-26, 34-28; cemetery operators, perpetual care trust funds and preneed burial contracts, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-2310 et seq.; cemeteries generally, Code of Virginia, § 57-22 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Unlawful entry on cemetery property. 
    If any person, without the consent of the owner, proprietor or custodian, shall go or enter in the nighttime, upon the premises, property, driveways or walks of any cemetery, either public or private, for any purpose other than to visit the burial lot or grave of some member of his family, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-125. 
Secs. 30-2-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BLANDFORD CEMETERY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cemetery means the Blandford Cemetery, owned and operated by the city. 
    Director and cemetery director mean the director of the Blandford Cemetery, unless otherwise indicated. 
(Code 1981, § 8-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 8-2) 
Sec. 30-33. - Operating rules and regulations. 
(a)  The city manager shall prepare rules and regulations governing the operation of the cemetery. When such rules and regulations have been submitted to and approved by the city council, they shall become the official rules and regulations governing the operation of the cemetery. 
(b)  The city council may, at any time, adopt new rules and regulations governing the operation of the cemetery and may amend, alter or repeal any rule or regulation previously prepared and approved pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Copies of rules and regulations adopted or approved under this section shall be available at the office of the clerk of the city council and at the office of the cemetery director. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rule or regulation adopted or approved pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6) 
Sec. 30-34. - Keeping of areas for burial. 
    The burial ground in the cemetery shall be kept as a place of burial for persons. 
(Code 1981, § 8-7) 
Sec. 30-35. - Division into lots or plots. 
    The cemetery shall be laid off into lots or plots in such manner as the city council may, from time to time, direct. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8) 
Sec. 30-36. - Designation and plan of single-grave portion. 
    The director shall designate a portion of the cemetery which shall be known as the single-grave portion and shall have a plan of such portion made. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9) 
Sec. 30-37. - Information to be furnished by applicant for burial permit. 
    A person applying for a burial permit for burial in the cemetery shall furnish the name of the owner of the lot or plot and the location of the lot or plot. 
(Code 1981, § 8-13) 
Sec. 30-38. - Evidence of burial privilege prerequisite to burial. 
    No burial shall be allowed in the cemetery until satisfactory evidence of the lawful privilege to bury a body has been established. 
(Code 1981, § 8-14) 
Sec. 30-39. - Digging and closing of graves generally. 
    All graves in the cemetery shall be dug and closed by employees of the city under the supervision of the director. 
(Code 1981, § 8-15) 
Sec. 30-40. - Depth of graves. 
    No graves in the cemetery shall be less than five feet deep, except graves for children, which shall be not less than four feet deep. 
(Code 1981, § 8-16) 
Sec. 30-41. - Height of grave mounds. 
    No grave in the cemetery shall have a mound above the grade level after a reasonable time for settling of the dirt has elapsed. 
(Code 1981, § 8-17) 
Sec. 30-42. - Mounds, cradles or other structures in single-grave portion. 
    No mounds, cradles or other structures, other than permanent markers, will be allowed on or around graves in the single-grave portion of the cemetery and any such permanent markers so erected shall not exceed 32 inches in width. 
(Code 1981, § 8-18) 
Sec. 30-43. - Charges for lots or plots, perpetual care or digging graves, interments and other services or work; ordinances not affected. 
(a)  The charges for digging graves, interments, disinterments and other services rendered or work done in the cemetery, or in connection therewith, shall be such as are prescribed, from time to time, by the city council. Such charges shall be paid to the collector of city taxes within 30 days after the service is rendered or the work done. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance prescribing the charges referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the prices of lots or plots or the charges for perpetual care of a lot or plot, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1981, §§ 8-10, 8-19, 8-40; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to charge for services rendered in connection with cemetery, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1121. 
Sec. 30-44. - Prerequisites to disinterments or reinterments, during certain period of year. 
    No disinterments or reinterments shall be made in the cemetery between May 15 and October 15 of any year, without the consent of the city manager and the approval of the health director. 
(Code 1981, § 8-20) 
Sec. 30-45. - Record of interments, disinterments and reinterments. 
(a)  The director shall register all interments in the cemetery in a book to be kept for the purpose and so arranged as to present, in a convenient tabular form, the name of the deceased, the date of the burial and the location in which the interment is made. The director shall keep this book in the cemetery office, properly indexed and subject at all times to the inspection of the public. 
(b)  The director shall record all disinterments and reinterments at the cemetery in a similar manner to that required for interments by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 8-21) 
Sec. 30-46. - Work permits generally. 
    No person shall do any work in the cemetery, such as curbing of a lot or setting monuments, headstones, footstones or markers, without having first obtained a permit therefor from the director. No such work shall commence until at least 48 hours have passed after the issuance of the permit required in this article. Such waiting period may be waived by the city manager in exceptional circumstances which require immediate attention. 
(Code 1981, § 8-22) 
Sec. 30-47. - Permit to plant or remove trees or shrubs. 
    No person shall plant any shade tree or large shrub in any lot in the cemetery or remove any tree or large shrub from such a lot, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director. 
(Code 1981, § 8-23) 
Sec. 30-48. - Permit for trimming trees. 
    No person shall trim, prune or remove any branches from any tree in the cemetery, whether on his lot or plot or not, without having first obtained a permit therefor from the director. 
(Code 1981, § 8-24) 
Sec. 30-49. - Fences prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect in or upon any square or section in the cemetery any fence of any kind or character whatsoever. 
(Code 1981, § 8-25) 
Sec. 30-50. - Removal of nuisances. 
(a)  If anything deemed offensive, improper or injurious or which violates any rules shall be deposited or placed on any lot or plot in the cemetery, the director shall remove it without notice. 
(b)  The director may remove from the cemetery any tree, vine, brush or shrub that is unsightly, dangerous or infected with fungi or other pests. 
(Code 1981, § 8-26) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 50-61 et seq. 
Secs. 30-51-30-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR 

Sec. 30-66. - Appointment, term and general duties of director. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a director of the Blanford Cemetery, whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. The director shall devote his whole attention to the preservation, adornment and keeping in order of the cemetery grounds and perform such other duties as are required by this article and as are prescribed by the city manager. The director shall be present at all interments in the cemetery and shall conduct them in the manner prescribed by the city manager. 
(b)  The director shall recommend to the city manager for appointment such employees as he may deem necessary for the operation and maintenance of the cemetery. 
(Code 1981, § 8-3) 
Sec. 30-67. - Obedience to directions of director. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey the lawful directions of the director. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5) 
Sec. 30-68. - Obstructing or hindering director. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or hinder the director in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1981, § 8-4) 
Secs. 30-69-30-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SALE OF LOTS OR PLOTS 

Sec. 30-86. - Prices. 
    The city shall sell lots or plots in the cemetery at such prices as are prescribed, from time to time, by the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 8-10) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to charge for cemetery lots and burial spaces, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1121. 
Sec. 30-87. - Procedure. 
    Any person desiring to purchase a burial lot or plot, or any part thereof, in the cemetery, shall apply, after due selection, to the director. The director shall issue an invoice, in quintuplet, that states the name and address of the purchaser and the lot or plot to be purchased. One copy of the invoice shall be retained in the cemetery office. The purchaser shall, within two days thereafter, pay the price of such lot or plot to the collector of city taxes, who shall issue a receipt to the purchaser and also, within two days thereafter, shall issue receipts to the cemetery director and to the director of finance. The collector of city taxes shall retain one copy for his office records. A copy of the receipt shall be certified by the director to the clerk of the circuit court, who shall record and properly index the copy in a book to be kept in his office for that purpose, and for public inspection. 
(Code 1981, § 8-11; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Records and papers of circuit court open to inspection, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-208. 
Sec. 30-88. - Limitation on sales to same person; transfer from one owner to another; repurchase by city. 
    Not more than one cemetery lot shall be sold to any one person, nor shall any lot or plot be transferred from one owner to another. The city shall repurchase any unoccupied and unused lot at the price originally paid by the purchaser or at 50 percent of the current resident selling price. Any unoccupied lot, from which bodies have been disinterred, shall, subject to the approval of the city manager, be repurchased by the city at 50 percent of the original purchase price. 
(Code 1981, § 8-12) 
Secs. 30-89-30-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERPETUAL CARE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city as to perpetual care of cemetery lots and burial spaces, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1121. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 30-106. - Rights of owner after care assumed by city. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect the right of any person to construct, in conformance with the official cemetery rules and regulations, a curbing of stone or to erect upon his lot or plot in the cemetery any mausoleum, vault, monument, tombstone or marker, after the city has assumed the care thereof under this article, nor the right of access thereto, nor to place flowers on the graves thereon, nor to plant shrubs thereon; provided, however, that if the ground is disturbed in erecting any such structure, the person doing the work shall restore the ground to the same condition as before. 
(Code 1981, § 8-39) 
Sec. 30-107. - Charges to be determined by city council. 
    The charges for perpetual care of a lot or plot or the interior area of a mausoleum in the cemetery shall be determined by the city council. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance establishing such charges and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 8-40) 
Sec. 30-108. - Charges to be paid to the collector of city taxes; receipts for payments. 
    All charges for perpetual care under this article shall be paid to the collector of city taxes, who shall receipt for such charges and give duplicates of such receipts, certified by the director, to the director, the director of finance and the collector of city taxes. The collector of city taxes shall retain one copy of such receipt for his office records. 
(Code 1981, § 8-41; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 30-109. - Disposition of charges paid. 
(a)  All sums which are paid into the city treasury for the purposes of perpetual care of a lot or plot or the interior area of a mausoleum in the cemetery shall be placed to the credit of the board of sinking fund commissioners and shall be invested by them. 
(b)  Annually, or at such times the board of sinking fund commissioners may elect, the income from perpetual care charges shall be credited to the general fund of the city to support cemetery operations. The amount of income from perpetual care shall constitute the city's minimum allowable level of financial support to cemetery operations. 
(Code 1981, § 8-42) 
Secs. 30-110-30-125. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Lots and Plots 

Sec. 30-126. - Notice when care desired. 
    The owner or any other authorized applicant desiring to place his lot or plot in the cemetery under perpetual care shall first give notice in writing to the director. 
(Code 1981, § 8-51) 
Sec. 30-127. - Examination of lot or plot and structures thereon. 
    Upon receipt of a notice provided for in section 30-126, the director shall examine the lot or plot in question and the curbing, mausoleum, vaults, monuments and other stones thereon and any fences around such lot or plot. 
(Code 1981, § 8-52) 
Sec. 30-128. - Acceptance or refusal. 
(a)  If, upon examination under section 30-127, the director finds the subjects of the examination to be in acceptable condition, he shall certify such fact to the applicant and to the collector of city taxes. The payment procedures outlined in section 30-108 shall then be followed. 
(b)  If, upon examination under section 30-127, the director finds the subjects of the examination not in acceptable condition, he shall promptly notify the applicant of his refusal to accept the lot or plot until it is conditioned to apply with cemetery regulations governing perpetual care. When the lot or plot is put in acceptable condition, the director shall certify that fact to the applicant and to the collector of city taxes. The payment procedures outlined in section 30-108 shall then be followed. 
(Code 1981, § 8-53; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 30-129. - Duty of city upon acceptance; limitations on city's responsibilities. 
    When a lot or plot in the cemetery is accepted by the city for perpetual care under this article, it shall be the duty of the city to keep such lot or plot in good order, free from undergrowth and to keep the grass cut and the monuments or stones upright, so long as such monuments or stones continue intact. The city will not be responsible for keeping alive any flowers, ivy, moss, shrubs or grass on a lot or plot. Grass will be planted only on new graves. Furthermore, the city will not be responsible for damage to stones or curbing or for results of vandalism. 
(Code 1981, § 8-54) 
Sec. 30-130. - Metal plate indicating perpetual care. 
    On each burial lot or plot in the cemetery placed under perpetual care pursuant to this article, a metal plate indicating the fact shall be attached in some substantial way, by and at the cost of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-55) 
Sec. 30-131. - Hedges prohibited. 
    No hedge will be permitted around a lot or plot in the cemetery under perpetual care pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 8-56) 
Sec. 30-132. - Mound graves prohibited. 
    No mound graves shall be allowed on any lot or plot in the cemetery under perpetual care pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 8-57) 
Secs. 30-133-30-150. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Interior Areas of Mausoleums 

Sec. 30-151. - Notice when care desired. 
    The owner of a lot in the cemetery, or any other authorized applicant, on whose lot there is a mausoleum and who desires to place the interior area of such mausoleum under perpetual care, shall after first having had his lot accepted by the city for perpetual care under this article, give notice in writing to the director. 
(Code 1981, § 8-69) 
Sec. 30-152. - Examination of mausoleum. 
    Upon receipt of a notice provided for in section 30-151, the director shall examine the mausoleum in question. 
(Code 1981, § 8-70) 
Sec. 30-153. - Acceptance or refusal. 
(a)  If, upon examination under section 30-152, the director finds the mausoleum in question to be in acceptable condition, he shall certify such fact to the collector of city taxes and to the applicant. The payment procedures outlined in section 30-108 shall then be followed. 
(b)  If, upon examination under section 30-152, the director finds the mausoleum in question not to be in acceptable condition, the director shall promptly notify the applicant of his refusal to accept the mausoleum for perpetual care in its present condition. 
(Code 1981, § 8-71; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 30-154. - Duty of city upon acceptance; delivery of key; repairs. 
    When the interior of the mausoleum is accepted by the city for perpetual care under this article, it shall be the duty of the city to keep such area clean. The owner or authorized applicant shall deliver to the director a key to the mausoleum. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the city to make repairs to any mausoleum. 
(Code 1981, § 8-72) 
Chapter 34 - CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Solicitation of contributions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq.; local ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 57-63. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively given them in this section, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
    Charitable means and shall include the words philanthropic, social services or welfare, either actual or purported. 
    Contribution means any gift, bequest, devise or other grant of any money, credit, financial assistance or property of any kind or value, including the promise to contribute, except payments by the membership of an organization for membership fees, dues, fines, or assessments, or for services rendered to individual members, and except money, credit, financial assistance or property received from any governmental authority. The term "contribution" shall not include any donation of blood or any gift made pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 32.1-289 et seq. 
    Person means any individual, organization, trust, foundation, association, partnership, corporation, society, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Promoter means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes or attempts to promote, manage, supervise or organize a campaign of solicitation. 
    Religious and religion shall not mean and include the word "charitable," but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. 
    Solicit and solicitation mean the request or appeal, directly or indirectly, for any contribution on the plea or representation that such contribution will be used for a charitable purpose, including, without limitation, the following methods of requesting such contribution: 
(1)  Any oral or written request; 
(2)  Any announcement to the press, over the radio or television, or by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal or campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected therewith; 
(3)  The distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or other publication which directly or by implication seeks to obtain public support; or 
(4)  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, subscription, ticket, or any service or tangible item in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable purpose or where the name of any charitable or civic organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will be donated to any charitable purpose. 
Solicitation shall be deemed to occur when the request is made, at the place the request is received, whether or not the person making the request actually receives any contribution. 
(Code 1981, § 29-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48. 
Sec. 34-2. - Violations of chapter. 
    Any person who willfully and knowingly violates or causes to be violated any provision of this chapter, or who willfully and knowingly gives false or incorrect information to the city in filing statements or reports required by this chapter, whether such report or statement is verified or not, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for the first offense by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 or by confinement in jail for not more than six months, or both, and for the second and any subsequent offense by a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $2,500.00 or by confinement in jail for not more than one year, or both. 
(Code 1981, § 29-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-59. 
Sec. 34-3. - Exemptions. 
    Any provision of this chapter from which any person is exempted by law shall not apply to such person. 
Sec. 34-4. - Misrepresentations, deception or fraud in soliciting or in applications or reports under chapter. 
    No person shall, directly or indirectly, solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city, or in any application or report filed under this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 29-3) 
Sec. 34-5. - Investigation of solicitors' affairs. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized to investigate the affairs of any person soliciting for charitable or religious purposes within the city, whether or not such person has or is required to have a permit or certificate under this chapter, and make public his written findings in order that the public may be fully informed as to the affairs of any of such person. Such person shall make available to the chief of police, or to any representative designated by the chief of police in writing for such specific purpose, all books, records or other information reasonably necessary to enable the chief of police to fully and fairly inform the public of all facts necessary to a full understanding by the public of the work and methods of operation of such person. 
(b)  Five days before the public release of any findings under this section, the chief of police shall serve a copy of such findings upon the person investigated and, at the time of the release of his findings, he shall release a copy of any written statement such person may file with him in explanation, denial or confirmation of such findings. 
(Code 1981, § 29-4) 
Secs. 34-6-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-31. - Records to be kept. 
    No person shall solicit any contributions for any charitable purpose without maintaining a system of accounting whereby all donations and all disbursements are entered upon the books or records of such person's treasurer or other financial officer. 
(Code 1981, § 29-16) 
Sec. 34-32. - Reports. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons issued permits under this article to furnish to the chief of police, within 60 days after the solicitation has been completed, a detailed report and financial statement showing the amount raised by the solicitation, the amount expended in collecting such funds, including a detailed report of the wages, fees, commissions and expenses paid to any person in connection with such solicitation, and the disposition of the balance of the funds collected by the solicitation. This report shall be available for public inspection at the office of the chief of police. The permit holder shall make available to the chief of police, or to any person designated in writing by the chief of police, as his representative for such purpose, all books, records and papers whereby the accuracy of such report may be checked. 
(Code 1981, § 29-17) 
Secs. 34-33-34-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 34-51. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose within the city without a permit from the chief of police authorizing such solicitation; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any established organization or other entity organized and operated wholly or partially for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person, if the solicitations by such established organization or other entity are conducted only among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of such established organization or other entity. 
(b)  When a permit has been issued under this division to other than an individual, then the individual agents and solicitors for the permit holder shall not be required to obtain individual permits. 
(Code 1981, § 29-29) 
Sec. 34-52. - Application generally. 
(a)  An application for a permit required by this division shall be made to the chief of police upon forms prescribed by him. Such application shall be sworn to or affirmed and filed with the chief of police at least 15 days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective. Such application shall contain the following information or, in lieu thereof, a statement satisfactory to the chief of police of the reasons why such information or any item thereof is not furnished: 
(1)  A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, such statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final distribution thereof. 
(2)  A full statement of the general character and extent of the charitable work being done or to be done by the applicant, and showing how much thereof is being done or is to be done within the city. 
(3)  A statement that the actual cost of the solicitation will not exceed 25 percent of the total amount to be raised, or if the cost of solicitation is expected to exceed 25 percent, a statement of what the maximum cost is expected to be, together with a statement of any special facts tending to show that there are peculiar reasons which make a cost higher than 25 percent reasonable in the particular case. 
(4)  A statement to the effect that, if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any department or officer thereof. 
(5)  A statement to the effect that, if a permit is granted, no person under the age of 16 years will be permitted to solicit money. 
(b)  If, while any application filed pursuant to this section is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the chief of police, in writing, thereof within 24 hours after such change. 
(Code 1981, § 29-30(a)(1)-(5), (b)) 
Sec. 34-53. - Investigation of applicant and application; inspection of applicant's records. 
    The chief of police shall examine all applications filed under this division and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation of the application and the applicant as he shall deem necessary in order for him to perform his duties under this division. Upon request by the chief of police, the applicant shall make available for inspection by the chief of police, or any person designated in writing by the chief of police as his representative for such purpose, all of the applicant's books, records and papers at any reasonable time before the application is granted. 
(Code 1981, § 29-31) 
Sec. 34-54. - Fee. 
    No application for a permit required under this division shall be accepted or considered by the chief of police unless the person applying for the permit pays to the city a fee of $10.00 to aid in defraying the cost involved in considering the application for the permit and taking action with respect thereto, which fee shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1981, § 29-32) 
Sec. 34-55. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  The chief of police shall issue a permit applied for under this division whenever he shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)  The fee required by section 34-54 has been paid. 
(2)  All of the statements made in the application are true. 
(3)  The applicant, or if the applicant is not an individual person, that its managing officers and managing agents, is or are of good character and reputation for honesty and integrity. 
(4)  The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons. 
(5)  The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise. 
(6)  The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public. 
(7)  The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the charitable cause described in the application, and will not be conducted primarily for private profit. 
(8)  The cost of raising the funds will be reasonable. Any such cost in excess of 25 percent of the amount collected shall be considered to be unreasonable, unless special facts are presented showing to the satisfaction of the chief of police that peculiar reasons make a cost higher then 25 percent reasonable in the particular case. 
(9)  The kind, character and method of the proposed solicitation, the time when it will take place and its duration are such that the solicitation will be in the interest of and not inimical to the safety, convenience or welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(b)  The chief of police shall file in his office for public inspection a written statement of his findings of fact and his decisions upon each application. If the application is denied, the chief of police shall notify the applicant, by registered mail at the address given in the application, stating the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1981, § 29-33) 
Sec. 34-56. - Contents. 
    A permit issued under this division shall bear the name and address of the person to whom it is issued, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city, or by any of its departments, officers or employees, of the purpose or of the person conducting the solicitation. All such permits shall be signed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 29-34) 
Sec. 34-57. - Term; renewal. 
    At the discretion of the chief of police, a permit issued under this division shall grant the right to solicit on one or more single, nonconsecutive days in any calendar year or the right to solicit for any number of consecutive days not to exceed one year from the date of the permit. Upon the expiration of any permit of the kind last mentioned, and if requested in writing to do so, the chief of police may renew the permit, if he is satisfied that the requirements of this article are still being met and that no violation of this article has been committed. The chief of police may, in his discretion, require a new application, and his action upon such new application shall be governed by the same standards as to granting or withholding the permit as in the case of an original application. No new permit or renewal of an original permit shall be issued for more than one year. 
(Code 1981, § 29-35) 
Sec. 34-58. - Transfer. 
    Any permit issued under this division shall be nontransferable. 
(Code 1981, § 29-36) 
Sec. 34-59. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Whenever it shall be shown, or whenever the chief of police has reason to believe, that any person to whom a permit has been issued under this division has violated any of the provisions of this article, or that any promoter, agent or solicitor of a permit holder has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation, the chief of police shall immediately suspend the permit and give the permit holder written notice, in person or by registered, special delivery mail, of the suspension and of a hearing to be held within two days of such suspension to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. The notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the chief of police has acted in suspending the permit. 
(b)  At the hearing referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the permit holder and any other interested person shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts upon which the chief of police based the suspension of the permit and any other facts which may aid the chief of police in determining whether this article has been violated or whether the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented. If, after such hearing, the chief of police finds that this article has been violated or the purpose of the solicitation has been misrepresented, he shall, within two days after the hearing, file in his office for public inspection and send to the permit holder by registered mail, or serve upon him in any manner provided by general law for the service of notices, a written statement of the facts upon which he bases such a finding and shall immediately revoke the permit. If, after such hearing, the chief of police finds that this article has not been violated and the purpose of the solicitation has not been misrepresented, he shall, within two days after the hearing, give to the permit holder a written statement cancelling the suspension of the permit and stating that no violation or misrepresentation was found to have been committed. 
(Code 1981, § 29-37) 
Secs. 34-60-34-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-81-34-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 

Sec. 34-96. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall solicit contributions for any religious purpose within the city without a certificate of registration from the chief of police authorizing such solicitation; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any established organization or other entity organized and operated exclusively for religious purposes and not operated for the pecuniary benefit of any person, if the solicitations by such established organization or other entity are conducted only among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of such established organization or other entity. 
(b)  When a certificate has been issued under this division to other than an individual, then the individual agents and solicitors for the certificate holder shall not be required to obtain individual certificates. 
(Code 1981, § 29-61) 
Sec. 34-97. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a certificate required by this division shall be made to the chief of police upon forms prescribed by him. Such application shall be sworn to or affirmed and shall contain the following information or, in lieu thereof, a statement satisfactory to the chief of police of the reasons why such information or any item thereof is not furnished: 
(1)  A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for religious purposes by the applicant, such statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it and the final distribution thereof. 
(2)  A full statement of the general character and extent of the religious work being done or to be done by the applicant and also the character and extent of such work being done or to be done within the city. 
(3)  A statement to the effect that, if a certificate is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any department or officer thereof. 
(4)  A statement to the effect that, if a certificate is granted, no person under the age of 16 years will be permitted to solicit money. 
(5)  Such other information as may be submitted to the chief of police in order for him to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation. 
(b)  If, while any application filed under this section is pending, or during the term of any certificate granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the chief of police, in writing, thereof within 24 hours after such change. 
(Code 1981, § 29-62) 
Sec. 34-98. - Fee. 
    No application for a certificate under this division shall be accepted or considered by the chief of police, unless the person applying for the certificate pays to the city a fee of $4.00 to aid in defraying the cost involved in considering the application for the certificate and taking action with respect thereto, which fee shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1981, § 29-63) 
Sec. 34-99. - Issuance. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a certificate under this division and payment of the prescribed fee, the chief of police shall forthwith issue such certificate to the applicant. 
(Code 1981, § 29-64) 
Sec. 34-100. - Contents. 
    A certificate of registration issued under this division shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the certificate, the date issued and a statement that the certificate does not constitute an endorsement by the city, or by any of its departments or officers, of the purpose of the solicitation or of the person conducting the solicitation. 
(Code 1981, § 29-65) 
Sec. 34-101. - Term; renewal. 
    A certificate issued under this division shall remain in force and effect for a period of one year after the issuance thereof and shall be renewed upon the expiration of such period upon the filing of a request in writing, but the chief of police may require a new application. 
(Code 1981, § 29-66) 
Chapter 35 - SOLICITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Restrictions on aggressive solicitation, ch. 36. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 35-1. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the solicitation restrictions imposed under this article are to: 
(a)  Reduce the detrimental effect that threatening and intimidating conduct has on a safe environment in the city; and 
(b)  Restrict solicitation in certain places where citizens feel vulnerable to criminal activity, without prohibiting constitutionally protected activity; 
(c)  Restrict solicitation after dark, when citizens feel vulnerable to criminal activity, without prohibiting constitutionally protected activity; 
(d)  Reduce the detrimental effect that solicitation has on tourism and retail business. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 35-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Beg, panhandle or solicit means any request made in person for donations, contributions, employment, business, sales or exchanges of any kind either by words, bodily gestures, signs or other means, from another person. 
    Public place means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, public grounds, public driveway, public parking lot, public transportation facility, or inside a motor vehicle in or on any such place. 
    Traveled portion of a roadway means any portion of a roadway that is normally used by a moving motor vehicle or that is not a lawful parking area. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 35-3. - Offense. 
(a)  No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in the following public places: 
(1)  Within 50 feet in any direction of any entrance or exit of any bank during the hours of operation of such bank; 
(2)  Within 50 feet in any direction of any automated teller machine; 
(3)  Within 20 feet in any direction of any outdoor or sidewalk café or restaurant during the hours of operation of such outdoor or sidewalk café or restaurant; and 
(4)  Within 20 feet in any direction of any package store or food store that sells alcohol during the hours of operation of such package store or food store; 
(5)  On the traveled portion of any street, roadway or road; 
(6)  The intersection while walking on, standing on or going into any street or highway used for motor vehicle travel, or any area appurtenant thereto (including medians, sidewalks, shoulder areas, turning lanes, ramps and exit ramps) within 50 feet (in any direction) of any of the following intersections, ramps, and exit ramps: 
a.  Exit 52 ramp from I-95 to East Washington Street; 
b.  Graham Road at I-95 off Ramp; 
c.  The intersection of Graham Road and Crater Road; 
d.  The intersection of Wagner Road and Crater Road; 
e.  The intersection of Sycamore Street and Bank Street; 
f.  The intersection of Crater Circle and Crater Road; 
g.  The intersection of Wythe Street and Sycamore Street; 
h.  The intersection of Washington and Sycamore Street; and 
i.  The intersection of Washington and Union Street. 
(7)  Within any public vehicle, facility or place. 
(b)  No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in a public place after sunset or before sunrise. However, passive solicitation is permitted at any time except within the areas listed in this section or as otherwise prohibited by law; provided such activity does not create a public safety issue. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 1, 5-21-2013; Ord. No. 14-82, 9-2-2014) 
State Law reference- Localities may prohibit or regulate distribution of handbills, etc., solicitation of contributions, and sale of merchandise or services on highways within their boundaries or on public roadways and medians, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-931. 
Sec. 35-4. - Permitted conduct. 
    Acts authorized as an exercise of a person's constitutional right to picket, protest, or speak and acts authorized by a permit issued by the city shall not constitute unlawful activity under this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 35-5. - Penalty. 
    Any person, upon conviction of an offense charged under this article, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 1, 5-21-2013) 
Chapter 36 - RESTRICTIONS ON AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Solicitation, ch. 35. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the aggressive solicitation restrictions imposed under this article are to: 
(a)  Reduce the detrimental effect that threatening and intimidating conduct has on a safe environment in the city; 
(b)  Restrict certain aggressive acts of solicitors without prohibiting constitutionally protected activity; and 
(c)  Maintain the peace and order of the city and preserve and protect the rights of all citizens to be free of intimidation. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 3, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-2. - Offense. 
    No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 3, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggressive manner means intentionally or recklessly: 
(a)  Touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting, asking, or begging; 
(b)  Blocking the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonable causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact in the course of soliciting, asking, or begging; or 
(c)  Using violent, obscene, or threatening gestures or language toward a person solicited, if such conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself, or the commission of a criminal act upon the person or upon property in the person's immediate possession or otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value or buying merchandise. 
    Public place means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, public grounds, public driveway, public parking lot, public transportation facility, or inside a motor vehicle in or on any such place. 
    Solicit, ask or beg means using the spoken, written, or printed work or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 3, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-4. - Permitted conduct. 
    Acts authorized as an exercise of a person's constitutional right to picket, protest, or speak and acts authorized by a permit issued by the city shall not constitute unlawful activity under this article; nor does aggressive solicitation include solicitation without engaging in the acts specifically prohibited in this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 3, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-5. - Penalty. 
    Any person, upon conviction of an offense charged under this article, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 13-37, § 3, 5-21-2013) 
Chapter 38 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 26; environment, ch. 50; planning, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 114; waterways, ch. 122. 
State Law reference- Open-Space Land Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1700 et seq.; promoting resources and advantages of city, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-940; Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4900 et seq.; Housing Authorities Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-1 et seq.; Virginia Housing Development Authority Act, Code of Virginia, § 36-55.24 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PETERSBURG REDEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING AUTHORITY 

Sec. 38-1. - Affirmation; appointment of members; terms. 
    In accordance with the 1950 Code of Virginia, § 36-11, as amended, the city council affirms the establishment of the Petersburg Redevelopment and Housing Authority and designates the number of commissioners to be seven. The commissioners shall serve for four-year staggered terms expiring on the next succeeding September 30 on or after the expiration of such four-year term. 
(Ord. No. 02-22, 4-2-2002) 
Secs. 38-2-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed Art. VII, §§ 38-31-38-37, which pertained to the tourism advisory board and derived from Code 1981, §§ 35.5-1-35-5.8. 

Secs. 38-31-38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-61. - Statement of purpose. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 59.1-270 et seq., and the resultant declaration of the governor of the commonwealth designating a portion of the city as an urban enterprise zone, it is the purpose of this article to stimulate business and industrial growth within the area designated as the Petersburg Urban Enterprise Zone by means of tax incentives, fee exemptions, governmental programs and other initiatives established to promote such growth. 
(Code 1981, § 36.1-2) 
Sec. 38-62. - Boundaries established. 
    The boundaries of the Petersburg Urban Enterprise Zone are as follows: 
    Beginning at the intersection of the northern city limits of the City of Petersburg and Interstate 95; thence southwardly along the centerline of I-95 to the south bank of the original channel of the Appomattox River; thence along the said south bank in an easterly direction to Poor Creek; thence along Poor Creek to East Bank Street; thence eastwardly along the centerline of East Bank Street to a point which is the intersection of East Bank Street with the northern projection of Patrick Street; thence southwardly along the said northern projection of Patrick Street and along the centerline of Patrick Street to Nottoway Street; thence westwardly along Nottoway Street to Accomack Street; thence southwardly along Accomack Street to Wythe Street; thence westwardly along Wythe Street to I-95; thence southwardly along the centerline of I-95 to its intersection with the eastward projection of the centerline of Surry Lane; thence westwardly along the projected and actual centerline of Surry Lane to South Sycamore Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of South Sycamore Street to Shore Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Shore Street to Halifax Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Halifax Street to Independence Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Independence Street to South Jones Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of South Jones Street to Lee Avenue; thence westwardly along the centerline of Lee Avenue to South Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of South Street to West High Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of West High Street to its intersection with the abandoned right-of-way of the Seaboard Coast Line Railway; thence northwardly along the centerline of said right-of-way to the Appomattox River, said river being the northern city limits of the City of Petersburg, Virginia; thence along the northern city limits to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 36.1-3) 
Sec. 38-63. - Rules and regulations. 
    Rules and regulations prescribing procedures effectuating the purpose of this chapter shall be promulgated by the city manager and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 36.1-8) 
Secs. 38-64-38-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 38-81. - Business taxes. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 26 of this Code, businesses, trades, professions, occupations and callings located or locating within the Petersburg Urban Enterprise Zone that are designated as qualified business firms by the state department of housing and community development in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 59.1-279, are exempt from the payment of local license taxes. Such exemptions shall extend for a maximum of five calendar years and shall be coextensive with the years for which state tax credits are received in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 59.1-280. 
(Code 1981, § 36.1-4) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 26; taxation, ch. 106. 
Sec. 38-82. - Building permit fees, zoning filing fees, and land disturbing permit fees. 
    Any business firm located or locating within the Petersburg Urban Enterprise Zone designated as a qualified business firm by the state department of housing and community development in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 59.1-279, is exempted from all building permit fees, zoning filing fees, and land disturbing permit fees, not withstanding the provisions of chapter 22, chapter 50, article IV, and the zoning ordinance, respectively. 
(Code 1981, § 36.1-5) 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of the council. 
Sec. 38-83. - Water and sewer fees. 
    Any business firm located or locating within the Petersburg Urban Enterprise Zone designated as a qualified business firm by the state department of housing and community development in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 59.1-279, is exempted from all sewer and water connection fees, notwithstanding the provisions of section 114-68 and section 114-204, respectively. 
(Code 1981, § 36.1-6) 
Sec. 38-84. - Retail sales tax. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 106, article IV of this Code, any business firm located or locating within the Petersburg Urban Enterprise Zone designated as a qualified business firm by the state department of housing and community development in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 59.1-279, is exempted from the payment of the local one percent sales tax for all items purchased for the conduct of its business. Such exemption shall extend for a period not to exceed five years and shall be coextensive with the years for which the state sales tax is exempted in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 59.1-282. 
(Code 1981, § 36.1-7) 
Secs. 38-85-38-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - I-95 TECHNOLOGY ZONE 

Sec. 38-90. - Purpose. 
    The city council finds that certain classes of high technology business activities have special economic significance to the city due to the nature of the technology and their potential for high growth in employment and capital investment. The city council further finds that the most appropriate method of encouraging location of new businesses and the expansion of certain existing classes of technology businesses is to create a technology zone with particular boundaries as designated herein and located on the east side of Interstate 95, and as authorized by the 1950 Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3850, as amended. The city council has determined that the establishment of this technology zone will improve economic conditions, hasten redevelopment, and benefit the welfare of its citizens. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, 7-15-2003) 
Sec. 38-91. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
    Base assessed value. The term "base assessed value" shall be defined as the assessed value of machinery and tools within a local enterprise zone as shown upon the records of the commissioner of the revenue on January 1 of the year preceding the effective date of the ordinance establishing the local technology zone development taxation. 
    Current assessed value. The term "current assessed value" shall be defined as the annual assessed value of machinery and tools in a local technology zone as shown upon the records of the commissioner of the revenue. 
    Definite place of business. The term "definite place of business" shall be defined as an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing over a period of 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person and real property leased to another. A definite place of business may include several facilities operated by the same person, as long as each facility will be located within the boundaries of a qualified technology zone. 
    New equipment. The term "new equipment" is defined as items of equipment subject to machinery and tools taxes that are brought on to the definite place of business within a five-year period, commencing on the first tax day following the date on which each item of property is first brought on to the site. 
    Qualified technology. The term "qualified technology" shall mean the research and development, manufacturing and/or production of any of the following: 
(1)  Pharmaceutical ingredients or advanced intermediaries; or 
(2)  Synthetic and organic chemical compounds for use in biotechnology or the production of pharmaceuticals. 
    Qualified technology business. The term "qualified technology business" shall be defined as a new or existing business that has a "definite place of business" as defined in paragraph (c) of this section, within a "qualified technology zone" as defined in paragraph (g) of this section, and which is primarily engaged in a qualified technology, as defined in paragraph (e) of this section. 
    Qualified technology zone. The term "qualified technology zone" shall mean the I-95 Technology Zone as described in section 38-98 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, 7-15-2003) 
Sec. 38-92. - Authorization. 
    There is hereby established a Technology Zone Taxation Program in the City of Petersburg. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, 7-15-2003) 
Sec. 38-93. - Technology zone incentives. 
    Qualified technology businesses shall receive the following: 
(1)  Capital investment grants: There is hereby established a grant provided to qualified technology businesses. The grant will be allocated by the industrial development authority of the city and will be based on the new or qualifying existing equipment within the technology zone. Each annual installment of the capital investment grant will be calculated based on the machinery and tools taxes paid by a qualified technology business on such new equipment in that calendar year. The grant, as further defined and limited by this article, will be equal to 100 percent of the machinery and tools taxes paid in years one through five attributable to such new or qualifying existing equipment and allocated to the local enterprise zone development fund. 
(2)  The capital investment grant shall be paid annually in each year that the qualified technology business has such new equipment. In furtherance of the foregoing, the five-year grant period shall apply separately to each and every item of such new equipment, such that a qualified technology business may receive the grant on a rolling basis for each year in which it has such new equipment. Accordingly, a qualified technology business shall be permitted to receive a capital investment grant for multiple years. 
(3)  The first year for which such incentives are calculated shall be the calendar year of the first machinery and tools tax filing for the calendar year in which a business firm is first certified as a qualified technology business. 
(4)  Taxes paid on leased items shall be eligible for the capital investment grant incentives only when the grant recipient directly pays to the City of Petersburg applicable machinery and tools taxes for those items. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 14-101, 10-21-2014) 
Sec 38-94. - Procedure. 
(a)  A business firm seeking to obtain the benefits provided under the technology zone program must make an initial filing to the city manager on applications provided by the commissioner of the revenue for certification as a qualified technology business. The city manager shall certify to the commissioner of the revenue those businesses that qualify. By January 31 of each calendar year, the commissioner of the revenue shall send applications to each previously certified business. 
(b)  Applications from qualified businesses for the capital investment grant shall contain information on machinery and tools taxes paid on new equipment. All applications shall be submitted on an annual basis to the commissioner of the revenue at the same time of the filing of the machinery and tools tax returns for that year in order to receive the grant. Applications will be processed within 60 days of the submission. Qualified technology businesses shall retain eligibility for technology zone incentives in subsequent calendar years. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue shall record in the appropriate books both the base assessed value and the current assessed value of machinery and tools in the local technology zone. 
(d)  Machinery and tools taxes attributable to the lower of the current assessed value or base assessed value of machinery and tools located in the local technology zone shall be allocated by the treasurer as they would be in the absence of this article. 
(e)  All of the increase in machinery and tools taxes paid attributable to the difference between (i) the current assessed value and (ii) the base assessed value shall be allocated by the treasurer and paid into a special fund entitled the "Local Enterprise Zone Development Fund." Such amounts paid into the fund shall be limited so as not to include any revenues resulting from machinery and tools taxes paid on other than new equipment as defined by this article. Such allocation shall be accomplished within 30 days after receipt of machinery and tools taxes from the qualified business. 
(f)  Grants shall be allocated, by the Petersburg Industrial Development Authority, to qualified businesses in accordance with this article from grants made to the authority by the city from the Technology Zone Development Fund. Such grants shall be allocated to the qualified business within 30 days after receipt of the funds from the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, 7-15-2003) 
Sec. 38-95. - Compliance. 
(a)  Once qualified as a qualified technology business, a business shall be entitled to file for a capital investment grant in each subsequent year unless it no longer engages in a qualified technology at a definite place of business in the qualified technology zone. 
(b)  If a business ceases to be a qualified technology business during a calendar tax year in which the grant program applies, any payments made to the qualified technology business shall be prorated for the months the business was a qualified technology business. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, 7-15-2003) 
Sec. 38-96. - Confidentiality. 
    To the extent permitted under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, confidential business records shall be safeguarded from disclosure. The technology zone administrator may establish verification procedures with the commissioner of the revenue for the city, which will ensure that all required taxes have been paid, but that all privacy concerns and rights are protected. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, 7-15-2003) 
Sec. 38-97. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be effective on October 21, 2014, and shall expire no later than January 1, 2020. Notwithstanding the foregoing, five-year grant periods, commenced for new equipment acquired prior to the termination of the technology zone, shall continue for the remainder of the five-year periods, and the technology zone shall extend for that purpose subject to the terms outlined herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 14-101, 10-21-2014) 
Sec. 38-98. - I-95 Technology Zone. 
    The I-95 Technology Zone shall consist of all that tract of land located in the City of Petersburg, Virginia, containing 197.033 acres located on the east side of Interstate 95 and on the north side of Wagner Road, further identified as Tax Map Parcel 063-01-001, reference to said Tax Map Parcel which is made by this section and incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 03-52, 7-15-2003) 
Secs. 38-99-38-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ARTS AND CULTURAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-105. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the words and phrases set out in this section shall have the following meanings: 
    Appeals committee means a group consisting of five individuals, appointed by council, established to review decisions made by the district administrator, hear appeals from those decisions, and provide guidance as to the overall administration of the district. 
    District means the Petersburg Arts and Cultural District established pursuant to this article. 
    Qualified arts organization means a business or not-for-profit organization physically located within the district which, has as its primary mission to expose, educate and enlighten the public with cultural and creative activities in the areas of the visual arts, performing arts, and literary arts. Examples may include, but are not limited to, theatres, art galleries, museums, and dance studios. 
    Resident means any individual or entity occupying a business structure or personal residence located within the district. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-106. - Purpose. 
    The city finds that the continued development and success of its arts and cultural venues require incentives, and determines that the most appropriate method of offering incentives for the area described in section 38-108 is to create an arts and cultural district in that area, as authorized by Code of Virginia § 15.2-1129.1. The city believes that the establishment of an arts and cultural district will improve the economic conditions of this geographic area which could, in turn, benefit the welfare of the citizens of Petersburg. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-107. - Administration. 
(a)  The district administrator shall be the city manager or his designee. The administrator shall establish the procedures for administration of this article, including, but not limited to: (i) the processes by which entities are designated as qualified arts organizations; (ii) the processes by which issues regarding the establishment and amendment of district boundaries are resolved; and (iii) the processes by which qualified arts organizations may obtain the benefits established pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Council may appoint up to five people to an appeals committee that may perform various tasks relating to the fair and effective administration of the district, including, but not limited to: (i) reviewing decisions made by the administrator; (ii) hearing appeals of those decisions; and (iii) providing guidance to the administrator, at his request or at the request of district residents, as to the overall administration of the district. At least one member shall be a representative of the Southside Virginia Council of the Arts, one shall be a representative of the Petersburg Chamber of Commerce, one shall be a representative of the Olde Towne Merchants Association, one shall be a representative of the Halifax Triangle area, and one shall be a representative of Downtown Petersburg, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-108. - Boundaries. 
    The district shall be located in the northeastern portion of the city, defined by the following borders: 
Beginning at the intersection of East Wythe and South Adams Streets, the boundary proceeds northwardly along the center line of South Adams Street, and thence along the centerline of North Adams Street to its intersection with the center line of Henry Street, thence eastwardly along the center line of Henry Street to the southward extension of the east property line of 203 Henry Street, thence northwardly along the east property lines of properties abutting Third Street to the center line of Bollingbrook Street, thence eastwardly along the center line of Bollingbrook Street to its intersection with the center line of Phoenix Street, thence northwardly along the center line of Phoenix Street to its intersection with the center line of Joseph Jenkins Roberts Street, thence northwestwardly along the center line of Joseph Jenkins Roberts Street to a point directly underneath the southern side of the Pocahontas Island ramp, thence westwardly to the center line of the railroad spur line serving Pocahontas Island, thence westwardly along the center line of the railroad spur line to its intersection with the center line of the Norfolk Southern main railroad track, thence westwardly along the center line of the Norfolk Southern main railroad track to its intersection with the northward extension of the west property line of property addressed as 520 McNeil's Alley, thence southwardly along this west property line and the west property line of property addressed as 201 Grove Avenue to the centerline of Grove Avenue, thence southwardly to and along the west property line of property addressed as 424 North Market Street, thence southwardly along the west property lines of properties abutting N. Market Street to the intersection of the center line of West Wythe Street, in the process crossing Low Street, High Street, Hinton Street, West Washington Street, thence eastwardly along the center line of West Wythe Street to the intersection of the northward extension of the east property line of property addressed as 111 South Market Street, thence southwardly along the east property lines of properties fronting South Market Street to the intersection of the north property line of property addressed as 153 Halifax Street, thence westwardly along the north property line of 153 Halifax Street extended to its intersection with the center line of South Market Street, thence southwardly along the center line of South Market Street to its intersection with the center line of Halifax Street, thence eastwardly along the south property lines of properties fronting South Avenue to the center line of Harrison Street, thence eastwardly along the center line of College Place to the intersection of the southward extension of the east property line of property addressed as 33 College Place, thence northwardly along the east property line of property addressed as 33 College Place, thence northwardly along the east property lines of properties fronting Harrison Street to the intersection with the north boundary of property addressed as 105 Harrison Street, thence eastwardly along the southern boundary of property addressed as 28 West Wythe Street, thence northwardly along the east property line of property addressed as 28 West Wythe Street to the intersection of this property line, as extended, with the center line of West Wythe Street, thence eastwardly along the center line of West Wythe and East Wythe Streets to the point of beginning. 
    All parcels located within the boundaries described above are included in the district. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 3-4-2008) 
Sec. 38-109. - Exemption from admissions tax; other incentives. 
    Qualified arts organizations shall be exempt, for a period of no more than 10 years, from the admissions tax imposed by chapter 106, article V, sections 106-201 et seq. of the Petersburg City Code. Council may establish other incentives at the request of any person or the appeals committee, including provisions to increase regulatory flexibility and other incentives designed to help create and support arts and cultural venues in the district. 
(Ord. No. 08-26, § 1, 3-4-2008) 
Chapter 42 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of police officers for issuance of civil warrants for collection of city taxes and other claims of the city, § 3-19. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 70; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Criminal and traffic jurisdiction of general district courts, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-123.1. 

Sec. 42-1. - Assessment for law library. 
(a)  The city does hereby assess, as part of the costs incident to each civil action filed in any court located within the city, the sum of $2.00. Such assessments shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed and remitted to the collector of city taxes, and held by such treasurer, subject to the disbursements by the city council for the acquisition of law books, law periodicals and computer legal research services and equipment for the establishment, use and maintenance of a law library, which shall be open for the use of the public at hours convenient to the public, and such disbursements may include compensation to be paid to the librarians and other necessary staff for the maintenance of such library and acquisition of suitable quarters for such library. The compensation of such librarians and the necessary staff and the cost of suitable quarters for such library shall be fixed by the city council and paid out of the fund created by the imposition of such assessment of cost. 
(b)  The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law, but shall not apply to any action in which the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof or the federal government is a party and in which the costs are assessed against the commonwealth, such political subdivision or the federal government. The city council is authorized to accept contributions to the fund from any bar association. 
(Code 1981, § 1-16; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70. 
Sec. 42-2. - Assessment for courthouse construction, renovation or maintenance. 
(a)  Imposed; amount. Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 17.1-281, and subject to the conditions and limitations thereof, there is hereby imposed an assessment as part of the costs in each civil action, and as a part of the fees taxed as costs against each defendant in each criminal and traffic case, in the district and circuit courts of the city, the sum of $2.00. The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. The assessment provided for in this section shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, and remitted to the collector of city taxes and held by the treasurer subject to disbursements by the city council for construction, renovation, or maintenance of any city courthouse or jail and court-related facilities and to defray increases in the cost of heating, cooling, electricity, and ordinary maintenance of such facilities. 
(b)  Additional sum imposed; amount. Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 17.1-281(C), and subject to the conditions and limitations thereof, there is hereby imposed an assessment as part of the costs in each civil action where the amount in controversy exceeds $500.00, and as a part of the fees taxed as costs against each defendant in each criminal and traffic case, in the district courts of the city, the additional sum of $3.00. The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. The assessment provided for in this section shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, remitted to the collector of city taxes, and held by the treasurer subject to disbursements by the city council solely for the construction, reconstruction, renovation of, or adaptive re-use of a structure for a courthouse. 
(Code 1981, §§ 34-224, 34-225; Ord. No. 12-64, 9-18-2012; Ord. No. 12-87, 12-18-2012; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 42-3. - Assessment for courthouse security. 
(a)  Imposed; amount. Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 53.1-120D, and subject to the conditions and limitations thereof, there is hereby imposed an assessment as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case in the Petersburg District or Circuit Court in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance the sum of $10.00. This assessment shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. 
(b)  Collection; disbursement. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the case is heard, remitted to the collector of city taxes and held by the treasurer subject to appropriation by the city council to the sheriff's office for the funding of courthouse security personnel, and, if requested by the sheriff, equipment and other personal property used in connection with courthouse security. 
(Ord. No. 02-30, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 07-60, 7-3-2007; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 42-4. - Processing fee may be imposed on certain individuals. 
(a)  Imposed; amount. Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1613.1, and subject to the conditions and limitations thereof, there is hereby imposed a processing fee of $25.00 on any individual admitted to the city jail, the jail farm, or the regional jail following conviction. This fee shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. 
(b)  Collection; disbursement. The fee shall be ordered as a part of court costs collected by the court clerk, deposited into the account of the collector of city taxes and shall be used by the sheriff's office to defray the costs of processing arrested persons into the city jail, the jail farm, or the regional jail. 
(Ord. No. 02-31, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 42-5. - Assessment for electronic summons system. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 17.1-279.1, the city council shall assess an additional sum not in excess of $5.00 as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case in any court in the city in which the defendant is charged with a violation of any statute or ordinance. The police department will use the additional funds toward its electronic summons system. 
(Ord. No. 17-37, 9-5-2017) 
Chapter 46 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Nomination and election of members of city council, §§ 2-2.1, 2-3.1. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Elections, Code of Virginia, tit. 24.2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WARDS 

Sec. 46-31. - Division of city into wards. 
    The city is divided into seven wards, as provided for in section 2-1.1 of the Charter. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1) 
Sec. 46-32. - Ward map. 
    The city engineer shall make a map of all the wards of the city, as defined in section 2-1.1 of the Charter, and file the ward map with the clerk of the circuit court of the city, to be recorded as required by law. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2) 
Sec. 46-33. - Election districts. 
    Each ward of the city shall constitute a separate election district. 
(Code 1981, § 11-3) 
State Law reference- Election districts, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-305 et seq. 
Secs. 46-34-46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRECINCTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Precincts, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-307 et seq. 

Sec. 46-61. - First Ward. 
    The First Ward shall consist of one precinct described as follows: 
All that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection on the north corporate limits line with the east corporate limits line at East Washington Street; thence southwardly along the east corporate limits line to its intersection with the south corporate limits line; thence westwardly along the south corporate limits line to its intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railway main line; thence northwardly along the centerline of the Norfolk Southern main line to its intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railway belt line; thence generally westwardly along the centerline of Norfolk Southern Railway belt line to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate 95; thence northwardly along the centerline of Interstate 95 to its intersection with Poor Creek; thence westwardly upstream along Poor Creek to the southwestern corner of Tax Parcel 042-09-0025; thence southwestwardly in a straight line to the southeast corner of Tax Parcel 042-11-0800 (Crater Ridge Apartments); thence westwardly along the south property line of said Tax Parcel 042-11-0800 (Crater Ridge Apartments) extended to its intersection with the centerline of South Crater Road; thence northwardly along the centerline of South Crater Road, then North Crater Road to its intersection with the centerline of Bollingbrook Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Bollingbrook Street to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate 95; thence northwardly along the centerline of Interstate 95 to its intersection with the north corporate limits line; thence eastwardly along the north corporate limits line to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 11-21; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-62. - Second Ward. 
    The Second Ward shall consist of one precinct described as follows: 
All that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at a point on the intersection on the south corporate limits line with the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railway main line; thence northwardly along the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railway main line to its intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railway belt line; thence generally westwardly along the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railway belt line to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate 95; thence northwardly along the centerline of Interstate 95 to intersection with Poor Creek; thence westwardly upstream along Poor Creek to the southwestern corner of Tax Parcel 042-09-0025; thence southwestwardly in a straight line to the southeast corner of Tax Parcel 042-11-0800 (Crater Ridge Apartments); thence westwardly along the south property line of said Tax Parcel 042-11-0800 (Crater Ridge Apartments) extended to its intersection with the centerline of South Crater Road; thence southwardly along the centerline of South Crater Road to its intersection with the extension of the centerline of the south leg of Flank Road; thence generally westwardly along the centerline of Flank Road to its intersection with the extension of the centerline of Fort Hayes Drive; thence eastwardly along the centerline of Fort Hayes Drive to its intersection with the south corporate limits line; thence generally eastwardly along the south corporate limits line to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 11-22; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-63. - Third Ward. 
    The Third Ward shall consist of one precinct described as follows: 
All that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at a point of the intersection of the centerline of Johnson Road and the south corporate limits line; thence eastwardly along the south corporate limits line to the intersection with the centerline of Fort Hayes Drive; thence northwestwardly along the centerline of Fort Hayes Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Flank Road; thence northeastwardly along the centerline of Flank Road and the southern leg thereof to its intersection with the centerline of South Crater Road; thence northwardly along the center line of South Crater Road to its intersection with the centerline of South Sycamore Street; thence generally northwestwardly along the centerline of South Sycamore Street to its intersection with the centerline of South Boulevard; thence eastwardly along the centerline of South Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Monticello Street, thence northwardly along the centerline of Monticello Street to its intersection with the centerline of Mount Vernon Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Mount Vernon Street to its intersection with the centerline of South Sycamore Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of South Sycamore Street to its intersection with the centerline of North Boulevard; thence generally southwestwardly along the centerline of North Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Johnson Road; thence southwardly along the centerline of Johnson Road to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 11-23; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-64. - Fourth Ward. 
    The Fourth Ward shall consist of one precinct described as follows: 
All that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection on the north corporate limits line with the intersection of the centerline of Interstate 95; thence southwardly along the centerline of Interstate 95 to its intersection with the centerline of Bollingbrook Street; thence eastwardly along the centerline of Bollingbrook Street to its intersection with the centerline of North Crater Road; thence southwardly along the centerline of North Crater Road, then South Crater Road to its intersection with the center line of South Sycamore Street; thence generally northwestwardly along South Sycamore Street to its intersection with the centerline of West South Boulevard; thence, eastwardly along the centerline of West South Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Monticello Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Monticello Street to its intersection with the centerline of Mount Vernon Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Mount Vernon Street to its intersection with centerline of South Sycamore Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of South Sycamore Street to its intersection with the centerline extended of Shore Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Shore Street to its intersection with the centerline of Ransom Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Ransom Street to its intersection with the centerline of Early Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Early Street to its intersection with the centerline of Harrison Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Harrison Street to its intersection with the centerline of Liberty Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Liberty Street to its intersection with the centerline of Byrne Street; thence, northwardly along the centerline of Byrne Street to its intersection with the centerline of Halifax Street; thence generally southwardly along the centerline of Halifax Street to its intersection with the centerline of South Market Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of South Market Street, then North Market Street to its intersection with the centerline of Low Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Low Street to its intersection with the centerline of Cross Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Cross Street to its intersection with the centerline of Plum Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Plum Street to its intersection with the centerline of Canal Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Canal Street to its intersection with the centerline of Fleet Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Fleet Street to its intersection with the north corporate limits line; thence eastwardly along the north corporate limits line to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 11-24; Ord. No. 96-80, § 11-24, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-65. - Fifth Ward. 
    The Fifth Ward shall consist of one precinct described as follows: 
All that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Johnson Road with the centerline of West South Boulevard; thence northwardly along the centerline of Johnson Road to its intersection with the centerline of North Boulevard; thence eastwardly along the centerline of North Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of South Sycamore Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of South Sycamore Street to its intersection with the centerline extended of Shore Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Shore Street to its intersection with the centerline of Ransom Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Ransom Street to its intersection with the centerline of Early Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Early Street to its intersection with the centerline of Harrison Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Harrison Street to its intersection with the centerline of Liberty Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Liberty Street to its intersection with the centerline of Byrne Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of Byrne Street to its intersection with the centerline of Halifax Street; thence generally southwardly along the centerline of Halifax Street to its intersection with the centerline of South Market Street; thence northwardly along the centerline of South Market Street, then North Market Street to its intersection with the centerline of Low Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Low Street to its intersection with the centerline of Cross Street; then northwardly along the centerline of Cross Street to its intersection with the centerline of Plum Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Plum Street to its intersection with the centerline of Canal Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of Canal Street to its intersection with the centerline of North South Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of North South Street to its intersection with the centerline of the former CSX Railroad spur line; thence westwardly along the centerline of the former CSX Railroad spur line to its intersection with the centerline of North Dunlop Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of North Dunlop Street, then South Dunlop Street to its intersection with the centerline of Rome Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Rome Street to its intersection with centerline of South West Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of South West Street to its intersection with the centerline of Lee Avenue; thence eastwardly along the centerline of Lee Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of the former CSX Railroad spur line (serving the former B&W manufacturing plant); thence southwardly along the centerline of the said former CSX Railroad spur line to its intersection with the centerline of Young Avenue; thence eastwardly along the centerline of Young Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Halifax Street; thence generally southwestwardly along the centerline of Halifax Street to its intersection with the centerline of Baylor's Lane; thence southwardly along the centerline of Baylor's Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Defense Road; thence generally southeastwardly along the centerline of Defense Road to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 11-25; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-66. - Sixth Ward. 
    The Sixth Ward shall consist of one precinct described as follows: 
All that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at a point on the north corporate limits line at Campbell's Bridge at Fleet Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of Fleet Street to its intersection with the centerline of Canal Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of Canal Street to its intersection with the centerline of North South Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of North South Street to its intersection with the centerline of the former CSX Railroad spur line; thence westwardly along the centerline of the former CSX Railroad spur line to its intersection with the centerline of North Dunlop Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of North Dunlop Street, then South Dunlop Street, to its intersection with the centerline of Rome Street; thence westwardly along the centerline of Rome Street to its intersection with the centerline of South West Street; thence southwardly along the centerline of South West Street to its intersection with centerline of Lee Avenue; thence eastwardly along the centerline of Lee Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of the former CSX Railroad spur line (serving the former B&W manufacturing plan); thence southwardly along the centerline of the said former CSX Railroad spur line to its intersection with the centerline of Young Avenue; thence eastwardly along the centerline of Young Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Halifax Street; thence generally southwestwardly along the centerline of Halifax Street to its intersection with the centerline of Baylor's Lane; thence southwardly along the centerline of Baylor's Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate 85; thence westwardly along the centerline of Interstate 85 to its intersection with the centerline of Squirrel Level Road; thence northwardly along the centerline of Squirrel Level Road to its intersection with the centerline of Boydton Plank Road; thence eastwardly along the centerline of Boydton Plank Road to its intersection with the centerline of the CSX Railroad main line; thence northwardly along the centerline of the CSX Railroad main line to its intersection with the north corporate limits line; thence eastwardly along the north corporate limits line to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 11-26; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-67. - Seventh Ward. 
    The Seventh Ward shall consist of one precinct described as follows: 
All that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: 
Beginning at the intersection of the north corporate limits line with the west corporate limits line; thence eastwardly along the north corporate limits line to its intersection with the centerline of CSX Railroad main line; thence southwardly along the centerline of the CSX Railroad main line to its intersection with the centerline of Boydton Plank Road; thence westwardly along the centerline of Boydton Plank Road to its intersection with the centerline of Squirrel Level Road; thence southwardly along the centerline of Squirrel Level Road to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate 85; thence eastwardly along the centerline of Interstate 85 to its intersection with the centerline of Baylor's Lane; thence southwardly along the centerline of Baylor's Lane to its intersection with the centerline of Defense Road; thence generally southeastwardly along the centerline of Defense Road to its intersection with the centerline of Johnson Road; thence southwardly along the centerline of Johnson Road to the south corporate limits line; thence westwardly along the south corporate limits line to the west corporate limits line; thence northwardly along the west corporate limits line to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 11-21; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-68. - Central absentee voter precinct. 
    There is hereby established a central absentee voter election precinct, for use in all elections. The central absentee voter election precinct shall conform in all respects with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 24.2-712, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 05-75, 9-6-2005) 
Secs. 46-69-46-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLLING PLACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Polling places, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-310 et seq. 

Sec. 46-91. - Generally. 
    There shall be one polling place in each ward, as provided in sections 46-92 through 46-98. 
(Code 1981, § 11-39; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-92. - First Ward. 
    The polling place for the First Ward shall be at the Blandford Academy, 816 East Bank Street. 
(Code 1981, § 11-40; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-93. - Second Ward. 
    The polling place for the Second Ward shall be the Good Shepherd Baptist Church, 2223 South Crater Road. 
(Code 1981, § 11-41; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 08-34, 4-15-2008; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-94. - Third Ward. 
    The polling place for the Third Ward shall be at the William W. Lawson, Jr., Gymnasium in the Petersburg High School, 3101 Johnson Road. 
(Code 1981, § 11-42; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-95. - Fourth Ward. 
    The polling place for the Fourth Ward shall be at the Union Train Station, 103 River Street. 
(Code 1981, § 11-43; Ord. No. 96-80, § 11-43, 7-2-1996; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 03-55, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 07-38, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-96. - Fifth Ward. 
    The polling place for the Fifth Ward shall be at Tabernacle Baptist Church's Community Life Center, 444 Halifax Street. 
(Code 1981, § 11-44; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-97. - Sixth Ward. 
    The polling place for the Sixth Ward shall be at the Westview Early Childhood Education Center, 1100 Patterson Street. 
(Code 1981, § 11-45; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 07-51, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec- 46.98. - Seventh Ward. 
    The polling place for the Seventh Ward shall be at the Stuart Elementary School, 100 Pleasants Lane. 
(Code 1981, § 11-46; Ord. No. 01-64, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 11-40, 5-17-2011) 
Sec. 46-99. - Central absentee voter polling place. 
    The polling place for the central absentee voter precinct shall be the council chambers on the 3rd floor of City Hall, 135 North Union Street, Petersburg, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 05-75, 9-6-2005) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-75, adopted September 6, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as § 46-99. For purposes of numerical order, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 46-99. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTION DATE FOR CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS AND SCHOOL BOARD MEMBERS 

Sec. 46-100. - Election of council and school board members. 
(a)  Pursuant to and in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), § 24.2-222.1, as amended, and notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia (1950), § 24.2-222, as amended, and notwithstanding Section 2-2.1 of the Charter of the City of Petersburg, in the year 2008, the members of the city council and members of the school board from wards two, four, and six shall be elected on the November general election date for terms to commence January 1, 2009. Thereafter, elections shall be held in such wards every fourth year on the November general election date. In the year 2010, the members of the city council and members of the school board from wards one, three, five, and seven shall be elected on the November general election date for terms to commence January 1, 2011. Thereafter, elections shall be held in such wards every fourth year on the November general election date. 
(b)  Pursuant to and in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), § 24.2-507, as amended, and notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2-3.1 of the Charter of the City of Petersburg, declarations of candidacy and the petitions therefor shall be filed according to the following schedule: 
(1)  For a November general election date, the deadline shall be at 7:00 p.m. on the second Tuesday in June; 
(2)  For a special election held at the same time as a November general election, either (i) at least seventy-four days before the election, or (ii) if the special election is being held at the second November election after the vacancy occurred, by 7:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in March. 
(3)  For a special election held at a time other than a general election, (i) at least thirty days before the election, or (ii) within five days of any writ of election or order calling a special election to be held less than 35 days after the issuance of the writ or order. 
(Ord. No. 07-15, 2-20-2007) 
Chapter 50 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 18; dangerous or vicious dogs, § 18-146 et seq.; rabies control, § 18-231 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; community development, ch. 38; floods, ch. 58; health and sanitation, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 78; planning, ch. 82; solid waste, ch. 94; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; deposit of hazardous or injurious material on street or sidewalk removal, § 98-21; subdivisions, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 114; radioactive wastes, § 114-268; hazardous waste, § 114-282; waterways, ch. 122; environmental site assessment for Chesapeake Bay preservation areas, § 122-98. 
State Law reference- Erosion and sediment control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.; local control programs, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-562; stormwater management, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.3; local air pollution ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1321; abatement or removal of nuisances, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-900, 15.2-1115. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Noise in parks, § 78-63. 

Sec. 50-31. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city to protect its citizens against excessive noise which is detrimental to life, health and enjoyment of property. In order to promote the public health, safety, welfare and the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city, the standards in this article relating to noise are hereby adopted. 
(Code 1981, § 19-1; Ord. No. 14-100, 10-21-2014) 
Sec. 50-32. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    A-weighted decibel means the sound level, in decibels, measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network or scale as specified in the ANSI S1.4-1983 (specifications for sound level meters). The level so read shall be postscripted dB(A) or dBA. 
    ANSI means The American National Standards Institute, Inc., New York, New York. 
    Daytime means the local time of day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. weekdays and from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays observed by city government unless otherwise specified. 
    Decibel means a unit that describes the sound pressure level or intensity of sound. The sound pressure level in decibels is 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound in microbars to a reference pressure of 0.0002 microbar; abbreviated dB. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
    Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    Industrial is given the same meaning as defined by the zoning ordinance. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle defined as a motor vehicle by § 46.2-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
    Multi-family dwelling means a building designed for, or occupied exclusively, by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Nighttime means those times excluded from the definition of daytime 
    Noise means any steady-rate or impulsive sound occurring on either a continuous or intermittent basis that disturbs persons or that causes or tends to cause an adverse effect on humans. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, cooperative, partnership, firm, association, trust, estate, private institution, group, agency, or any legal successors, representative, agent or agency thereof. 
    Residential area is given the same meaning as defined by the zoning ordinance. 
    Residential dwelling means a building or portion thereof designed or intended to be occupied as living quarters by one or more persons and including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
    Residential property line means an imaginary line along the ground surface and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by one person from that owned, leased or otherwise controlled by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions. 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
    Urban mixed use means a district that includes commercial, industrial, institutional and residential uses, such as B-2, B-3, RB, MXD-1 and MXD-2, as defined by the zoning ordinance. 
    Zoning district classification means the designation of land use classification contained in the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 19-3; Ord. No. 14-100, 10-21-2014) 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of the council. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-33. - Specific prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(a)  To use, operate or play any radio, phonograph, television, record, compact disc or tape player, musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device capable of producing or reproducing sound in such a manner or with such volume or duration that it is heard between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.: 
(1)  Inside the confines of the residential dwelling, house or multi-family dwelling of another person; or 
(2)  At 50 or more feet from the device, except for devices permitted to be used at public parks or recreation fields, sporting events, school-sponsored activities on school grounds, or duly authorized parades, public functions or commemorative events. 
(b)  To allow noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that is heard either inside the confines of the residential dwelling, house or multi-family dwelling of another person or at 50 or more feet when the noise is made by one or more persons. 
(c)  To operate, install, have, or permit on the outside of any store, shop, business establishment, warehouse or commercial building, any loudspeaker or other sound-producing or reproducing device capable of emitting music, noise, sounds, tapes or voice in such manner that it is heard on any public sidewalk or street unless it is used only intermittently for announcing or paging an individual or unless it signals the ringing of a telephone, danger from smoke, a fire or a burglary or the beginning or stopping of work or school, or unless it is operated in accordance with conditions of zoning. 
(d)  Using any instrument, whistle, drum or bell or making any other unnecessary noise for the purpose of advertising, announcing, or otherwise calling attention to any goods, wares, merchandise, or to any show, entertainment, or event. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by verbally announcing the sale of merchandise, food, or beverage at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses or other similarly licensed public entertainment events. 
(e)  To play or permit the playing of any radio, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device or mechanical equipment used for the amplification of sound, which is located within a motor vehicle and which is heard from outside the motor vehicle at a distance of 50 feet or more from the vehicle. This provision shall not apply to sirens, loud speakers and emergency communications radios in public safety vehicles, nor shall it apply to motor vehicle alarms or other security devices. 
(f)  To create noise heard in residential areas in connection with the loading or unloading of refuse, waste or recycling collection vehicles between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except those areas zoned for urban mixed use, when the sound or noise is produced in connection with the loading or unloading of refuse, waste or recycling collection vehicles. 
(g)  To create a noise disturbance across a residential property line between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in connection with lawn care, leaf removal, gardening, tree maintenance or removal, other landscaping, lawn or timbering activities; the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, grinder, sander or similar device; or the construction, demolition, repair, paving, excavation or alteration of a building or street. 
(h)  Operating or causing to be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays observed by city government equipment used in the construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, alleys or appurtenances thereto in the outdoors in any residential district within 100 yards of a lawfully occupied dwelling. This section shall not apply to construction of public projects, the repair or maintenance work performed on such projects or work performed by private or public utility companies for the repair of facilities or restoration of services. 
    Provided however, that the prohibitions of this section shall not apply to emergency work to provide public facilities or utilities, or to remove debris, when necessary to protect the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 14-100, 10-21-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-100, adopted Oct. 21, 2014, repealed § 50-33 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 50-33 pertained to violations of article and derived from § 19-2 of the 1981 Code. 
Sec. 50-34. - Exemptions. 
    This provision shall not apply to: 
(a)  Noise generated in connection with the business being performed in an industrial area; 
(b)  Locomotives and other railroad equipment, and aircraft; 
(c)  Sound emanating from any area permitted by the Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy or any division thereof; 
(d)  Police, fire, ambulance or emergency vehicle sirens; 
(e)  Sounds created when responding to emergencies, including emergency utility repairs; 
(f)  Motor vehicles and trucks traveling on roads; 
(g)  Heat pumps and/or air conditioners on residential properties; 
(h)  Backup generators running during power outages; 
(i)  Public transportation facilities; 
(j)  Burglar, fire or other alarms tests between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; 
(k)  Band performances or practices, athletic matches or practices and other such activities on school or recreational grounds between 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; 
(l)  Religious services, religious events or religious activities, including, but not limited to music, bells, chimes and organs which are a part of such religious activity between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; 
(m)  Sound amplifying equipment used at public parks or recreation fields provided the operation of such equipment has been approved by the department of parks and leisure services; 
(n)  Activities for which the regulation of noise has been preempted by federal law; 
(o)  Parades, fireworks or other special events or activities for which a permit has been issued by the city, within such hours as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1981, § 19-7; Ord. No. 14-100, 10-21-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-980. 
Sec. 50-35. - Animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to [allow an] animal or bird except farm animals in agricultural districts to create noise or intense barking that is plainly audible at least once a minute for ten consecutive minutes: 
(1)  Inside the confines of the residential dwelling, house or multi-family dwelling of another; or 
(2)  At 50 or more feet from the animal or bird. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the animal or bird noise shall not be deemed a noise disturbance if a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private party in or upon which the animal or bird is situated, or is using any other means to tease or provide the animal or bird. This provision shall not apply to public zoos, licensed animals parks or licensed veterinarian facilities. 
(Ord. No. 14-100, 10-21-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-100, adopted Oct. 21, 2014, repealed § 50-35 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 50-35 pertained to measurement procedures and derived from § 19-6 of the 1981 Code. 
Sec. 50-36. - Maximum permissible sound levels generally. 
(a)  In addition to, and not in limitation of the specific prohibitions of sections 50-33, 50-34, and 50-35, any noise which emanates from any operation, activity or source and which exceeds the maximum permissible sound levels established in this section is hereby prohibited. When noise emanates from private property, such levels shall be measured at the property boundary of the sound source, at any point on public property, or at any point within any other property affected by the noise. When noise emanates from public property including street rights-of-way, such levels shall be measured at any point on public property or at any point within any other property affected by the noise. When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one zoning district classification, the limits of the most restrictive classification shall apply. 
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE 
SOUND PRESSURE LEVELS 
Zoning District Maximum dBA Classification Daytime Nighttime Agricultural 65 55 Residential 65 55 R/B 70 60 Planned unit development 70 60 Mixed use district 75 65 Business 75 65 Industrial 79 72  
(b)  Measurements in multi-family dwellings. In a structure used as a multi-family dwelling, the measurements to determine such sound levels shall be taken from common areas within or outside the structure or from other dwelling units within the structure, when requested to do so by the owner or tenant in possession and control thereof. Such measurement shall be taken at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source, with doors to the receiving area closed and windows in the normal position for the season. 
(c)  Any person, with lawfully obtained permits, who during the daytime operates or causes to be operated any equipment used in the construction, repair, alteration, or demolition work on buildings, structures, alleys or appurtenances thereto in the outdoors shall not be subject to the levels enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Persons performing construction of public projects, repair or maintenance work for such projects or persons performing work for private or public utilities for the repair of facilities or restoration of services shall not be subject to the levels enumerated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 19-4; Ord. No. 14-100, 10-21-2014) 
Sec. 50-37. - Penalty and enforcement. 
(a)  If it is determined that a noise in violation of this chapter exists at a fixed location, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  A written or verbal warning shall be issued by the chief of police, or his or her designee to the person(s), corporation, firm or association, responsible for the event causing the noise disturbance. 
(2)  If the noise disturbance persists for more than five minutes following the issuance of a written or verbal warning, the chief of police, or his or her designee, shall proceed to charge the person responsible for the event causing the noise disturbance. 
(b)  No person shall be charged with a violation of the provisions of this section unless a violation is committed in the presence of the chief of police, or his or her designee. 
(c)  The person operating or controlling a noise source shall be guilty of any violation caused by that source. If that cannot be determined, any owner, tenant or resident physically present on the property where the violation is occurring is rebuttably presumed to responsible for the noise violation. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for a first offense and a class 3 misdemeanor for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 14-100, 10-21-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-100, adopted Oct. 21, 2014, repealed § 50-37 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 50-37 pertained to prohibitions generally and derived from § 19-5 of the 1981 Code. 
Sec. 50-38. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-100, 10-21-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-100, adopted Oct. 21, 2014, repealed § 50-38 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 50-38 pertained to animals and derived from § 19-5.1 of the 1981 Code. 
Secs. 50-39-50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Removal of nuisances in Blandford Cemetery, § 30-50. 

Sec. 50-61. - Nuisances generally. 
(a)  No person shall cause a nuisance, as described in this section or in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-900 or 15.2-1115, in any place whatever within the corporate limits of the city, nor suffer any nuisance to remain in any house or lot occupied or owned by him. Everything shall be deemed a nuisance, within the meaning of this section, which is offensive or prejudicial to the health of any citizen and which is not specifically proscribed by the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-54) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to abate nuisances, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-900, 15.2-1115; nuisances generally, Code of Virginia, tit. 48. 
Sec. 50-62. - Certain offensive, unwholesome, etc., uses of land declared a nuisance. 
(a)  Any condition or use of any land or premises in the city which is offensive, unwholesome, unsanitary, unhealthy, is detrimental to the property of others, or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in value of the property in the neighborhood in which such land or premises is located is hereby declared a nuisance. This includes but is not limited to the keeping or the depositing on, or the scattering over the land or premises of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, trash, or debris; 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as motor vehicle parts, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers or plumbing fixtures. 
Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of a designated enforcement official that such a nuisance exists, it shall be his duty to give notice to the occupant of the premises or, if unoccupied, to the owner of the premises to cause such nuisance to be abated within 48 hours from the date of receipt of such notice. 
(b)  Any occupant or owner who shall fail to abate such nuisance within the time specified in a notice given pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and each day that such nuisance is permitted to remain upon such land or premises after the expiration of the time specified in such notice shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(c)  If such nuisance is permitted to remain on any such land or premises after the expiration of the time specified in a notice given pursuant to this section, the designated enforcement official may cause such nuisance to be removed therefrom, and the city may collect the expense of so doing from the owner or occupant of the land or premises by distress and sale in the same manner in which taxes levied upon real estate for the benefit of the city are authorized to be collected. Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of the property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property. 
(d)  All sworn police officers, health inspectors, building and housing inspectors, and the zoning administrator are hereby designated as enforcement officers for the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 21-54.1; Ord. No. 14-47, 5-20-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901. 
Sec. 50-63. - Detrimental or excessively high growths of weeds or other vegetable matter. 
(a)  (1)  The existence of any weeds, bushes, grass or other vegetable matter upon any land or premises in the city which is detrimental to the health, comfort or general welfare of any of the inhabitants of the city or which exceeds a height of 12 inches is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(2)  No owner of any lot or parcel of land shall permit to grow or remain thereon any hedge, shrub, tree or other vegetation, the limbs, branches or other parts of which overhang, extend or protrude into any street, sidewalk or public alley in a manner which obstructs or impedes the safe and orderly movement of persons or vehicles, or in the case of trees, when the dead limbs, trunks, or branches are likely to fall into or across such street or sidewalk, thereby endangering such persons and vehicles. 
(b)  Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the city manager, or his or her designee, that such a nuisance exists, it shall be his or her duty to give notice to the occupant of the premises or, if unoccupied, to the owner of the premises to cause such weeds, bushes, grass or other vegetable matter to be cut and removed from such premises within 48 hours from the date of receipt of such notice or in the time limit set forth in the notice. 
    If weeds, bushes, grass or other vegetable matter are permitted to remain on any such land or premises after the expiration of the time specified in a notice given pursuant to this section, the city manager, or his or her designee, may cause such nuisance to be removed therefrom, and the city may collect the expense of so doing from the owner or occupant of the premises by distress and sale in the same manner in which taxes levied upon real estate for the benefit of the city are authorized to be collected. 
(c)  Any owner who violates paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 for the first violation, or violations arising from the same set of operative facts. The civil penalty for subsequent violations not arising from the same set of operative facts within 12 months of the first violation shall be $200.00. Each business day during which the same violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same set of operative facts result in civil penalties that exceed a total of $3,000.00 in a 12-month period. 
(d)  Violations of paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(2) shall be a class 3 misdemeanor in the event three civil penalties have previously been imposed on the same defendant for the same or similar violation, not arising from the same set of operative facts, within a 24-month period. Classifying such subsequent violations as criminal offenses shall preclude the imposition of civil penalties for the same violation. 
(e)  Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3940 et seq. and 58.1-3965 et seq. The city may waive such liens in order to facilitate the sale of the property. Such liens may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner and who has no business association with the owner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Code 1981, § 21-56; Ord. No. 11-97, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 14-47, 5-20-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-901, 15.2-1115. 
Sec. 50-64. - Standing water on private property. 
(a)  The existence of any standing water upon any land or premises in the city which is, in the opinion of the health director, detrimental to the health, comfort or general welfare of any of the inhabitants of the city is hereby declared a nuisance. Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the health director that such a nuisance exists, it shall be his duty to give notice to the occupant of the premises, or if unoccupied, to the owner, to cause the standing water to be drained within ten days. Any such occupant or owner who shall fail to cause such standing water to be drained within the time specified in such notice shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and each day that such nuisance is permitted to remain upon such land or premises after the expiration of the time specified in such notice shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(b)  If any standing water is permitted to remain on any land or premises after the expiration of the time specified in a notice given pursuant to this section, the health director may cause such nuisance to be removed therefrom and the city may collect the expense of so doing from the owner and occupant of the property by distress and sale in the same manner in which taxes levied upon real estate for the benefit of the city are authorized to be collected. 
(Code 1981, § 21-59) 
State Law reference- Grounds subject to be covered by standing water, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 
Secs. 50-65-50-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Prior to the reenactment of Art. IV by Ord. No. 14-67, said article was repealed by Ord. No. 08-103, § 3, adopted Nov. 18, 2008. The former Art. VI, §§ 50-91-50-99, 50-116-50-123, pertained to erosion and sediment control and derived from §§ 12-2-12-11 and §§ 12-23-12-30 of the 1981 Code. 

Sec. 50-101. - Purpose and authority. (Section 9VAC25-870-20, 9VAC25-870-40) 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Petersburg and protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from a land disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resources, and to establish procedures whereby stormwater requirements related to water quality and quantity shall be administered and enforced. 
(b)  This article is adopted pursuant to Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:27 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-102. - Definitions. (9VAC25-870-10) 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein by reference, the following words and terms used in this article have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. Where definitions differ, those incorporated herein shall have precedence. 
    Administrator means the VSMP authority including the stormwater program manager or the department of public works. 
    Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan means a contract between the VSMP authority and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the VSMP authority in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this article. 
    Best management practice or BMP means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
    Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing activity means a land-disturbing activity including clearing, grading, or excavation that results in a land disturbance equal or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than one acre in all areas of jurisdictions designated as subject to the regulations adopted pursuant to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:67 et seq. 
    Clean Water Act or CWA means the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
    Common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on difference schedules. 
    Control measure means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
    Department means the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). 
    Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
    General permit means the state permit titled General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater From Construction Activities found in Part XIV (9VAC25-880-1 et seq.) of the Regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Virginia Stormwater Management Act. 
    Land disturbance or land-disturbing activity means a man-made change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in section 50-103(c) of this article. 
    Layout means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
    Minor modification means an amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
    Operator means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this article. 
    Permit or VSMP authority permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with this article, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by the department. 
    Permittee means the person to whom the VSMP authority permit is issued. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Regulations means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations, 9VAC25-870, as amended. 
    Site means the land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity. Areas channelward of mean low water in tidal Virginia shall not be considered part of a site. 
    State means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    State board means the state water control board. 
    State permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the state board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the state board for stormwater discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the Regulations. 
    State water control law means Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    State waters means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
    Stormwater means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater management plan means a document(s) containing material describing methods for complying with the requirements of section 50-106 of this article. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWPPP means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this article. In addition the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
    Subdivision means the same as defined in section 33-1 of article I of the Petersburg Subdivision Ordinance. 
    Total maximum daily load or TMDL means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Act or Act means Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP means a program approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program authority or VSMP authority means an authority approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-103. - Stormwater permit requirement; exemptions. 
(a)  A person shall not conduct any land-disturbing activity until a permit application has been submitted to the VSMP authority that includes a state VSMP permit registration statement, if such statement is required. A registration statement is not required for detached single-family home construction within or outside of common plan of development or sale; however, such projects must adhere to the requirements of the general permit. 
(b)  Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing shall not require completion of a registration statement or require coverage under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land-disturbing activity shall be subject to an erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the requirements of the erosion and sediment control ordinance, a stormwater management plan as outlined under section 50-106, the technical criteria and administrative requirements for land disturbing activities outlined in section 50-109, and the requirements for control measures for long-term maintenance outlined under section 50-110. Exceptions to these technical criteria and administrative requirements may be requested. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the following activities are exempt, unless otherwise required by federal law: 
(1)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(2)  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the state board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Subsection B of § 10.1-1163 of Article 9 of Chapter 11 of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(3)  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures; 
(4)  Land-disturbing activities that disturb less than one acre of land area; except for land disturbing activity exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet in all areas of the jurisdictions designated as subject to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations (9VAC 25-830) adopted pursuant to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act (§ 62.1-44.15:67 et seq.) or except for activities that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater of disturbance. 
(5)  Discharges to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer system; 
(6)  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use; 
(7)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection; and 
(8)  Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land-disturbing activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of subsection (a) is required within 30 days of commencing the land-disturbing activity. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-104. - Stormwater management program established; submission and approval of plans; prohibitions. 
(a)  Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:27 of the Code of Virginia, the City of Petersburg hereby establishes a Virginia stormwater management program for land-disturbing activities and adopts the applicable regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the state board for the purposes set out in section 50-101 of this article. The city council hereby designates the stormwater program manager as the administrator of the Virginia stormwater management program. 
(b)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued by the administrator, until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein: 
(1)  A permit application that includes a general permit registration statement; 
(2)  An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with the Petersburg Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance (Chapter 50, Article V of this Code); and 
(3)  A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of section 50-106 of this article, or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
(c)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until evidence of general permit coverage is obtained. 
(d)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until the fees required to be paid pursuant to section 50-115, are received, and a reasonable performance bond required pursuant to section 50-116 of this article has been submitted. 
(e)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved permit. 
(f)  No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a VSMP authority permit has been issued by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-105. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall include the content specified by Section 9VAC25-870-54 and must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in Section 9VAC25-880-70, Section II (stormwater pollution prevention plan) of the general permit. 
(b)  The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
(c)  The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-106. - Stormwater management plan; contents of plan. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan, required in section 50-104 of this article, must apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in section 50-109 of this article to the entire land-disturbing activity. A stormwater management plan that is approved for a residential, commercial, or industrial subdivision shall govern the development of the individual parcels, including those parcels developed under subsequent owners. Individual lots in new residential, commercial, or industrial developments shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities. The stormwater management plan must consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to surface runoff, and include the following information: 
(1)  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters or karst features, if present, and the predevelopment and postdevelopment drainage areas; 
(2)  Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of the owner and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected; 
(3)  A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site conditions; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete; 
(5)  Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities, including: 
(i)  The type of facilities; 
(ii)  Location, including geographic coordinates; 
(iii)  Acres treated; and 
(iv)  The surface waters or karst features, if present, into which the facility will discharge; 
(6)  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics; 
(7)  Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of section 50-109 of this article; 
(8)  A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes: 
(i)  All contributing drainage areas; 
(ii)  Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies, and floodplains; 
(iii)  Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area, forest cover, and other vegetative areas; 
(iv)  Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements; 
(v)  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
(vi)  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
(vii)  Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; and 
(viii)  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads, and easements. 
(b)  If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements set forth in section 50-109 of this article through the use of off-site compliance options, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant's land-disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by § 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(d)  A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be submitted to the administrator. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-107. - Pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  A pollution prevention plan, required by 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(b)  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(c)  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-108. - Review of stormwater management plan. 
(a)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan according to the following: 
(1)  The administrator shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with section 50-106 of this article, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
(2)  The administrator shall have an additional 60 calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subsection (1), then plan shall be deemed complete and the administrator shall have 60 calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
(3)  The administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved, within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
(4)  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity or his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reasons for not approving the plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(5)  If a plan meeting all requirements of this article is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subsection (2) for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(b)  Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
(2)  The administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
(c)  The administrator shall require the submission of a construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities. The administrator may elect not to require construction record drawings for stormwater management facilities for which recorded maintenance agreements are not required pursuant to section 50-110(b). 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-109. - Technical criteria for regulated land disturbing activities. 
(a)  To protect the quality and quantity of state water from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, the locality hereby adopts the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities set forth in Part II B of the regulations, as amended, expressly to include 9VAC25-870-62 (applicability); 9VAC25-870-63 (water quality design criteria requirements); 9VAC25-870-65 (water quality compliance); 9VAC25-870-66 (water quantity); 9VAC25-870-69 (offsite compliance options); 9VAC25-870-72 (design storms and hydrologic methods); 9VAC25-870-60-74 (stormwater harvesting); 9VAC25-870-76 (linear development project); 9VAC25-870-85 (stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities); 9VAC25-870-92 (comprehensive stormwater management plans); 9VAC25-870-93 (definitions); 9VAC25-870-94 (applicability); 9VAC25-870-95 (general); 9VAC25-870-96 (water quality); 9VAC25-870-97 (stream channel erosion); 9VAC25-870-98 (flooding); and 9VAC25-870-99 (regional stormwater management plans), which shall apply to all land-disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this article, except as expressly set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any land disturbing activity shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Regulation provided: 
(1)  A proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with a plan of development, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan, or any document determined by the locality to be equivalent thereto (i) was approved by the locality prior to July 1, 2012, (ii) provided a layout as defined in 9VAC25-870-10, (iii) will comply with the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation, and (iv) has not been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no increase in the volume or rate of runoff; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(c)  Locality, state and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation provided: 
(1)  There has been an obligation of locality, state or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(d)  Land disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall remain subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation for one additional state permit cycle. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the board. 
(e)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his discretion. 
(g)  The administrator may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of Part II B or Part II C of the regulations, provided that (i) the exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, (ii) reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the Act, the regulations, and this article are preserved, (iii) granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and (iv) exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Exceptions to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required VSMP authority permit shall not be given by the administrator, nor shall the administrator approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website, or any other control measure duly approved by the director. 
(2)  Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9VAC25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-110. - Long-term maintenance of permanent stormwater facilities. 
(a)  The administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in an instrument recorded in the local land records prior to general permit termination or earlier as required by the administrator and shall at a minimum: 
(1)  Be submitted to the administrator for review and approval prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Be stated to run with the land; 
(3)  Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections; 
(4)  Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and maintenance reports to the administrator; and 
(5)  Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-111. - Monitoring and inspections. 
(a)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator (engineering technician/project inspector) shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(b)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator (engineering technician/project inspector) may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(d)  Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:40 of the Code of Virginia, the administrator may require every VSMP authority permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP authority permit requirements under this article, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this article shall be conducted by the administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator (engineering technician/project inspector) pursuant to the locality's adopted and state board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five years except as may otherwise be provided for in section 50-110. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-112. - Hearings. 
    The state board shall hold hearings in a manner consistent with Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.26. If the City of Petersburg holds hearings under this article it shall do so in a manner consistent with applicable city hearing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-113. - Appeals. 
    Appeals shall be considered in accordance with section 50-134(f) and section 50-137 of this Code, and shall be consistent with the limitations within § 62.1-44.15:46 of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-114. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the VSMP authority permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions by any of the following: verbal warnings and inspection reports, notices of corrective action, consent special orders, and notices to comply. Written notices shall be served by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
(1)  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection (b) or the permit may be revoked by the administrator. 
(2)  If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this section within the time specified, the administrator may issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
    Such orders shall be issued in accordance with section 50-134 of this Code. Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land records of the locality, or by personal delivery by an agent of the administrator. However, if the administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land-disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the administrator may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with subsection 50-114(c). 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy provided by this article, if the administrator or his designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this article, they may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner that is consistent with Chapter 50, Article V of this Code. 
(c)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in Petersburg Circuit Court by the city to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any order of the administrator, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $32,500.00 for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(i)  No state permit registration; 
(ii)  No SWPPP; 
(iii)  Incomplete SWPPP; 
(iv)  SWPPP not available for review; 
(v)  No approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(vi)  Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; 
(vii)  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
(viii)  Operational deficiencies; 
(ix)  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
(x)  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and 
(xi)  Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section 9VAC25-870-70 of the general permit. 
(2)  The administrator may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. 
(3)  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
(4)  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by Petersburg shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Petersburg to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the locality and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court may, by order, direct. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, any order of the administrator, any condition of a permit, or any order of a court shall, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months or a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $32,500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-115. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees to cover costs associated with implementation of a VSMP related to land disturbing activities and issuance of general permit coverage and VSMP authority permits shall be imposed in accordance with Table 1. When a site or sites has been purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees ("total fee to be paid by applicant" column) in accordance with the disturbed acreage of their site or sites according to Table 1. VSMP authority portion of the statewide permit fee for coverage under the general permit for discharges of stormwater for construction activities for small construction activity involving a single family detached residential structure with a site or area, within or outside a common plan of development or sale, that is equal to or greater than one acre but less than five acres shall be no greater than the VSMP authority portion of the fee for coverage of sites or areas with a land-disturbance acreage of less than one acre within a common plan of development or sale. 
Table 1. Fees for Permit Issuance 
Fee Type Total fee to be paid by applicant (includes both VSMP authority and department portions where applicable) Department portion of "total fee to be paid by applicant" (based on 28% of total fee paid*) Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land-Disturbing Activity (not subject to general permit coverage; sites within designated areas of Chesapeake Bay Act localities with land-disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than 1 acre) $290.00 $0.00 General/stormwater management - Small construction activity/land clearing (areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) $290.00 $81.00 General/stormwater management - Small construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres) $2,700.00 $756.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $3,400.00 $952.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $4,500.00 $1,260.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $6,100.00 $1,708.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) $9,600.00 $2,688.00  
* If the project is completely administered by the department such as may be the case for a state or federal project or projects covered by individual permits, the entire applicant fee shall be paid to the department. 
(b)  Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general permit issued by the state board shall be imposed in accordance with Table 2. If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the City of Petersburg, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in Table 2. The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the general permit modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have applied for the total disturbed acreage in Table 1. 
Table 2. Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements for the General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities 
Type of Permit Fee Amount General/stormwater management - Small construction activity/land clearing (areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) $20.00 General/stormwater management - Small construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 and less than 5 acres) $200.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $250.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $300.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $450.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) $700.00  
(c)  The following annual permit maintenance shall be imposed in accordance with Table 3, including fees imposed on expired permits that have been administratively continued. With respect to the general permit, these fees shall apply until the permit coverage is terminated. 
Table 3. Permit Maintenance Fees 
Type of Permit Fee Amount Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land-Disturbing Activity (not subject to general permit coverage; sites within designated areas of Chesapeake Bay Act localities with land-disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than 1 acre) $50.00 General/stormwater management - Small construction activity/land clearing (areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) $50.00 General/stormwater management - Small construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres) $400.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $500.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $650.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $900.00 General/stormwater management - Large construction activity/land clearing (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater 100 acres) $1,400.00  
General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid annually to the City of Petersburg, by the anniversary date of general permit coverage. No permit will be reissued or automatically continued without payment of the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until a notice of termination is effective. 
_____
(d)  The fees set forth in subsections (a) through (c) above, shall apply to: 
(1)  All persons seeking coverage under the general permit. 
(2)  All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration statement for coverage under a general permit. 
(3)  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the department for an individual permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. 
(4)  Permit and permit coverage maintenance fees outlined under section 50-115(c) may apply to each general permit holder. 
(e)  No general permit application fees will be assessed to: 
(1)  Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in section 50-102 of this article. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the administrator shall not be exempt pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the department, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the administrator or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
(f)  All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in § 58.1-15 of the Code of Virginia and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over 90 days past due) account. The City of Petersburg shall be entitled to all remedies available under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 50-116. - Performance bond. (9VAC25-870-104.D and Code § 62.1-44.15:34(A)) 
    Prior to issuance of any permit, the applicant shall be required to submit a reasonable performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the city attorney, to ensure that measures could be taken by the City of Petersburg at the applicant's expense should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of him by the permit conditions as a result of his land disturbing activity. If the City of Petersburg takes such action upon such failure by the applicant, the city may collect from the applicant for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held, if any. Within 60 days of the completion of the requirements of the permit conditions, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(Ord. No. 14-67, 7-1-2014) 
Secs. 50-117-50-123. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL ORDINANCE 

Sec. 50-124. - Title, purpose, and authority. 
    This article shall be known as the "Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance of the City of Petersburg." The purpose of this article is to conserve the land, water, air and other natural resources of the city by establishing requirements for the control of erosion and sedimentation and procedures for administering and enforcing those requirements. 
    This article is authorized by Title 10.1, Chapter 5, Article 4 (§§ 10.1-560 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-125. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the official designated by the city manager to administer the city's erosion and sediment control program established pursuant to this article. 
    Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the plan-approving authority and the owner that specifies conservation measures that must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence, and that may be executed by the plan-approving authority in lieu of a formal plan. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of any permit necessary to authorize initiation of land-disturbing activities. 
    Board means the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board. 
    Certificate of competence means a certificate issued by the board pursuant to Code of Virginia § 10.1-561 F. 
    Certified inspector means an employee or agent of the program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of project inspection or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Certified plan reviewer means an employee or agent of the program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review, (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment, or (iii) is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (Code of Virginia §§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Code of Virginia tit. 54.1, ch. 4. 
    Certified program administrator means an employee or agent of the program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of program administration or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area means an area delineated by the city in accordance with criteria established pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2107. 
    Clearing means any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover, including, but not limited to, root mat removal or top soil removal. 
    Conservation plan, erosion and sediment control plan, or plan means a document, prepared in accordance with the requirements of this article that details mechanisms and techniques for the conservation of soil and water in the course of implementation of land-disturbing activities. 
    District or soil and water conservation district means a political subdivision of the commonwealth organized in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 (Code of Virginia, § 10.1-506 et seq.) of Title 10.1. 
    Erosion impact area means an area of land not associated with current land-disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion that results in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to (i) any lot or parcel of land of 5,000 square feet or less used for residential purposes or (ii) to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
    Excavating means any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth materials. 
    Filling means any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
    Grading means any excavating or filling of earth material or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled conditions. 
    Land development project means a tract of land developed or to be developed as a single unit under single ownership or unified control, for use for a business or industrial purpose or that contains two or more residential dwelling units, which development involves construction activity necessitating a land-disturbing permit. 
    Land-disturbing activity means any land change that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the commonwealth, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include those activities made exempt from this article pursuant to section 50-126. 
    Land-disturbing permit means a permit issued by the administrator pursuant to this article. 
    Local erosion and sediment control program or local control program means the law, policy, and procedures the city uses to regulate land-disturbing activities in accordance with state law, and includes this article, and such regulations, policies, guidelines, and technical materials as the administrator may identify or create. 
    Natural channel design concepts means the utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its bankfull bench and its floodplain. 
    Owner means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
    Peak flow rate means the maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
    Permittee means the person to whom the permit authorizing land-disturbing activities is issued, the person who certifies that the approved erosion and sediment control plan will be followed, or the person responsible for carrying out the plan, who may be the same person. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town, or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
    Plan-approving authority means the program authority, or a department of a program authority, responsible for evaluating, and approving or disapproving, conservation plans. 
    Program authority means the City of Petersburg in the context of its operation of a duly-adopted soil erosion and sediment control program that has been approved by the board. 
    Responsible land disturber means an individual from the project or development team, who will be responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity covered by an approved plan or agreement in lieu of a plan, in accordance with that plan or agreement, who (i) holds a responsible land disturber certificate of competence, (ii) holds a current certificate of competence from the board in the areas of combined administration, program administration, inspection, or plan review, (iii) holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion or sediment control, or (iv) is licensed in Virginia as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article I (Code of Virginia § 54.1-400 et seq.) of Code of Virginia tit. 54.1, ch. 4. 
    Runoff volume means the volume of water that runs off the land development project from a prescribed storm event. 
    Single-family residence means a noncommercial dwelling that is occupied exclusively by one family. 
    State erosion and sediment control program or state program means the program administered by the board pursuant to Code of Virginia § 10.1-561, including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
    State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth, or within its jurisdiction. 
    Transporting means any moving of earth materials from one place to another, other than such movement incidental to grading, to the extent that erosion and sediment will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
    Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook or Handbook, whether the 3 rd Edition (1992) or a later edition, means the handbook prepared by the Virginia Department of Conservation that describes the specifications and requirements governing appropriate land-disturbing activities in the commonwealth, including criteria, formulas, calculations, and techniques of control of sediment and erosion. 
    Virginia Minimum Standards means the criteria, techniques, and methods established under § 40 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control regulations at 4 VAC 50-30. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP means the Virginia program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and article 1.1 (Code of Virginia §§ 10.1-603.1 et seq.), of the Code of Virginia tit. 10.1, ch. 6. 
    Water quality volume means the volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-126. - Local erosion and sediment control program. 
(a)  Program authority. The City of Petersburg shall act as program authority to implement an erosion and sediment control program for the area of land encompassed by the city boundaries. The city shall administer the program in accordance with the requirements of this article, and pursuant to any regulations, references, guidelines, standards, and specifications it develops in accordance with, and for use in conjunction with, this article. The program shall be implemented by a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. 
(b)  Activities not subject to article. The following activities do not constitute "land-disturbing activities" as defined in this article, and are not subject to the requirements of this article, except as otherwise provided by article II (section 122-31 et seq.), chapter 22, of the Code of the City of Petersburg, and any other applicable law. 
(1)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work. 
(2)  Individual service connections. 
(3)  Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard surfaced road, street or sidewalk provided the land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk that is hard surfaced. 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land-disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system. 
(5)  Surface or deep mining activities authorized under a permit issued by the department of mines, minerals and energy. 
(6)  Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads, feeder lines and off-site disposal areas. 
(7)  Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations; including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia tit. 10.1, ch. 11 §§ 10.1-1100 et seq.; of this title, or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Code of Virginia, pursuant to § 10.1-1163(B). 
The removal or clearing of trees from property zoned for commercial, industrial, or residential use, although such clearing may be a bona fide silvicultural activity, shall not be exempted from the requirements of this section and, except for selective removal of dead or diseased trees, such clearing shall require approval of a land disturbance permit. 
The clearing of trees within the "A" agricultural district, as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the City of Petersburg, shall require approval of a Forestry Harvest Plan by the Virginia Department of Forestry. A copy of such plan shall be filed by the owner of any affected property with the City of Petersburg Erosion and Sediment Control Program administrator. Such plan shall provide for Forestry Best Management Practices. All applicable federal, state, and local regulations pertaining to working in or crossing live watercourses shall be met. 
(8)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, right-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company, performed by the railroad company. 
(9)  Agricultural engineering operations including but not limited to the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the provisions of the Dam Safety Act, Article 2, (Code of Virginia §§ 10.1-604 et seq.) of Chapter 6, Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation. 
(10)  Disturbed land areas of less than 1,000 square feet in size, except that where a series of projects, not otherwise exempt, on any one parcel disturbs an aggregate of more than 1,000 square feet of area within a one-year period, a plan shall be required; however, the city council may reduce this exception to a smaller area of disturbed land or qualify the conditions under which this exception shall apply. 
(11)  Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles. 
(12)  Shoreline erosion control projects on tidal waters when all of the land disturbing activities are within the regulatory authority of and approved by local wetlands boards, the Marine Resources Commission or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; however, any associated land that is disturbed outside of this exempted area shall remain subject to this article and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(13)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs; however, if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the plan-approving authority. 
(14)  State agency projects, except as provided for in Code of Virginia § 10.1-564. 
(15)  Construction, installation and maintenance of electric transmission, natural gas, and telephone utility lines and pipelines, performed by the regulated utility supplying the associated services. 
(c)  Stream restoration and relocation projects. In accordance with Va. Code Ann. § 10.1-561, stream restoration and relocation projects that incorporate natural channel design concepts are not man-made channels and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels as defined in any regulations promulgated pursuant to Va. Code Ann. § 10.1-561, § 10.1-562, or § 10.1-570. 
(d)  Natural or manmade channels. In accordance with Va. Code Ann. § 10.1-561, any land-disturbing activity that provides for stormwater management intended to address any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels shall be deemed to satisfy the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels if the practices are designed to (i) detain the water quality volume and to release it over 48 hours; (ii) detain and release over a 24-hour period the expected rainfall resulting from the one year, 24-hour storm; and (iii) reduce the allowable peak flow rate resulting from the 1.5, 2, and 10-year, 24-hour storms to a level that is less than or equal to the peak flow rate from the site assuming it was in a good forested condition, achieved through multiplication of the forested peak flow rate by a reduction factor that is equal to the runoff volume from the site when it was in good forested condition divided by the runoff volume from the site in its proposed condition. Those practices that are designed to accomplish (i), (ii) and (iii) of this subsection shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels as defined in any regulations promulgated pursuant to Va. Code Ann. § 10.1-562 or § 10.1-570. 
(e)  Public hearing. Before adopting or revising regulations to implement this article, the city shall give due notice and conduct a public hearing on the proposed new or revised regulations, except that a public hearing shall not be required when the city is amending its program to conform to revisions in the state program. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-127. - Requirement for plan. 
(a)  Erosion and sediment control plan required. No person may obtain a permit authorizing him to engage in any land-disturbing activity subject to the requirements of this article and lying within the territorial limits of the City of Petersburg, until he has submitted to the administrator an erosion and sediment control plan for the land-disturbing activity and such plan has been approved by the plan-approving authority. The requirement for such plan may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Multiple jurisdictions. Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one local control program, an erosion and sediment control plan, at the option of the applicant, may be submitted to the board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned, however, a copy of such plan must be submitted to the administrator for review. 
(2)  Agreement in lieu of plan. Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence and affects fewer than 5,000 square feet of land, a properly executed agreement in lieu of plan may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan. Where such agreement is substituted, the administrator may permit the applicant to identify in that agreement someone other than a person who qualifies as a responsible land disturber as defined in section 50-124 of this article. If a violation occurs during the land-disturbing activity, the person responsible for carrying out the agreement in lieu of plan shall correct the violation and provide to the administrator the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence. Failure to provide the name of such person shall be a violation of this article and may result in revocation of plan approval and imposition of penalties pursuant to sections 50-134 and 50-135 of this article. 
(b)  Responsibility for submission of plan or agreement in lieu of plan. The owner of the property included within the land development project shall be responsible for ensuing the preparation, submission and approval of any plan or agreement in lieu of plan required by this article. This responsibility shall not be altered or eliminated where the identity of the person performing the land-disturbing activity is different from that of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-128. - Contents of plan; submission; fees. 
(a)  Generally. Plans shall be prepared, submitted, and approved in accordance with the standards contained within the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations at 4 VAC 50-30-10 et seq., the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, the Zoning ordinance of the City of Petersburg, and such other guides and publications as the administrator may identify, all of which are available for review in the office of the administrator. When the standards vary between the publications, the state regulations shall take precedence. 
(b)  Contents of plan. The plan shall contain: 
(1)  A statement that it was prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the state, except that the administrator may waive this requirement for projects of less than one acre that do not involve the construction of a building or structure and are not within a Resource Protection Area (RPA) established pursuant to article II (section 122-31 et seq.) of chapter 122 of the Code of the City of Petersburg. 
(2)  A site plan or map which conforms to any plan of development or subdivision plat. 
(3)  Identification of the location of all buffers required by the Code of the City of Petersburg, including resource protection area buffers, or conditions for zoning, development or use under which land-disturbing activities will occur. The plan also shall contain a certification that prior to any land-disturbing activity (i) all buffer areas and wetlands shall be conspicuously flagged or otherwise identified and not disturbed unless authorized by law; and (ii) the applicant shall notify the administrator upon completion of flagging. 
(4)  Measures to control erosion and sediment. 
(5)  A comprehensive drainage plan. 
(6)  Evidence on the site plan that no more land than is necessary to provide for the proposed use or development shall be disturbed. 
(7)  A statement by the permittee that all erosion and sediment control measures shall be maintained and that the permittee will inspect the erosion and sediment control measures at least once in every two-week period and within 48 hours following rainstorm events during construction to ensure continued compliance with the approved plan. Records of self-inspection shall be maintained on the site and available for review by city inspectors. 
(8)  A statement by the permittee acknowledging that the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers may have additional jurisdiction over wetlands not regulated by the city. 
(9)  A statement by the permittee acknowledging that a VSMP permit application, if required, has been made for land disturbing activities affecting an acre or more of land. 
(10)  A statement incorporating by reference the Virginia Minimum Standards. 
(11)  Environmental site assessment information consisting of: 
i.  Base flood hazard areas (100-year floodplain). 
ii.  Location of all tidal and nontidal wetlands. 
iii.  Location of all tidal shores. 
iv.  Location of all tributary and nontributary streams. 
v.  Location of all resource management areas as defined in Petersburg City Code section 122-31. 
(12)  A stormwater management section that includes all components of this subdivision, except that any maintenance, alteration, use or improvement to an existing structure which the administrator determines does not degrade the quality of surface water discharges shall be exempt from the stormwater management requirements of this subdivision: 
i.  Specifies the applicable watershed management area designation and all watershed management practices that will be implemented, including construction of best management practices. 
ii.  Includes calculations and other evidence necessary to show that nonpoint source pollution loads of phosphorous and sediments to receiving surface waters during and after development will be controlled in accordance with regulations implementing the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act and the VSMP. 
iii.  Shows the location of all planned stormwater control devices. 
iv.  Includes the design of all planned stormwater control devices. 
v.  Includes a verification of structural soundness, including a professional engineer or class IIIB surveyor certification, for all stormwater facilities. 
vi.  Establishes a long-term schedule for inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities that includes all maintenance requirements and persons responsible for maintenance. 
vii.  Contains procedures for implementing nonstructural stormwater control practices and technologies. 
Any plan establishing a permanent stormwater detention facility shall include, in addition to the components of this subdivision, a guaranty as to the permanent maintenance of the facility in accordance with VSMP law and regulations. The guaranty may be an agreement requiring maintenance of the facility by the owner or his successor and granting the city an easement to perform such maintenance, at the expense of the owner or his successor, in the event of the failure of the owner or his successor to do so. Permanent maintenance responsibility, however, shall remain with the owner and his successors, absent city council acceptance of the facility into the public stormwater drainage system. Such agreement shall be approved by the administrator as to compliance with this article and by the city attorney as to form and may be accepted by the city manager on behalf of the city. 
(13)  Clear delineation of the preliminary areas of land disturbance necessary for installation of the initial erosion and sediment control measures. The preliminary areas of land disturbance shall be the minimum necessary for installation of the initial erosion and sediment control measures and the delineation shall include all areas necessary for such installation, including stockpiles, borrow areas, and staging areas. 
(14)  Clear delineation of the ultimate areas of land disturbance. 
(15)  Information identifying the responsible land disturber. 
(16)  Mechanisms that will be used to protect any affected erosion impact area consistent with the requirements of Va. Code Ann. § 10.1-563 F. 
(c)  Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas; additional requirements. All plans for development on a lot containing a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall, in addition to the requirements contained in subsection (b): 
(1)  Identify the location of all Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, including all land disturbing activities contemplated therein. 
(2)  Contain a statement that, prior to any land-disturbing activity, all wetlands shall be conspicuously flagged or otherwise identified, and that the applicant shall notify the administrator upon completion of flagging. 
(3)  Contain evidence that: 
i.  All applicable U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and state permits necessary for activities in state waters and wetlands or appropriate waivers of jurisdiction have been obtained. 
ii.  A water quality impact assessment, in the form specified by subsection (c)(4) or (5), has been performed for any proposed development within an RPA, including any buffer area modification or reduction, and for any development in a resource management area which, due to the unique characteristics of the site or intensity of the proposed development, is considered by the administrator to be environmentally sensitive land. 
(4)  A minor water quality impact assessment shall be prepared for land-disturbing activity affecting no more than 2,500 square feet of land within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. A minor water quality impact assessment must demonstrate that the remaining buffer area and additional vegetated area equal to the area of encroachment into the buffer will maximize water quality protection and mitigate the effects of the buffer encroachment. 
(5)  A major water quality impact assessment shall be prepared for land-disturbing activity affecting more than 2,500 square feet of land within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. A major water quality impact assessment must demonstrate that the remaining buffer area and additional vegetated area equal to the area of encroachment into the buffer will maximize water quality protection and will mitigate the effects of the buffer encroachment. In addition, the major water quality impact assessment shall, except by waiver of the administrator: 
i.  Describe the existing topography, soils, hydrology and geology of the site and adjacent lands. 
ii.  Describe the impacts of the proposed development on topography, soils, hydrology and geology on the site and adjacent lands. 
iii.  Describe the: 
a.  Disturbance or destruction of wetlands and justification for such action. 
b.  Disruptions or reduction in the supply of water to wetlands, streams, lakes, rivers or other water bodies. 
c.  Disruptions to existing hydrology, including wetlands and stream circulation patterns. 
d.  Source location and description of proposed fill material. 
e.  Location of dredge material and location of dumping area for such material. 
f.  Location of and impacts on shellfish beds, submerged aquatic vegetation and fish spawning areas. 
g.  Estimated predevelopment and postdevelopment pollutant loads in runoff. 
h.  Estimated percent increase in impervious surface on the site and types of surfacing materials used. 
i.  Percent of site to be cleared for the project. 
j.  Anticipated duration and phasing schedule of the construction project. 
k.  List of required permits from all applicable agencies necessary to develop the project. 
iv.  Describe the proposed mitigation measures for the potential hydrological impacts. Potential mitigation measures include: 
a.  Proposed erosion and sediment control steps. Steps may include minimizing the extent of the cleared area, perimeter controls, reduction of runoff velocities, measures to stabilize disturbed areas, and the schedule and personnel for site inspection. 
b.  Proposed stormwater management system. 
c.  Creation of wetlands to replace those lost. 
d.  Minimizing cut and fill. 
(d)  Fees. An administrative fee of $250.00, plus $50.00 for every acre or part thereof in excess of one acre, subject to any limit imposed by state law, shall be paid to the city at the time of submission of the erosion and sediment control plan. No fee shall be required for the execution of an agreement in lieu of a plan. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-129. - Approval of plans. 
(a)  Review period. The plan-approving authority shall, within 45 days of receipt thereof, provide written approval or disapproval of a plan. An erosion control plan shall not be approved until it is reviewed by a certified plan reviewer, except that if no action is taken within 45 days, the plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(b)  Plan inadequate. When the plan is determined to be inadequate, the plan-approving authority shall explain the reasons for disapproval and shall specify such modifications, terms, and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. 
(c)  Changes to approved plan. An approved plan may be changed by the plan-approving authority when: 
(1)  Monitoring or inspection pursuant to section 50-132 of this article reveals that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulations; or 
(2)  The person responsible for carrying out the plan finds that because of changed circumstances or other reasons, the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this article, are agreed to by the plan-approving authority and the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-130. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall engage in any land-disturbing activity subject to the provisions of this article until (i) he has acquired a land-disturbing permit, in such form, and in accordance with such applicable requirements as the administrator may establish, (ii) has paid the fees, and (iii) has posted the required surety or bond. 
(b)  Requirements for issuance of permit. Agencies authorized to issue grading, building, or other permits for activities involving land-disturbing activities shall not issue any such permit unless the applicant submits with his application (i) four copies of an approved erosion and sediment control plan, and (ii) a certification by the proposed permittee that he will perform properly the erosion and sediment control measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Applicant a permittee. Any applicant who receives a permit to conduct land-disturbing activity shall be deemed a permittee and as such shall be the person responsible for carrying out the plan. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-131. - Bond. 
(a)  Bond required. All applicants for permits pursuant to section 50-130 of this article shall, at the time of permit application, provide to the city a performance bond, cash escrow, or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city attorney, to support the cost of measures necessarily undertaken by the city as a result of the applicant's failure to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation measures required of him as a result of his land-disturbing activity. No land-disturbing permit shall be valid until an approved bond has been provided in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Bond amount. The amount of the bond or other security for performance shall not exceed the total of (i) the estimated cost to initiate and maintain appropriate conservation action based on unit price for new public or private sector construction in the locality, and (ii) a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs and inflation, which shall not exceed 25 percent of the cost of the conservation action. Should it be necessary for the city to take such conservation action, the city may collect from the applicant any costs in excess of the amount of the surety held. 
(c)  Refund or termination of bond. Within 60 days of adequate stabilization in any project or section of a project, as determined by the administrator, such bond, cash escrow or letter of credit, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof shall be either refunded to the applicant or terminated, based upon the percentage of stabilization accomplished in the project or project section. The owner or permittee shall provide written notice to the administrator of completion of any project. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-132. - Monitoring, reports, and inspections. 
(a)  Monitoring by city. All erosion and sediment control measures and systems shall be maintained, inspected, and repaired as needed to ensure continued performance of their intended function. The permittee shall grant access to the administrator or his designated agent during the construction period and, where maintenance of systems and measures is required thereafter, shall provide for periodic access to the property by the administrator or his agent, for the purpose of inspection of permanent measures and systems. 
(b)  Monitoring by permittee. The city may require the permittee to monitor the land-disturbing activity. The permittee shall maintain records of inspections and maintenance to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(c)  Inspections by certified inspector. Inspections of land-disturbing activities shall be conducted by a certified inspector. The administrator or his agent shall periodically inspect the land-disturbing activity as required under the state program to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. The owner or permittee shall be given notice of the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-133. - Failure to comply with this article; notice. 
(a)  Notice to comply. If the administrator determines that there is (i) a failure to comply with the plan, (ii) a failure to prepare a plan or obtain approval of a plan, or (iii) a failure to obtain a permit, notice shall be served upon the owner or the permittee by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land-disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. Notice shall also be provided to the issuer of any permit. Such notice shall set forth specifically the measures needed to correct the failures and shall specify the time within which such corrective measures shall be completed. 
(b)  Effect of noncompliance. If the permit holder fails to comply within the time specified, he may be subject to a stop-work order imposed in accordance with section 50-134 or revocation of the permit, and shall be subject to the penalties or other applicable action imposed in accordance with section 50-135 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-134. - Failure to comply with plan, obtain plan, or obtain permit; stop work order. 
(a)  Stop work order. Upon the documented failure to take the specified corrective measures identified pursuant to subsection (a) of section 50-133, the administrator may issue an order requiring that all or part of the land-disturbing activity permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been installed, established, taken or otherwise accomplished. 
(b)  Emergency issuance. Where the noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion or sediment disposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, the administrator may issue a stop work order without issuing a notice to comply in accordance with section 50-133. 
(c)  Service. The administrator shall cause the stop work order to be served in the same manner as the notice to comply issued pursuant to section 50-133. The order shall remain in effect for a period of seven days from the date of service pending application by the city or permit holder for appropriate relief to the Circuit Court of the City of Petersburg. 
(d)  Disposition of order. The stop work order shall be disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Upon completion and approval of corrective measures, including obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order, with concurrence of the city attorney, shall be rescinded immediately. 
(2)  If, within seven days from the date of service of the order, the alleged violator has not (i) taken the corrective measures to remedy a failure to comply with an approved plan or any approved permits, or (ii) obtained an approved plan or any required permits, the administrator may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until the owner implements corrective measures to remedy the failure of compliance or obtains an approved plan and any required permits. Such an order shall be served upon the owner in accordance with subsection (a) of section 50-133. 
(e)  Enforcement of order. Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey a stop work order issued by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Circuit Court of the City of Petersburg to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. 
(f)  Appeal of order. The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the Circuit Court of the City of Petersburg. 
(g)  Other action. In conjunction with the issuance of a stopwork order pursuant to this section, the administrator may take or seek the authorization of the city attorney to take any other appropriate action specified in section 50-135. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-135. - Failure to comply with this article; penalties, injunctions, civil action. 
(a)  City attorney to enforce. The city attorney shall, upon request of the administrator, take legal action to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Civil penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon finding of the General District Court of the City of Petersburg, be assessed a civil penalty in accordance with the schedule of civil penalties in section 50-138. The civil penalty for any one violation shall be $100.00, except that the civil penalty for commencement of land-disturbing activities without an approved plan shall be $1,000.00. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. 
In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $3,000.00, except that a series of violations arising from the commencement of land-disturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00. 
The assessment of civil penalties for an offense shall preclude prosecution of the offense as a criminal offense. 
(c)  Injunctions. The administrator, or the owner of property which has sustained damage or which is in imminent danger of being damaged, may apply to the Circuit Court of the City of Petersburg, to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article, without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. 
However, an owner of property shall not apply for injunctive relief unless (i) he has notified in writing the person who has violated the local program, and the program authority, that a violation of the local program has caused, or creates a probability of causing, damage to his property, and (ii) neither the person who has violated the local program nor the program authority has taken corrective action within 15 days to eliminate the conditions which have caused, or create the probability of causing, damage to his property. 
(d)  Civil action for damages. In addition to any civil or criminal penalties provided under this article, any person who violates any provision of this article may be liable to the City of Petersburg in a civil action for damages. 
(e)  Civil penalty for disregard of remedy. In addition to the remedies which may be obtained pursuant to this section, any person (i) violating, or (ii) failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation. A civil action for such failure may be brought by the city. 
(f)  Stipulated charges. With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or condition of a permit or any provision of this chapter, the city may provide for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed $2,000.00. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty, however, payment of any such charges shall not nullify or otherwise affect the requirement for compliance with this article. 
(g)  Payment. Any civil penalties assessed by the court shall be paid into the treasury of the city, except that where the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(h)  Effect of compliance. Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-136. - Failure of plan compliance measures; invocation of bond. 
    If the erosion and sedimentation control measures required by the plan or agreement in lieu of a plan are not completely constructed, or, if constructed, fail through overload or inadequate maintenance, the city may, if the owner or permittee does not, install ground cover, plants, stabilizing devices or other material to the minimum extent necessary to achieve erosion and sediment control and protect water quality equal to that which would have been furnished by the approved plans or agreement in lieu of a plan. The cost of any such temporary measures taken by the city shall be borne by the owner or permittee, and shall be a charge against the security required by section 50-131. The city may collect any amounts expended which exceed the security provided. Within 30 days of the achievement of adequate stabilization of the land disturbing activity, the security, or the unexpended portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-137. - Appeals and judicial review. 
(a)  Appeal of plan disapproval to city council. Any applicant under the provision of this article who is aggrieved by any action of the city or its agent in disapproving plans submitted pursuant to this article shall have the right to apply for and receive a review of such action by the city council provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of the action. Any applicant who seeks an appeal hearing before the city council shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled city council public hearing provided that the city council or other involved parties have at least 30 days prior notice. In reviewing the agent's actions, the city council shall consider evidence and opinions presented by the aggrieved applicant and agent. After considering the evidence and opinions, the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the action. The city council's decision shall be final, subject only to review by the Circuit Court of the City of Petersburg. 
(b)  Appeal of city council decision. Final decisions of the city under this article shall be subject to review by the Circuit Court of the City of Petersburg, provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-138. - Uniform schedule of civil penalties, and enforcement procedure. 
(a)  Uniform schedule of civil penalties. A civil penalty in the amount listed on the schedule below shall be assessed for each violation of the respective offenses: 
(1)  Commencement of land disturbing activity without an approved erosion and sediment control plan shall be $1,000.00 per day. 
(2)  Vegetative measures-Failure to comply with items 1, 2 or 3 of the Virginia Minimum Standards shall be $100.00 per violation/per day. 
(3)  Structural measures-Failure to comply with items 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 or 19 of the Virginia Minimum Standards shall be $100.00 per violation/per day. 
(4)  Underground utility measures-Failure to comply with item 16 of Virginia Minimum Standards shall be $100.00 per violation/per day. 
(5)  Tracking dirt onto a paved or public road-Failure to comply with item 17 of the Virginia Minimum Standards shall be $100.00 per violation/per day. 
(6)  Failure to obey a stop work order shall be $100.00 per day. 
(7)  Failure to stop work when permit is revoked shall be $100.00 per day. 
(8)  Failure to maintain a required permanent erosion and sediment control structure, system, or measure, in accordance with 4 VAC 50-30-60, Maintenance and Inspections, this article and the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Petersburg, shall be $100.00 per violation/per day. 
(9)  Failure to remove any temporary erosion and sediment control measure in accordance with requirements of an approved plan, or in violation of Virginia Minimum Standard 18, shall be $100.00 per day. 
(b)  Issuance of summonses for civil offenses. The administrator may issue a Virginia Uniform Summons or a summons bearing the title "City of Petersburg Erosion and Sediment Control Violation Summons," charging a violation of this article. Service of a civil summons under this article shall be made in the manner established under the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 50-139. - Article is in addition to other permit requirements. 
(a)  Requirements cumulative. The requirements of this article are in addition to all other provisions of the Code of the City of Petersburg (2001) (as amended), which relate to the issuance of permits for work involving land disturbing activities, and shall not be construed to otherwise affect the requirements for such permits. 
(b)  Wetland mitigation banks. In accordance with the procedure set forth by Code of Virginia § 10.1-563(E), any person engaging in the creation of wetland mitigation banks in multiple jurisdictions, which have been approved and are operated in accordance with applicable federal and state guidance, laws, or regulations for the establishment, use, and operation of mitigation banks, pursuant to a permit issued by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, may, at the option of that person, file general erosion and sediment control specifications for wetland mitigation banks annually with the board for review and approval consistent with guidelines established by the board. 
(Ord. No. 08-103, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Chapter 54 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; fire limits in building code, § 22-35; fire protection, § 114-91 et seq.; fire hydrants, § 114-116 et seq. 
State Law reference- Smoke detectors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922; appropriations for voluntary firefighting organizations, rescue squads, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-953; explosive or inflammable substances, fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; fuel-burning equipment, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1116; regulation of the making of fires, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1118; false fire alarms, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212; fire protection generally, Code of Virginia, tit. 27; furnishing fire protection beyond territorial limits, Code of Virginia, § 27-1 et seq.; fire departments and fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq.; ordinances as to fire departments, etc., Code of Virginia, § 27-14; local fire marshals, Code of Virginia, § 27-30 et seq.; relief for firefighters and dependents, Code of Virginia, § 27-39 et seq.; mobilization of firefighters during state of war, Code of Virginia, § 44-152 et seq.; explosives, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-137 et seq.; fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Ordinances relating to storage of flammable liquids, explosives, etc., not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Relative to or establishing limits in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited: 
(2)  Relative to or establishing limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted; 
(3)  Relative to or establishing limits in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited; 
(4)  Relative to or establishing limits in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are prohibited; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 13-1) 
Sec. 54-2. - Setting woods, etc., on fire intentionally whereby another is damaged or jeopardized. 
    An person who intentionally sets or procures another to set fire to any woods, brush, leaves, grass, straw, or any other inflammable substance capable of spreading fire, and who intentionally allows the fire to escape to lands not his own, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire. 
(Code 1981, § 13-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-87. 
Sec. 54-3. - Carelessly damaging property by fire. 
    If any person carelessly, negligently or intentionally sets any woods or marshes on fire, or sets fire to any stubble, brush, straw or any other substance capable of spreading fire on lands, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire. 
(Code 1981, § 13-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-88. 
Sec. 54-4. - Open burning prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall ignite or maintain, or cause or permit to be ignited or maintained, any open fire on public property outside any building. Salvage, demolition operations, construction waste, or disposal of waste materials by burning is prohibited. Private property is regulated below. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Open fires may be set in the performance of official duties by the fire code official or his designee when necessary for any of the following purposes: 
a.  For the abatement of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means; 
b.  For training in firefighting or for research in control of fires under supervision of the fire code official or his designee; 
c.  In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances when open burning is determined by the fire code official to be in the public interest. 
(2)  Fires may be used for cooking food, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(3)  Recreational fires may be set provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created: 
a.  Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a structure or combustible material; and 
b.  Recreational fires shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. 
(4)  Open burning shall be prohibited for land clearing operations, except controlled force-air pit burning of brush, leaves and trees from land clearing operations conducted under authority of a permit issued by the fire code official or his designee is permitted; provided that such burning shall be in conformance with procedures approved by the fire code official and the department of environmental quality (air division), and shall be immediately terminated upon revocation of such permit. Compliance with the provisions of this subsection shall not exempt any person from any damages or liability which may result from such open burning, nor exempt any person from adherence to all applicable laws, ordinance and regulations and orders of the fire code official and the state forester. 
(c)  Open burning, where permitted by this chapter, shall be constantly monitored until the fire is extinguished. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be available for immediate use. 
(d)  The fire code official may prohibit open burning, otherwise lawful, when smoke may cause reduced visibility on any highway, or when emissions or odors may constitute a hazard or nuisance. The fire code official may order the extinguishing by the permit holder or other responsible person, or by the fire department, of any fire which creates such a hazard or nuisance, or if adjacent property is considered to be endangered. 
(e)  Violation of subsections (a)-(c) of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 14-66, 7-1-2014) 
State Law reference- Regulating or prohibiting the making of fires, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922.1, § 10.1-1142, Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code 307.4.2, 307.5. 
Sec. 54-5. - Open burning permit requirements. 
(a)  The fire official shall establish procedures for issuance of permits for open burning or fires and shall include in the permits restrictions and conditions determined in the sole discretion of the fire official to be necessary to assure control of the fire and to minimize the impact on air quality. 
(b)  Any person conducting open burning or fires which requires a permit shall first obtain a permit from the fire official. 
(c)  Permit applications shall be made on forms prescribed by the fire official. Permit applications may be submitted at any time prior to a proposed burn; however, permit applications must be submitted at least five days prior to a proposed burn in order to guarantee timely review and action by the fire official. 
(d)  Permits shall be effective for a maximum period of 90 days from the date of issuance, shall apply only to the site defined in the permit application, and must be available on that site for inspection by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 14-66, 7-1-2014) 
Sec. 54-6. - Fireworks and pyrotechnic displays prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section it shall be unlawful for any person to transport, manufacture, assemble, store, sell, offer or display for sale, or to buy, use, possess, ignite or explode any firecracker, torpedo, sky rocket, or other substance or device that contains any explosive or flammable compound or substance, and is intended or commonly known as fireworks, and which explodes, rises into the air or travels laterally, fires projectiles or discharges sparks into the air. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any organization or group of individuals which has been granted a permit by the fire code official for the public or private display of fireworks or pyrotechnics, provided that such fireworks are stored, handled, transported and used in compliance with the terms and conditions of such permit. The provisions of this section shall not apply to sparklers when used or ignited by an adult or a minor under the supervision of an adult. 
(c)  The fire code official or any law enforcement officer shall be authorized to seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all fireworks offered or exposed for display or sale, stored or held in violation of this section. 
(d)  Before the fire code official issues any permit required by this section the applicant for the permit shall submit evidence of liability insurance for the protection of persons and property from death, bodily injury and damage in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. 
(e)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 14-66, 7-1-2014) 
State Law reference- Permits for display of fireworks; use and exhibitions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-974; seizure and destruction of certain fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 27-100.1. 
Sec. 54-7. - Throwing or dropping inflammatory objects from vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall throw, toss or drop from a vehicle moving or standing on a highway any lighted smoking material, lighted match, lighted material of any nature or any bomb, device or contraption liable to set fire to inflammable material on the ground while in or near any forest land, brushland or field containing inflammable vegetation or trash. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor for each separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 14-66, 7-1-2014) 
State Law reference- Throwing inflammatory objects from vehicle on highway while in or near certain lands, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1143. 
Sec. 54-8. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
    Construction waste means solid waste which is produced or generated during construction of structures. Construction waste consists of lumber, wire, sheetrock, broken brick, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, and metal and plastics if the metal or plastics are a part of the materials of construction or empty containers for such materials. Paints, coatings, solvents, asbestos, any liquid, compressed gases or semi-liquids, and garbage are not construction wastes and the disposal of such materials must be in accordance with the regulations of the Virginia Waste Management Board. 
    Fire official means the fire official of the city, as such term is defined in Section 105.1 of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, or his designee. 
    Open burning means the burning of any matter in such a manner that the products resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct, or chimney. 
    Recreational fires means an outdoor fire burning materials other than refuse (i.e., garbage, rubbish, copper, trade waste) where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height for pleasure, warmth, or similar purposes. 
(Ord. No. 14-66, 7-1-2014) 
Secs. 54-9-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Departments, § 2-191 et seq.; authority of fire department officers to direct traffic, § 110-4. 

Sec. 54-31. - Composition; direction and control. 
    The fire department shall consist of a chief of the fire department and such number of officers, firefighters and cadets as the city council may prescribe, who shall be under the direction and control of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 13-21) 
Sec. 54-32. - Appointment and term of chief. 
    The city manager shall appoint the chief of the fire department, whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 13-22) 
Sec. 54-33. - Duties of chief during fire. 
    During a fire, the chief of the fire department shall control all water plugs, maintain order among the firefighters and bystanders, preserve property, command the city police, note and report to the city manager all violations of the laws or city ordinances and do all things necessary for the efficient operation of the department, under the general direction of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 13-23) 
Sec. 54-34. - Appointment and terms of officers, firefighters and cadets. 
    The chief of the fire department shall recommend, for appointment by the city manager, the officers and such number of firefighters and cadets as the city manager may approve, the efficiency of the fire department may require and the appropriations for the department may justify, all of whom shall retain their position at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 13-24) 
Sec. 54-35. - Qualifications of officers, firefighters and cadets. 
(a)  The qualifications for officers, firefighters and cadets in the fire department shall be as follows: 
(1)  No person shall be appointed to the fire department who does not have a high school education or the equivalent thereof. 
(2)  Applicants for appointment shall be examined by some physician designated by the city manager, and no such applicant shall be appointed until the physician has certified that, in his opinion, the applicant is physically able to perform firefighting duties. 
(b)  The certificate referred to in subsection (a)(2) of this section shall be forwarded to the director of personnel and shall be filed with the original application of the applicant for appointment to the fire department. 
(Code 1981, § 13-25) 
Sec. 54-36. - Persons discharged or having criminal records not eligible for membership. 
    No member of the fire department discharged for misconduct shall be eligible for appointment or reappointment in the fire department or police department. No person with a criminal record shall be eligible for appointment in the fire department. 
(Code 1981, § 13-26) 
Sec. 54-37. - Establishment and operation of bureau of fire prevention. 
    There is hereby established in the fire department a bureau of fire prevention which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1981, § 13-27) 
Sec. 54-38. - Police powers of officers and members. 
    The officers and members of the fire department, when on active assignment or otherwise in the performance of their duties as firefighters, are hereby vested with all of the powers, authority, functions, rights and privileges of police officers of the city and, in such capacity, may do all things necessary for the public safety. 
(Code 1981, § 13-28) 
Sec. 54-39. - Interference with firefighters; meddling with apparatus; etc. 
    If any person interferes with a firefighter while in the discharge of his duty or tampers with the engines or apparatus of the department, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-29) 
State Law reference- Assault or assault and battery against a firefighter, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57. 
Secs. 54-40-54-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 54-61. - Adopted. 
    The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by the State Board of Housing and Community Development pursuant to § 27-97 of the Virginia Code, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the City of Petersburg, Virginia, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Clerk of City Council of the City of Petersburg, Virginia. Pursuant to § 1-220 of the Virginia Code, as amended, all future additions and amendments to the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code shall be automatically adopted into City Code. 
(Code 1981, § 13-41; Ord. No. 04-50, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 11-60, 6-7-2011) 
Charter reference- Adoption of ordinances or codes by reference, § 1-6. 
State Law reference- Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code Act, Code of Virginia, § 27-94 et seq. 
Sec. 54-62. - Amendment. 
    Amendment to International Fire Code, 2000. 
    A permit shall be obtained from the fire official for each installation of liquefied petroleum gas utilizing storage containers of 500 gallons (1.89 m 3 ), or over, individual water capacity, or within aggregate water capacity exceeding 1,000 gallons (3.78 m 3 ), or over. Prior to making such an installation, an installer shall submit plans to the fire official, and if compliance with the requirements of this code is shown by such plans, a permit shall be issued. 
(Code 1981, § 13-42; Ord. No. 04-50, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 54-63. - Amendment; fire suppression system required. 
    Amendment to International Fire Code, 2000. 
    Approved automatic-fire suppression systems shall be installed and maintained in full operating condition in buildings 50 feet or more in height for which building permits are issued after the date of passage of this section. Nothing in this section shall impair or reduce the requirements in effect as of September 1, 1987. 
(Code 1981, § 13-42.1; Ord. No. 04-50, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 54-64. - Enforcement. 
    The fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention. The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall, from time to time, be necessary for the enforcement of such code and he may recommend to the city manager the employment of technical inspectors for enforcement of such code. 
(Code 1981, § 13-43) 
Sec. 54-65. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such order as affirmed or modified by the city manager or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1981, § 13-44) 
Sec. 54-66. - Appeals. 
    When it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the board of appeals established in section F-113.2 of the code adopted in section 54-61, within 30 days from the date of the decision from which the appeal is taken. 
(Code 1981, § 13-46) 
Sec. 54-67. - Permit fees; expiration of permits. 
    An initial fee of $25.00 shall be paid to the city for each permit obtained pursuant to the fire prevention code adopted by this article. Where activities requiring permits continue for a period in excess of one year, renewals may be obtained upon payment of a fee of $5.00. All such permits shall expire upon completion of the activity for which the permit is issued or one year after the issuance or renewal date of the permit, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1981, § 13-48) 
Sec. 54-68. - Reports of proceedings under code and recommendations as to amendments. 
    A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the city manager. It shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code adopted by this article, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to such code as may, in his judgment, be desirable. 
(Code 1981, § 13-49) 
Secs. 54-69-54-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE ALARMS 

Sec. 54-91. - Duplicate keys for fire alarm boxes; false fire alarms. 
    If any person, without authority from the city manager, shall make or cause to be made, or have in his possession, a duplicate or impression of the key to any fire alarm box, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-2) 
Sec. 54-92. - Interfering or tampering with fire alarm system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or tamper with the alarm boxes, poles, wires, insulators, batteries or any other thing connected with the city's fire alarm system or to deface the poles or alarm boxes of such system. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-3) 
Secs. 54-93-54-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SMOKE DETECTORS 

Sec. 54-111. - Smoke detectors required. 
    The owner or owners of the following structures or buildings shall install smoke detectors in such structures or buildings: 
(1)  Any building containing one or more dwelling units. 
(2)  Any hotel or motel regularly used, offered for, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations for one or more persons. 
(3)  Roominghouses regularly used, offered for, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations. 
(Code 1981, § 13-60) 
Sec. 54-112. - Types of smoke detectors; method of installation. 
    Smoke detectors installed pursuant to this article shall be either battery-operated or AC-powered units and shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1981, § 13-61) 
Sec. 54-113. - Certificates, rented or leased units. 
    The owner of any unit which is rented or leased, at the beginning of each tenancy and at least annually thereafter, shall furnish the tenant with a certificate that all required smoke detectors are present, have been inspected, and are in good working order. 
(Code 1981, § 13-62) 
Sec. 54-114. - Tenants' and owners' interim responsibilities. 
    Except for smoke detectors located in hallways, stairwells, and other public or common areas of multifamily buildings, interim testing, repair and maintenance of smoke detectors in rented or leased units shall be the responsibility of the tenant; however, the owner shall be obligated to service, repair or replace any malfunctioning smoke detectors within five days of receipt of written notice from the tenant that such smoke detector is in need of service, repair, or replacement. 
(Code 1981, § 13-63) 
Sec. 54-115. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-65) 
Chapter 58 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 82; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 114; waterways, ch. 122. 
State Law reference- Flood Damage Reduction Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-600 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-09, adopted January 18, 2011, amended Article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article II, §§ 58-31-58-37, 58-56-58-59, 58-76, 58-77, 58-96-58-98, 58-116, 58-136-58-138, 58-156-58-158, 58-176 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1981, §§ 13.5-1-13.5-7, 13.5-19-13.5-22, 13.5-34, 13.5-35, 13.5-41-13.5-43, 13.5-50, 13.5-67-13.5-73. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-31. - Purpose. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to localities by chapter 6 of title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia Flood Protection and Dam Safety (Va. Code § 10.1-600 et. seq.) The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(1)  Regulating uses, activities and development which, acting alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies. 
(2)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating within areas subject to flooding. 
(3)  Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur in floodprone areas to be protected and floodproofed against flooding and flood damage. 
(4)  Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes, because of flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-32. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Base flood means a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of occurring each year, although such a flood may occur in any year). 
    Base flood elevation means the Federal Emergency Management Agency designated 100-year water surface elevation. The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's flood insurance rate map. For the purposes of this article, the 100-year flood or one percent annual chance flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Crater Regional Building Code Board of Appeals means the board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the building official and/or zoning administrator in the interpretation of this article. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers). 
    Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Existing manufactured home park/subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 18, 1990. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park/subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or, 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(c)  Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(2)  The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (1)(a) of this definition. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM). 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Floodplain means: 
(1)  A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; or 
(2)  An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source. 
    Floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the designated area of the floodplain required to carry and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this article, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the 100-year magnitude. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. When a freeboard is included in the height of a structure, the flood insurance premiums will be significantly cheaper. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
(b)  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44CFR § 60.3. 
    Manufactured home means, for the purposes of this article, a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
    Manufactured home park/subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale for the placement of manufactured homes. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after March 16, 1981 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 18, 1990, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park/subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 18, 1990. 
    Recreational vehicle means, for purposes of this article, a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis. 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection. 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck. 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Shallow flooding area means a special flood hazard area with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Special flood hazard area means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in section 58-56 of this article. 
    Start of construction means, for other than new construction and substantial improvement, under the Costal Barriers Resource Act (P.L. 97-384), the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means for flood plain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance as required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-33. - General penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this article or directions of the director of planning or any authorized employee of the City of Petersburg shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor as provided in section 1-14 of the Code of the City of Petersburg and subject to the penalties therefore. 
    In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or noncompliances within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this article may be declared by the City of Petersburg to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-34. - City disclaimer of liability for flood damages. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes, and is based upon scientific and engineering considerations. Floods more severe than the regulatory 100-year flood can and will occur on rare occasions, as flood heights may be increased by natural or manmade causes. The provisions of this article are not intended to imply that lands outside the designated floodplain districts, or development permitted within such districts, will be free from flooding or flood damage. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that may result under compliance with the provisions of this article or any administrative decision lawfully made pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-35. - Applicability of article; compliance; abrogations; greater restrictions. 
(a)  Applicability . The provisions of this article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Petersburg and identified as being floodprone within this article. 
(b)  Compliance . No land shall hereafter be developed, and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered, except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this article. 
(c)  Abrogation and greater restrictions . This article supersedes any article currently in effect in floodprone areas. However, any underlying article shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that the provisions of such article are more restrictive. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-36. - Administration and enforcement; duties of zoning administrator and building inspector. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator of the city to administer and enforce the provisions of this article; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to abrogate the authority and responsibility of the building inspector of the city to administer and enforce the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as it applies to development within designated floodplain districts. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 58-37. - Building permits required; applications; required information. 
(a)  A building permit to erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, extend or structurally alter any building or structure within a floodplain district shall be required, as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Applications for building permits shall be filed with the building inspector of the city; and no such permit shall be issued until the applicant has furnished satisfactory evidence that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by state and federal law and the zoning administrator has reviewed all sites to assure that they are reasonably safe from flooding. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(b)  In addition to information required by the building code to be provided in conjunction with building permit applications, the following shall be included when the property involved is located, wholly or partially, within a floodplain district: 
(1)  The elevation of the 100-year flood, and delineation of the 100-year floodplain. 
(2)  The elevation of the lowest floor, including basement. 
(3)  The elevation to which a nonresidential structure is to be floodproofed. 
(4)  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Secs. 58-38-58-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 58-56. - Established; criteria. 
(a)  Areas included; basis for delineation . The various floodplain districts shall include areas subject to inundation by waters of the 100-year flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study (FIS) and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for the City of Petersburg prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated February 4, 2011, and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. 
(b)  Floodway district . The floodway district is delineated for purposes of this article, using the criterion that a certain area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot, at any point. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in table 5 of the flood insurance study referenced in subsection (a) of this section and shown on the accompanying flood boundary and floodway map. 
(c)  Special floodplain district . The special floodplain district shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study for which 100-year flood elevations have been provided. 
(d)  Approximated floodplain district . The approximated floodplain district shall be those areas identified as an A or A99 zone on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. In these zones, no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the 100-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. For these areas, the 100-year flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where the specific 100-year flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey Floodprone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the zoning administrator. 
(e)  Shallow flooding district . The shallow flooding district shall be those areas identified as zone AO or AH on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-57. - Official floodplain map designated. 
    The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established, as shown on the flood insurance rate map, which is declared to be a part of this article and which shall be kept on file at the office of the clerk of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-58. - District boundary changes. 
    The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the city council, where natural or manmade changes have occurred or where more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, or other qualified agency or individual, document the justification for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-59. - Interpretations of boundaries; disputes. 
    Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the zoning administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the crater regional building code board of appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board of appeals and to submit his own technical evidence, if he so desires. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-60. - Submitting technical data. 
    A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and flood plain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Secs. 58-61-58-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICT USES, ACTIVITIES AND DEVELOPMENT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 58-76. - District provisions, generally. 
(a)  All uses, activities and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a building permit and requisite zoning approval. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this article, chapter 102 and all other applicable codes and articles, such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the zoning administrator shall require all applications to include evidence of compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(b)  Under no circumstances shall any use, activity or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(c)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be according to the VA USBC, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(d)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(e)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(f)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(g)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(h)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(i)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(j)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
In addition to provisions (a)-(h) above, in all special flood hazard areas, the additional provisions shall apply: 
(k)  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained from the U. S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, in riverine areas, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the department of conservation and recreation (division of dam safety and floodplain management) and the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
(l)  The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. 
Sec. 58-77. - Specific standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided in the flood insurance study or generated according [to] article 4, section 4.6, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Residential construction: 
(1)  New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation (recommend = one foot freeboard). 
(b)  Nonresidential construction: 
(1)  New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation (recommend = one foot freeboard). Buildings located in all A1-30, AE, and AH zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the BFE plus one foot are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification, including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by (title of community administrator). 
(c)  Elevated buildings: fully enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall: 
(1)  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
(2)  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation; 
(3)  Include, in zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
b.  The total net area of all openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
c.  If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area must have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit. 
d.  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade. 
e.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
f.  Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above. 
(d)  Manufactured homes, as defined in this article, that are placed or substantially improved on sites: 
(1)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage, as the result of a flood; 
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(e)  Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (d) of this section shall be elevated so that either: 
(1)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(f)  Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
(3)  Meet the permit requirements for placement and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (d) or (e) of this section as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-78. - Design criteria for utilities and facilities. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private package sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the floodwaters. In addition, such facilities shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage or impairment. 
(b)  Water facilities . All new or replacement water facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system, and shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(c)  Drainage facilities . All storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface water, without damage to persons or property. The systems shall ensure drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites. The city council may require a primarily underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. 
(d)  Utilities . All utilities, such as gas lines and electrical and telephone systems, being placed in floodprone areas shall be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during an occurrence of flooding. 
(e)  Streets and sidewalks . Streets and sidewalks shall be designed to minimize their potential for increasing and aggravating the levels of flood flow. Drainage openings shall be required to sufficiently discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Secs. 58-79-58-95. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Floodway District 

Sec. 58-96. - Improvements to offset development. 
    Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments are prohibited unless certification such as hydrologic and hydraulic analyses (with supporting technical data) is provided to the zoning administrator demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Such improvements also shall be approved by all appropriate local and state authorities, as required in section 58-76. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-97. - Manufactured homes, recreational vehicles. 
    The placement of any manufactured home or recreational vehicle within the floodway district is specifically prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-98. - Permitted activities; prerequisites. 
    In the floodway district the following activities are permitted, provided they are in compliance with the provisions of this article and are not prohibited by any other ordinance, and provided that they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials and equipment: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching, and swimming areas, hiking and horseback riding trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, skeet game ranges, and hunting and fishing areas. 
(3)  Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious parking and loading areas. 
(4)  Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas, pervious parking and loading areas, airport landing strips, etc. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Secs. 58-99-58-115. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Special Floodplain and Approximated Floodplain Districts 

Sec. 58-116. - Standards for the special floodplain district and approximated floodplain district 
    Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as zones A1-30 and AE on the flood insurance rate map, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Petersburg. 
    Development activities in Zones A1-30, AE, and AH, on the City of Petersburg's Flood Insurance Rate Map which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies - with the City of Petersburg's endorsement - for a conditional flood insurance rate map revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    No structure shall be located within ten feet of the boundary of the special floodplain district and approximated floodplain district. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Secs. 58-117-58-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MODIFICATIONS, EXCEPTIONS; EXISTING STRUCTURES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 58-136. - Conditions. 
    In accordance with applicable provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, the crater regional building code board of appeals shall grant modifications to the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, pertaining to the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration or repair of a building or structure in a floodplain district, only under the following conditions: 
(1)  No modification shall be granted for any proposed development within a floodway district that will cause any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood. 
(2)  A modification shall only be granted upon the following: 
(a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause. 
(b)  A determination that failure to grant the modification would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant. 
(c)  A determination that the granting of the modification shall not result in unacceptable or prohibited flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; and will not create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing codes or ordinances. 
(3)  A modification shall only be granted upon a determination that the modification is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-137. - Notification by board of appeals of increase in cost of flood insurance. 
    Upon granting a modification to construct a structure below the 100-year flood level, the crater regional building code board of appeals shall notify the applicant, in writing, that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from such construction. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-138. - Board of appeals to maintain records. 
    Records shall be maintained, by the Crater Regional Building Code board of appeals, of all modifications granted, including the justification for each, and shall be included in any reports required by, and submitted to, the emergency management agency. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Secs. 58-139-58-155. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Special Exceptions 

Sec. 58-156. - Special exceptions to requirements of article; conditions; documentation of affecting factors; authority of building inspector. 
(1)  The building inspector of the city shall have the authority to grant special exceptions to the provisions of this article, other than such provisions as pertain to the requirements of the Virginia Statewide Uniform Building Code; provided, that the applicant shall furnish sufficient information and documentation to satisfy the inspector as to the following factors: 
(a)  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No special exception shall be granted for any proposed use, development or activity within any floodway district that will cause any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(b)  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands, or downstream, to the injury of others. 
(c)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
(d)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
(e)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(f)  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
(g)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding, for the proposed use. 
(h)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(i)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
(j)  The safety of access to the property, in time of flood, by ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(k)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
(l)  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the special exception is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(2)  The building inspector may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a special exception to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
(3)  Special exceptions shall be issued only after the building inspector has determined that the granting of such will not result in: 
(a)  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
(b)  Additional threats to public safety; 
(c)  Extraordinary public expense; and will not 
(d)  Create nuisances; 
(e)  Cause fraud or victimization of the public; or 
(f)  Conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
    A special exception shall only be issued upon the determination that the special exception is the minimum required to provide relief from any hardship to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-157. - Notification by building inspector of increase in cost of flood insurance. 
    Upon issuance of a special exception for any development or activity below the 100-year flood level, the building inspector shall notify the applicant, in writing, that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from such development or activity. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Sec. 58-158. - Records to be maintained by building inspector. 
    Records shall be maintained by the building inspector of all special exceptions granted, including the justification for each, and shall be included in any reports required by, and submitted to, the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Secs. 58-159-58-175. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Existing Structures 

Sec. 58-176. - Existing structures in floodplain districts; conditions for continuation. 
    A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before September 18, 1990, but which is not in conformity with these provisions may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Existing structures or uses located in floodway districts shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any flood plain areas to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent of its market value shall conform to the VA USBC. 
(3)  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain area to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with this article and shall require the entire structure to conform to the VA USBC. 
(4)  Uses, or adjuncts thereof, which are, or become, nuisances shall not be permitted to continue. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, 1-18-2011) 
Chapter 62 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 18; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 50; floods, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 114. 
State Law reference- Food and drink generally, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-361 et seq.; certain local regulations pertaining to food and beverage containers prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1425; authority of city to require cutting of weeds and removal of trash, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901; regulation of well covers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-318; inspection warrant for inspecting or testing for toxic substances, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-393 et seq.; health, Code of Virginia, tit. 32.1; restaurants, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 26. 

Sec. 62-31. - Revocation of business license for violation of article. 
    If any person is convicted of violating the provisions of this article a second time, and such violation occurs in the conduct of a business or activity licensed by the city, such license may be revoked in the discretion of the judge of the general district court. 
(Code 1981, § 14-1) 
Sec. 62-32. - Permit for sale of food. 
(a)  No person shall, within this city, sell or expose for sale any meat, fowl, fish, fruits, vegetables, confectioneries, bread, cakes, pies or any other food supplies, whether of like kind or not, or any drink products such as are usually sold at soda fountains, intended for human food or drink, or supply food for human consumption at any room, stall, store, hotel, restaurant or any other place, except the public markets, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the health department. 
(b)  Application for a permit under this section shall be made by verbal request to the health director or his authorized representative. 
(c)  Before granting a permit under this section, it shall be the duty of the health director or his authorized representative to make or cause to be made an examination of the place or premises where food or drink is to be sold. Thereafter, the health director shall, from time to time, inspect the place or premises, and the food and drink offered for sale, and if such place is found unsanitary, or if any such food or drink is found impure or unwholesome, such permit shall be refused, or if already granted, may, at any time, be revoked or suspended, until such place is made sanitary, or such impure or unwholesome food or drink is removed therefrom or destroyed. 
(d)  A permit granted under this section shall be valid for one year, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(e)  No person holding a permit granted under this section shall be allowed to assign such permit. 
(f)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 14-2) 
Sec. 62-33. - Prerequisites for sale of meat. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, display or offer for sale any meat or meat products in the city, unless such meat or meat products have been slaughtered, handled and processed in compliance with the rules and regulations of the United States Department of Agriculture's meat inspection service or those of the state board of agriculture and consumer services. The official legend of approval of either of such meat inspection services, appearing on wholesale meat cuts and on wholesale and retail packages, shall be deemed satisfactory evidence that such meats and meat products have been prepared in compliance with this section, unless evidence is produced that such legend was illegally applied. 
(b)  Any person that violates any provisions of this section shall upon conviction be subject to confinement in jail for not more than one year, or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Code 1981, § 14-3(a), (c)) 
State Law reference- Virginia Meat and Poultry Products Inspection Act, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-884.17 et seq.; penalties, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-884.31. 
Sec. 62-34. - Slaughtering or butchering certain animals prohibited except at abattoirs, packinghouses, etc. 
(a)  No person shall slaughter, butcher, or cause to be slaughtered or butchered, any animal, wild or domesticated, weighing 25 pounds or more, on any property or premises located within the city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to established slaughterhouses, abattoirs, packinghouses, rendering plants or other similar establishments, when such establishments are licensed and conducted under the rules and regulations of the Federal Department of Agriculture and the state board of agriculture and consumer services. 
(c)  Any person that violates any provisions of this section shall upon conviction be subject to confinement in jail for not more than one year, or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Code 1981, § 14-4) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Penalties, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-884.31. 
Sec. 62-35. - General maintenance requirements for food establishments. 
    Every person owning or occupying any room, stall, store, hotel, restaurant or other place where any meat, fish, fruit, vegetables, confectioneries, bread, cakes, pies or any other food supplies, whether of like kind or not, or any food or drink products are kept, exposed or offered for sale or furnished or supplied for human consumption, shall maintain such place and its appurtenances in a clean and wholesome condition. Every person having charge of, interested in or engaged in the care of any such food supplies or food or drink products shall maintain such supplies or products in a clean and wholesome condition and shall not allow such supplies or products to be infected or rendered unsafe or unwholesome for human food. 
(Code 1981, § 14-5) 
Sec. 62-36. - Control of flies and other insects at food establishments. 
    Every manager of a store, dairy, cafe, lunch room or any other place where food, beverage, confectionery or any similar article is manufactured or prepared for sale, stored for sale, offered for sale or sold shall cause it to be effectually screened, or effectually protected by a power driven fan, so as to prevent flies and other insects from obtaining access to such food, beverage, confectionery or other articles, and shall keep such food, beverage, confectionery and other articles free from flies and other insects at all times. 
(Code 1981, § 14-6) 
Sec. 62-37. - Mislabeling or misrepresenting food. 
    No meat, fish, fruit, vegetables, food supplies or food or drink products shall be sold, offered for sale, furnished or supplied, if such products are labeled or represented to be of a false name or quality, or as being otherwise, as respects wholesomeness or soundness for food or drink, than according to the facts. 
(Code 1981, § 14-7) 
Sec. 62-38. - Unwholesome food not to be brought into or stored in the city. 
    No decayed or unwholesome fruit or vegetables, nor impure, unhealthy or unwholesome meat, fish, birds or fowl shall be brought into the city, to be consumed or offered for sale for human food, nor shall any such articles be kept or stored in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 14-8) 
Sec. 62-39. - Sale of unwholesome food. 
    No meat, fish, birds, fowl, fruits, vegetables, confectioneries, bread, cakes, pies or any other food supplies, whether of like kind or not, or any drink products, such as are usually sold at soda fountains, intended for human food or drink, not being then healthy, fresh, sound, pure, wholesome and safe for human food, nor any animals, fish or fowl, which has died from accident or disease, shall be sold or offered for sale, or furnished or supplied for human food in any public market or at any room, stall, hotel, restaurant, lot, or any other place in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 14-9) 
Sec. 62-40. - Condemnation of unwholesome food. 
    Whenever the health director or his authorized representative shall find any meat, birds, fowl, fish, vegetables, confectioneries, bread, cakes, pies or any other food, whether of a like kind or not, or any drink products, intended for human food or drink, in an unwholesome condition and unfit for use as human food, or in a condition or of a weight or quality condemned or forbidden, he shall have power to immediately condemn the food or drink and thereupon the food or drink shall either be destroyed by the owner, in the presence of the health director or his authorized representative, or removed from the city. 
(Code 1981, § 14-10) 
Sec. 62-41. - Permit exemption for certain establishments. 
    As prescribed by 1950 Code of Virginia, § 35.1-25, as amended, the following are exempt from the permit provisions of this article: 
(1)  Boardinghouses that do not accommodate transients; 
(2)  Cafeterias operated by industrial plants for employees only; 
(3)  Churches, fraternal, school and social organizations, and volunteer fire departments and rescue squads which hold occasional dinners, bazaars, and other fundraisers of one or two days duration, at which food prepared in the homes of members or in the kitchen of the church, school or organization is offered for sale to the public; 
(4)  Churches which serve meals for their members as a regular part of their religious observances. 
(Ord. No. 04-12, 2-3-2004) 
Chapter 66 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Virginia Fair Housing Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.1 et seq.; powers of city, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 66-31-66-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 14-77, adopted July 22, 2014, amended Div. 2 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said division to read as set out herein. The former Div. 2, §§ 66-46-66-56, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 12.5-2-12.5-11 of the 1981 Code, and Ord. No. 99-183, §§ 12.5-3-12.5-11 and § 12.5-13, adopted Dec. 6, 1999. 

Sec. 66-46. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is the policy of the city to provide for fair housing throughout the city, to all its citizens, regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, marital status, presence of children in the family or disability, and to that end to prohibit discriminatory practices with respect to residential housing by any person or group of persons, in order that the peace, health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of all the inhabitants of the city may be protected and ensured. To this end, the city encourages the enforcement, by both public and private agencies, of laws prohibiting discriminatory practices as defined in this article. This article shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state for the protection of the people of the state as granted to and conferred upon the city. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
Sec. 66-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Age means an individual who has attained the individual's 55th birthday. 
    Disability means, with respect to a person, (i) a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; (ii) a record of having such an impairment; or (iii) being regarded as having such an impairment. The term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in state or federal law. Neither the term "individual with disability" nor the term "disability" shall apply to an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite. 
    Discriminatory housing practices means an act that is unlawful under section 66-48 or 66-49. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Familial status means one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years being domiciled with a parent or other person having legal custody of such individual, or the designee of such parent or other person having custody with the written permission of such parent or other person. The term "familial status" also includes any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. For purposes of this definition, the phrase "in the process of securing legal custody" means having filed an appropriate petition to obtain legal custody of such minor in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
    Family includes a single individual, whether male or female. 
    Lending institution means any bank, savings institution, credit union, insurance company or mortgage lender. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, whether male or female, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
    Restrictive covenants means any specification limiting the transfer, rental, or lease of any dwelling because of race, color, religion, national origin, familial status, sex, marital status, presence of children in a family, disability or age. 
    To rent includes to lease to sublease, to let or otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-48. - Unlawful discriminatory housing practices. 
(a)  It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, or familial status. 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in the connection therewith to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, or familial status. 
(3)  Make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, familial status, or disability. The use of words or symbols associated with a particular religion, national origin, sex, or race shall be prima facie evidence of an illegal preference under this article which shall not be overcome by a general disclaimer. However, reference alone to places of worship, including but not limited to churches, synagogues, temples, or mosques, in any such notice, statement or advertisement shall not be a prima facie evidence of an illegal preference. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, familial status, or disability that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  Deny any person access to membership in or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, familial status, or disability. 
(6)  Include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of housing any restrictive covenant that discriminates because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age familial status, or disability or for any person to honor or exercise or attempt to honor or exercise any such discriminatory covenant pertaining to housing. 
(7)  Induce or attempt to induce to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, familial status, or disability. 
(8)  Refuse to sell or rent or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise discriminate or make unavailable or deny a dwelling because of a disability of: 
a.  The buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter. 
(9)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of a disability of: 
a.  That person; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it was so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, discrimination includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by any person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, practices, policies, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that: 
a.  The public use and common use areas of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons; 
b.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs; and 
c.  All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an accessible route into and through the dwelling; light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls are in accessible locations; reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. As used in this subsection, the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators and ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
(c)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standards for Building and Facilities, commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1," or with any other standards adopted as part of regulations promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) providing accessibility and usability for physically disabled people shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of subsection (b)(3)c. of this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to invalidate or limit any state law or regulation which requires dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords disabled persons greater access than is required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.3. 
Sec. 66-49. - Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including any lending institution, whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions, to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction or in the manner of providing such a transaction, because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, familial status, or disability. It shall not be unlawful, however, for any person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate transactions to require any applicant to qualify financially for the loan for which such person is making application. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "residential real estate-related transaction" means any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: 
a.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or 
b.  Secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering, insuring or appraising of residential real property. However, nothing in this article shall prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, familial status, or disability. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any state, county, city, or municipal treasurer or governmental official whose responsibility it is to account for, to invest, or manage public funds to deposit or cause to be deposited any public funds in any lending institution provided for in this section which is found to be committing discriminatory practices, where such findings were upheld by any court of competent jurisdiction. Upon such a court's judicial enforcement of any order to restrain a practice of such lending institution or for such institution to cease or desist in a discriminatory practice, the appropriate fiscal officer or treasurer of the city or any political subdivision thereof which has funds deposited in any lending institution which is practicing discrimination, as set forth in this section, shall take immediate steps to have the funds withdrawn and redeposited in another lending institution. If for reasons of sound economic management this action will result in a financial loss to the city, the action may be deferred for a period not longer than one year. If the lending institution in question has corrected its discriminatory practices, any prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-94.4. 
Sec. 66-50. - Interference with enjoyment of rights of others under article. 
    It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of or on account of such person's having exercised or enjoyed or on the account of such person's having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.5. 
Sec. 66-51. - Certain restrictive covenants void; instruments containing such covenants. 
(a)  Any restrictive covenant and any related reversionary interest, purporting to restrict occupancy or ownership of property on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, familial status, or disability, whether included in an instrument affecting the title to real or leasehold property, are declared to be void and contrary to the public policy of this commonwealth. 
(b)  Any person who is asked to accept a document affecting title to real or leasehold property may decline to accept the document if it includes such a covenant or reversionary interest until the covenant or reversionary interest has been removed from the document. Refusal to accept delivery of an instrument for this reason shall not be deemed a breach of contract to purchase, lease, mortgage, or otherwise deal with such property. 
(c)  No person shall solicit or accept compensation of any kind for the release or removal of any covenant or reversionary interest described in subsection (a) of this section. Any person violating this subsection shall be liable to any person injured thereby in an amount equal to the greater of three times the compensation solicited or received or $500.00, plus reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred. 
(d)  A family care home, foster home, or group home in which physically disabled, mentally ill, mentally retarded, or developmentally disabled persons reside, with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons, shall be considered for all purposes residential occupancy by a single family when construing any restrictive covenant which purports to restrict occupancy or ownership of real or leasehold property to members of a single family or to residential use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.6. 
Sec. 66-52. - Familial status protection not applicable to housing for older persons. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; 
(2)  Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended for and solely occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. The following criteria shall be met in determining whether housing for older persons under this subsection (a)(3): 
a.  At least 80 percent of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 
b.  The publication of an adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(b)  Nothing in this article regarding unlawful discrimination because of familial status shall apply to housing for older persons. 
(c)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
(1)  Persons residing in such housing as of September 13, 1988, who do not meet the age requirements of subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section, provided that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of those subsections; or 
(2)  Unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the requirements of subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
Sec. 66-53. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 66-48(a)(3), this article shall not apply to any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual does not own more than three single-family houses at any one time. In the case of the sale of any single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of the sale or who was not the most recent resident of the house prior to sale, the exemption granted shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period, provided that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on such owner's behalf under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be exempt from the application of this article only if the house is sold or rented (i) without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, salesperson, or of the facilities or the services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee, independent contractor, or agent of any broker, agent, salesperson, or person and (ii) without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this article. However, nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. This exemption shall not apply to or inure to the benefit of any licensee of the real estate board, regardless of whether the licensee is acting in such licensee's personal or professional capacity. 
(b)  Except for section 66-48(a)(3), this article shall not apply to rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as the owner's residence. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preferences to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, familial status, or disability. Nor shall anything in this article apply to a private membership club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. Nor, where matters of personal privacy are involve, shall anything in this article be construed to prohibit any private, state-owned or state-supported educational institution, hospital, nursing home, religious or correctional institution from requiring that persons of both sexes not occupy any single-family residence or room or unit of dwellings or other buildings or restrooms in such room or unit in dwellings or other buildings which it owns or operates. 
(d)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in federal law. 
(e)  It shall not be unlawful under this article for any owner to deny or limit the rental of housing to persons who pose a clear and present threat of substantial harm to others or to the dwelling itself. 
(f)  A rental application may require disclosure by the applicant of any criminal convictions, and the owner or managing agent may require as a condition of acceptance of the rental application that the applicant consent in writing to a criminal record check to verify the disclosures made by the applicant in the rental application. The owner or managing agent may collect from the applicant moneys to reimburse the owner or managing agent for the exact amount of the out-of-pocket costs for such criminal record checks. Nothing in this article shall require an owner or managing agent to rent a dwelling to an individual who, based on a prior record of criminal convictions involving harm to persons or property, would constitute a clear and present threat to the health or safety of other individuals. 
(g)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or federal restriction regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. Owners or managing agents of dwellings may develop and implement reasonable occupancy and safety standards based on factors such as the number and size of sleeping areas or bedrooms and overall size of a dwelling unit so long as the standards do not violate the local, state or federal restrictions. Nothing in this article prohibits the rental application or similar document from requiring information concerning the number, ages, sex and familial relationship of the applicants and the dwelling's intended occupants. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.2. 
Sec. 66-54. - Persons adversely affected; filing of civil action or complaint. 
    Any person adversely affected by the use of a discriminatory practice prohibited under this article may institute an action for injunctive relief and money damages against the person responsible for such discriminatory practice in the circuit court of the city. If the court finds that the defendant was responsible for such a practice and that the plaintiff was adversely affected thereby, it shall enjoin the defendant from use of such practice and in its discretion award the plaintiff actual damages with court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
Sec. 66-55. - Additional authority. 
    In addition to the complaint procedure set forth in section 66-54, the city manager, or the manager's designee, may, on its, his or her own initiative, proceed to take appropriate steps to remedy unlawful housing practices as described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
Sec. 66-56. - Burden of proof. 
    In any action brought pursuant to this article, the burden of proof shall be on the complainant. 
(Ord. No. 14-77, 7-22-2014) 
Chapter 70 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of police officers for issuance of civil warrants for collection of city taxes and other claims of the city, § 3-19. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Police and public order, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1700 et seq.; powers of governor as to local law enforcement agencies, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-410. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Physicians to report certain injuries to police. 
(a)  Every doctor, physician or other person who renders any medical aid or treatment to any person for a cut, stab or gunshot wound, any other wound described in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-2967, or any injury apparently caused by an unlawful act of another shall report, within one hour, to the police department the name, residence, occupation, race and any other description of the person treated and such other information as may be required by the chief of police. 
(b)  Any physician or other person failing to comply with this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Any person participating in the making of a report pursuant to this section or participating in a judicial proceeding resulting therefrom shall be immune from any civil liability in connection therewith, unless it is proved that such person acted in bad faith or with malicious intent. 
(Code 1981, § 24-13) 
State Law reference- Physicians and others rendering medical aid to report certain wounds, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-2967. 
Sec. 70-2. - Interfering or tampering with police alarm system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or tamper with the alarm boxes, poles, wires, insulators, batteries or any other thing connected with the city's police alarm system or to deface the poles or alarm boxes of such system. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 24-8) 
Sec. 70-3. - Refusal to assist officer. 
    If any person, on being required by any sheriff, police officer, or other officer refuses or neglects to assist him: 
(1)  In the execution of his office in a criminal case; 
(2)  In the preservation of the peace; 
(3)  In the apprehending or securing of any person for a breach of the peace; or 
(4)  In any case of escape or rescue; 
he shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 24-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-463. 
Sec. 70-4. - Impersonation generally. 
    Any person who shall falsely assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties and privileges incident to the office of sheriff, police officer, marshal or other peace officer, or who shall falsely assume or pretend to be any such officer, shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 24-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174. 
Sec. 70-5. - Unlawful wearing of police uniform. 
    No person, not entitled to wear such uniform, shall wear any uniform as is designated by the proper authority for the use of the police department of the city. Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 24-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-175. 
Sec. 70-6. - Imitating police signals. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person, within the corporate limits of the city, to blow, or attempt to blow, a whistle in imitation of the police signal. 
(Code 1981, § 24-12) 
Sec. 70-7. - False reports to police. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Knowingly give a false report as to the commission of any crime to any sheriff, deputy sheriff, member of the state police, police officer or any other law enforcement official with intent to mislead; or 
(2)  Without just cause and with intent to interfere with the operations of any law enforcement official, to call or summon any law enforcement official by telephone or other means, including engagement or activation of an automatic emergency alarm. 
(b)  A violation of the provisions of this section shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, §§ 24-8, 24-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461. 
Sec. 70-8. - Designation of police to enforce trespass violations. 
    The Petersburg Police Bureau is hereby authorized to establish a procedure allowing an owner, lessee, custodian, or person lawfully in charge of any real property, as the terms are used in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119, to designate the Petersburg Police Bureau, and its officers, as a person lawfully in charge of the property for the purpose of forbidding another to go or remain upon the lands, buildings, or premises as specified in the designation, pursuant to provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1717.1, as amended, or subsequently amended. The decision whether to accept or rescind any such designation is solely within the discretion of the chief of police or his designee, who may base the decision on factors including, but not limited to, resource levels of the police bureau and the proper allocation of resources. Any such designation shall be in writing on forms promulgated by the chief of police, or his designee, and the city attorney and shall be kept on file with the police bureau. The chief of police, or his designee, in consultation with city attorney, shall promulgate rules, regulations, and/or procedure for the acceptance, use, and rescission of such designation. 
(Ord. No. 14-110, 12-9-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 18.2-119, § 15.2-1717.1, § 55-248.31:01. 
Secs. 70-9-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Departments, § 2-191 et seq.; emergency powers of chief of police to regulate or prohibit traffic or parking, § 110-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-31. - Composition, direction and control of department. 
    The police department shall consist of a chief and such officers, patrol officers and others as the city council, on the recommendation of the city manager, may prescribe, who shall be under the direction and control of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 24-1) 
Sec. 70-32. - Minimum qualifications; waiver. 
(a)  The chief of police and all police officers and cadets of the city, all deputy sheriffs and jail officers, and all law enforcement officers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 9-169, who enter upon the duties of such office after July 1, 1994, are required to meet the following minimum qualifications for office. Such person shall (i) be a citizen of the United States, (ii) be required to undergo a background investigation including fingerprint-based criminal history records inquiries to both the Central Criminal Records Exchange and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, (iii) have a high school education or have passed the General Educational Development exam, (iv) possess a valid driver's license if required by the duties of office to operate a motor vehicle, (v) undergo a physical examination, subsequent to a conditional offer of employment, conducted under the supervision of a licensed physician designated by the city manager, and no such applicant shall be appointed until the physician has certified that, in his opinion, the applicant is physically able to perform police duties. Such certificate shall be forwarded to the city manager and shall finally be filed with the original application for appointment to the police department, (vi) be at least 18 years of age, (vii) not have been convicted of or pleaded guilty or no contest to a felony or any offense that would be a felony if committed in the commonwealth, and (viii) not have produced a positive result on a pre-employment drug screening, if such screening is required by the hiring law enforcement agency or jail, where the positive result cannot be explained to the law enforcement agency or jail administrator's satisfaction. 
(b)  Upon request of a sheriff or chief of police, or the director or chief executive of any agency or department employing law enforcement officers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 9-169, or jail officers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 53.1-1, the state department of criminal justice services may waive the requirements for qualification as set out in subsection (a) of this section for good cause shown. 
(Code 1981, §§ 24-3, 24-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1705. 
Sec. 70-33. - Appointment and terms of members of department. 
    The city manager shall appoint a chief of police, whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. The city manager shall appoint, on the recommendation of the chief of police, such other officers, members and cadets of the police department as the city council may deem necessary to properly enforce the state laws and city ordinances and protect the lives and property of citizens, all of whom shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 24-2) 
Sec. 70-34. - Certain persons not eligible for appointment. 
    No member of the police department discharged for misconduct shall be eligible for appointment or reappointment in either the fire department or police department for a period of five years from the date of discharge. Such person may be considered for reappointment after the five-year period provided that no criminal conviction resulted from the misconduct on which the discharge was made. 
(Code 1981, § 24-3; Ord. No. 02-10, 1-22-2002) 
Sec. 70-35. - Oath of members of department. 
    Before entering upon his duties, each member of the police department shall take an oath that he will obey the orders of his superior officers and will discharge his duties in the police department to the best of his ability. The certificate of such oath shall be deposited with the clerk of the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 24-4) 
Sec. 70-36. - General duties of chief and members of department. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to command and supervise the police force of the city under the general direction of the city manager, and to see that the duties of the members of such force, as defined by law and city ordinances, are properly performed. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each member of the police department to acquire, as soon as practicable, a general knowledge of the criminal laws of the state and of the ordinances and regulations of the city, which he may be called upon to enforce, and to use his best efforts to prevent the commission, within the police jurisdiction of the city, of offenses against the laws of the state and the ordinances and regulations of the city, to enforce all such laws, ordinances and regulations, to detect and arrest offenders, to preserve the good order of the city and to secure the inhabitants thereof from violence and their property from injury. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of all police officers to observe at all times the sanitary conditions of their districts and to promptly report to the health department any nuisance or accumulation of filth found to exist. 
(Code 1981, § 24-6) 
Sec. 70-37. - Procedure for deduction from pay when member of department is fined or suspended. 
    Whenever a fine is imposed upon any member of the police department, or whenever any member of the police department is suspended without pay, the name of the member upon whom such penalty is imposed, together with the amount of fine or length of time of suspension, shall be certified by the city manager to the director of finance, who shall deduct the amount of fine, or the amount of compensation such member would have received during the time of suspension, as the case may be, from such member's pay for the current month. 
(Code 1981, § 24-7) 
Secs. 70-38-70-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC DIVISION 

Sec. 70-56. - Establishment authorized; control. 
    The city manager may establish, in the police department of the city, a traffic division to be under the control of an officer or police officer directly responsible to the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 18-89) 
Sec. 70-57. - General duties. 
    With such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, it shall be the duty of the traffic division: 
(1)  To enforce the vehicle and traffic ordinances and regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle and traffic laws and regulations applicable to traffic in the city. 
(2)  To make arrests for traffic violations. 
(3)  To cooperate with the traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of vehicle and traffic laws, ordinances and regulations and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions. 
(4)  To carry out those duties specially imposed upon such division by this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 18-90) 
Sec. 70-58. - Duties with reference to accidents generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the police department, to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1981, § 18-91) 
Sec. 70-59. - Duties with respect to accident reports. 
    The traffic division shall receive all traffic accident reports made to the police department and shall maintain a suitable system of filing such reports. Accident reports, or cards referring to them, shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the traffic engineer. 
(Code 1981, § 18-92) 
Sec. 70-60. - Record of traffic violations. 
(a)  The traffic division shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this city or of the state traffic laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of traffic violations and notices of such violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year, a written record shall be kept available to the public, showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All records kept pursuant to this section shall be public records. 
(Code 1981, § 18-93) 
Sec. 70-61. - Drivers' files. 
(a)  The traffic division shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
(b)  The division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident and shall investigate the reasons therefor and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent such violations and accidents or to have the licenses of such persons suspended or revoked. 
(c)  Records kept pursuant to this section shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(Code 1981, § 18-94) 
Sec. 70-62. - Annual report. 
    The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city manager. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data. 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police. 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Code 1981, § 18-95) 
Secs. 70-63-70-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JAILS; PRISONERS 

Sec. 70-91. - Control, use of city jail. 
    The city sheriff shall have charge of the city jail, which shall be used only as prescribed by the laws of the state and for the purpose of punishment as prescribed by ordinance. The buildings in use as a jail and jail annex adjacent to the courthouse complex are hereby set apart and designated as the city jail and annex, and shall be used for that purpose until otherwise ordered by the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 24-47) 
Sec. 70-92. - Establishment and use of city jail farm. 
    There is hereby established, under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 53.1-96 et seq., on a certain tract of land, formerly the Jandl Farm, now owned by the city, containing approximately 150 acres, and located in the County of Prince George, Virginia, about six miles from the city, a farm to be maintained by the city, where any person convicted and sentenced to confinement in the jail of the city or sentenced to a state correctional institution or sentenced to be confined in jail or held in a state correctional institution for failure to pay any fine or cost or execute any bond, as provided by law, may be confined and required to do such work as may be assigned him during the term of sentence aforesaid, under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the city council. Such farm shall be known as "Petersburg City Jail Farm." 
(Code 1981, § 24-48) 
State Law reference- County and city farms, persons who may be confined, Code of Virginia, § 53.1-96. 
Secs. 70-93-70-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FALSE ALARMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of alarm company operators, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-911. 

Sec. 70-121. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to reduce the number of false alarms, thereby protecting the public safety by minimizing unnecessary use of the city's limited law enforcement resources. 
(b)  This article governs burglary and robbery alarm systems, establishes certain service fees and provides a system of administration. 
(Code 1981, § 24-53) 
Sec. 70-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any device or system which transmits a signal visibly, audibly, electronically, mechanically or by any combination of these methods which indicates a hazard or occurrence requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. The term "alarm system" shall not include a personal, direct telephonic call, requesting emergency services, from a person at the premises in question. 
    Alarm user and user mean the occupant of the premises which are protected by the alarm system. 
    Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
    False alarm means any alarm signal communicated to the city public safety communication center which, when activated by a person either intentionally or otherwise, is not reasonably believed to be in response to actual or threatened felonious criminal activity. Additionally, false alarms include negligently activated signals which are the result of faulty, malfunctioning or improperly installed or maintained equipment. False alarms should not include signals activated by unusually severe weather conditions or other causes which are identified by the chief of police to be beyond the control of the user. 
    Installer means any person, firm or corporation which installs, services, monitors, sells or leases any security alarm system. 
    Negligently activated means the doing of an act where ordinary care suggests that the act should not have been done at all or that it should have been done in some other way. 
    Nonemergency means any activation of an alarm resulting in a response by the police department other than that purpose for which the system was designed, installed and approved by the chief of police or his designee. 
(Code 1981, § 24-54) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-911(B), (C). 
Sec. 70-123. - Dial alarm systems regulated. 
    Automatic dialing devices, or systems which are set or programmed to directly dial, actuate, call or in any other manner make direct contact with any telephone line or radio circuit of the city public safety communication center without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee, are strictly prohibited. Violation of this section shall be a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 24-55) 
Sec. 70-124. - Alarm permit. 
    Upon installing a security alarm system, all users shall, on a permit, furnish the city public safety communication center with the following information: name and location of the alarmed premises; the type of alarmed premises (residential or commercial); the normal operating hours, if commercial; the individuals designated by the user to respond when notified; the manufacturer, model and type of alarm system; the name, address and telephone number of the service company; and the zone of the alarm, if applicable. 
(Code 1981, § 24-56; Ord. No. 14-17, 3-18-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 15.2-911. 
Sec. 70-125. - Duties of security alarm users. 
    It shall be the responsibility of security alarm users to instruct employees, or others who may have occasion to activate an alarm, that alarm systems are to be activated only in emergency situations to summons an immediate police response. Alarm users shall also instruct appropriate employees as to the operation of the alarm system, including setting, activation and resetting of the alarm. All instructions pertaining to alarm systems and procedures shall be in written form, suitable for distribution to employees, and shall be available for inspection by representatives of the police department. The user shall be responsible for maintaining the security system in proper working order. 
(Code 1981, § 24-57) 
Sec. 70-126. - Deliberate false alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deliberately and without just cause activate an alarm system to summon the police department in a nonemergency situation. Violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the periodic testing of direct transmittal alarms when sufficient notice is given to the communications supervisors of the city public safety communication center. 
(Code 1981, § 24-58) 
Sec. 70-127. - Service fees for false alarms. 
(a)  Schedule of fees. Violations after the second false alarm originating from any premises within any 180-day period will result in the following service fee being imposed upon the alarm user which must be paid within 30 days after receipt of citation. The service fee shall be imposed in accord with the following schedule: 
Number of False Alarms Service 
Fee First and second false alarm ..... No penalty Third false alarm ..... $  25.00 Fourth false alarm .....  50.00 Fifth false alarm .....  75.00 Sixth and subsequent false alarms ..... 100.00  
(b)  All service fees or civil penalties assessed by the chief of police against the owner or tenant of residential, commercial or industrial premises protected by an alarm system shall be due and owing to the finance and budget department. 
(c)  The failure of a permit holder to pay any service fee or civil penalty assessed under this article within 30 days after it is assessed shall constitute grounds for the revocation of an alarm system permit by the chief of police. The continued operation of an alarm system by the owner or tenant of premises protected by an alarm system after notification by first class mail that the permit has been revoked shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum fine of $250.00. 
(d)  An alarm permit that has been revoked may be reinstated by the chief of police upon payment of all amounts owing. 
(Code 1981, § 24-59; Ord. No. 14-17, 3-18-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-911. 
Sec. 70-128. - Exceptions. 
    The service fees of this article shall not be applied to any alarm system used, operated or installed in any premises or place owned, leased, occupied or under the control of the United States Government, the commonwealth or any of its political subdivisions, nor to the city or its school board or any officer, agent or employee of the governmental agencies identified in this section, while acting or employed in their official capacity. All other requirements, including termination of service, shall apply. 
(Code 1981, § 24-60; Ord. No. 14-17, 3-18-2014) 
Sec. 70-129. - Payment of fees for false alarms. 
    The chief of police, or his officers, shall upon response to a third or subsequent false alarm, issue a citation to the owner or tenant of residential, commercial or industrial premises protected by an alarm system, with the amount of payment due to the director of finance. Any account more than 30 days in arrears may be subject to permit revocation specified in subsection 70-127(c). 
(Code 1981, § 24-61; Ord. No. 14-17, 3-18-2014) 
Sec. 70-130. - Failure to respond; failure to silence. 
    An owner or tenant of residential, commercial or industrial premises protected by an alarm system which emits an audible signal loud enough to be heard by any other person outside the property shall be responsible for silencing such audible signal as soon as reasonably possible, but in all cases within 30 minutes of being notified by the police in connection with an activation of the alarm system. Any person failing to comply with this section shall be assessed a civil penalty of $100.00. 
(Code 1981, § 24-62; Ord. No. 14-17, 3-18-2014) 
Sec. 70-131. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person who believes that a service fee or civil penalty has been wrongfully assessed against him may appeal such assessment by submitting a letter to the chief of police within ten days of receiving the citation. The letter shall contain the person's name, complete address and telephone number, the reasons for disputing the fee or assessment and any other written evidence which might justify a change in the assessment. 
(b)  The chief of police shall consider the evidence presented and render a written decision within ten days of his receipt of the appeal unless an extension has been agreed upon by both parties. The chief of police shall have the authority to waive, or rescind in whole or in part, a service fee or assessment if he believes that there is insufficient evidence to fully support the imposition of the service fee or assessment. 
(c)  The chief of police may consider the following factors in reaching a determination on the appropriateness of a service fee or assessment: 
(1)  Evidence of attempts by the person against whom the service fee is assessed to eliminate the cause of false alarms, such as: 
a.  Installation of new equipment. 
b.  Replacement of defective equipment. 
c.  Certified inspection and repair of the system by an alarm system technician. 
d.  Specific formal training of the alarm's users. 
(2)  Evidence that the false alarm was caused by unusually severe weather conditions. 
(3)  Evidence that the false alarm was caused by the disruption of telephone or electrical circuits beyond the control of the alarm user or the user's monitoring company and that the cause of such disruption has been corrected. 
(4)  Evidence that the alarm system which caused the false alarm has been disconnected and removed from the protected premises. 
    Noting in this section shall be interpreted to require the waiver or rescission of the service fee or assessment in appeals which meet any or all of the above factors. Such factors are intended as guidelines only and shall not prevent the chief of police from waiving or reducing service fees or assessments for any other reason. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 3-18-2014) 
Sec. 70-132. - Failure to notify police department for alarm test. 
    Failure of an owner, occupant, or tenant to notify the Petersburg Bureau of Police of an alarm test shall be considered a deliberate false alarm as defined in section 70-126. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 3-18-2014) 
State Law reference- Deliberate false alarms, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212. 
Secs. 70-133-70-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 

Sec. 70-151. - Disposition of unclaimed personal property. 
(a)  Sale generally. Any unclaimed personal property which has been in the possession of the police department or sheriff's department and unclaimed for a period of more than 60 days shall be disposed of in accordance with this section. As used in this section, the term "unclaimed personal property" shall be any personal property belonging to another which has been acquired by any law enforcement officer pursuant to his duties, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act (Code of Virginia, § 55-210.1 et seq.). 
(b)  Notice. Prior to the sale or retention for use by the police department or sheriff's department of any unclaimed item, the chief of police, sheriff or their duly authorized agents shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain from the attorney for the commonwealth in writing a statement advising that the item is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once a week for two successive weeks, notice that there shall be a public display and sale of unclaimed personal property. Such property, including property selected for retention by the police department or sheriff's department, shall be described generally in the notice, together with the date, time and place of the sale and shall be made available for public viewing at the sale. The chief of police, sheriff or their duly authorized agents shall pay from the proceeds of sale the costs of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens, and notice of sale. The balance of the funds shall be held by such officer for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. Any unclaimed item retained by the police department or sheriff's department shall become the property of the city and shall be retained only if, in the opinion of the chief of police or sheriff, there is a legitimate use for the property by the police department or sheriff's department and that retention of the item is a more economical alternative than purchase of a similar or equivalent item. 
(c)  Time limitation upon claim of ownership. If no claim has been made by the owner for the property or proceed of such sale within 60 days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the city and the retained property may be placed into use by the police department or sheriff's department. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city within three years from the date of the sale and, if timely application is make therefor and satisfactory proof of ownership of the funds or property is made, the city shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale or return of property to the owner without interest or other charges or compensation. No claim shall be made nor any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds or property after three years from the date of the sale. 
(Code 1981, § 2-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719. 
Chapter 74 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prevent vice, immorality and lewd conduct or exhibitions, § 4-5. 
Cross reference- Courts, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Crimes and offenses generally, Code of Virginia, tit. 18.2; local ordinances prohibiting obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-389. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of any person under 18 years of age to knowingly permit, allow or encourage such person to be and remain in and upon any street, avenue, road, alley, park, vacant lot, playground, place of amusement, or in and upon any other public place, whether of like kind or not, in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless such person is accompanied by such parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person, or is on an emergency errand or legitimate business and has a written statement to that effect signed by such parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to be and remain in and upon any street, avenue, road, alley, park, vacant lot, playground, place of amusement, or in and upon any other public place, whether of like kind or not, in the city, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, unless such person is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person, or is on an emergency errand or legitimate business and has a written statement to that effect signed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person. 
(c)  Whenever any police officer or other officer charged with the duty of enforcing the laws of this state or the ordinances of this city shall discover or have his attention called to the fact that any person under the age of 18 years is in or on any street, avenue, road, alley, park, vacant lot, playground, place of amusement, or is in or upon any other public place, whether of like kind or not, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, the officer shall make an immediate investigation for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the presence of such person is in violation of any of the provisions of this section. If such investigation reveals that such presence of such person is in violation of any of the provisions of this section, then the officer shall take the name and address of such person and the name and address of the parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of such person and shall issue a summons or otherwise notify such person and such parent, guardian or other person, in writing, to appear before the judge of the juvenile and domestic relations district court of the city at a time to be specified in such summons or notice to be there dealt with according to the provisions of this section and the laws of the state applicable thereto. The officer shall also order such person to forthwith proceed to his home or place of abode and should such person refuse or fail so to do, the officer shall take such person to his home or place of abode should he deem such advisable. 
(d)  Should any such person refuse to give such officer his name and address and the name and address of the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person, such officer shall take such person to police headquarters and there detain him until such time as he can be turned over to the officers of the juvenile and domestic relations district court of the city to be dealt with in the manner required by law. 
(e)  Every person who violates any of the provisions of this section, or who shall fail to proceed forthwith to his home or place of abode when so ordered by such officer, or who shall knowingly give a false name or false address to such officer, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and each such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  This section shall not be so construed as to prohibit persons under 18 years of age from attending places of religious worship or meetings held by or under the auspices of the public schools, boy scouts, girl scouts or other like organizations, when not accompanied by the parents, guardians or other adult persons. 
(Code 1981, § 21-4) 
Sec. 74-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-37, § 2, adopted May 21, 2013, repealed § 74-2 which pertained to aggressive panhandling Code 1981, § 21-9; and Ord. No. 97-123, § 21-9, adopted Sept. 16, 1997. For similar provisions, now see Ch. 36. 
Sec. 74-3. - Fences made of barbed, concertina, razor wire, etc., on residential property or street lines. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of property zoned for residential purposes shall erect, maintain, or allow to remain on such property any fence made, in whole or in part, of barbed, concertina, or razor wire, or other material designed to pierce, puncture, cut or emit an injurious electric shock to that which may come into contact with such material. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any licensed business operating as a nonconforming use on property zoned for residential purposes or on property exceeding three acres where such fence is used for the purpose of confining livestock. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, have or maintain, along the line of any street, lane or alley, a barbed-wire fence or tree box or other thing made, in whole or in part, of barbed wire. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and every day that such fence, tree box or other thing shall remain standing, after notice to remove, shall constitute a separate offense. Each fence, tree box or other thing so described and located is hereby declared to be a nuisance and the city manager may order the removal of such nuisance. 
(Code 1981, § 32-31; Ord. No. 97-11, § 21-54.2, 1-27-1997) 
Secs. 74-4-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INCHOATE OFFENSES 

Sec. 74-31. - Attempt to commit misdemeanor. 
    Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the attempt. 
(Code 1981, § 21-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27. 
Secs. 74-32-74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 74-61. - Assault and battery. 
    Any person who commits a simple assault or assault and battery shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and if the person intentionally selects the person against whom a simple assault is committed because of his race, religious conviction, color or national origin, the penalty upon conviction shall include a mandatory, minimum term of confinement of at least six months, 30 days of which shall not be suspended, in whole or in part. 
(Code 1981, § 21-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57. 
Secs. 74-62-74-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-91. - Reserved. 
Sec. 74-92. - Receiving, etc., stolen goods. 
    If any person buys or receives from another person, or aids in concealing, any stolen goods or other thing, the subject of petit larceny, knowing such goods or other things to have been stolen, he shall be deemed guilty of larceny thereof and may be proceeded against, although the principal offender is not convicted. 
(Code 1981, § 21-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-108. 
Sec. 74-93. - Trespass after having been forbidden to do so; penalties. 
    If any person without authority of law goes upon or remains upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted by such persons or by the holder of any easement or other right-of-way authorized by the instrument creating such interest to post such signs on such lands, structures, premises or portion or area thereof at a place or places where it or they may be reasonably seen, or if any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-253.4, 16.1-278.2-16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, 16.1-279.1, 19.2-152.8, 19.2-152.9 or 19.2-152.10 or an ex parte order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 20-103, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-132-18.2-136. 
(Code 1981, § 21-46) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119. 
Sec. 74-94. - Instigating, etc., trespass by others; preventing service to persons not forbidden on premises. 
    If any person shall solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure another or others to go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing such other person or persons to have been forbidden, either orally or in writing, to do so by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or knowing such other person or persons to have been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place or places where it or they may reasonably be seen; or if any person shall, on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof prevent or seek to prevent the owner, lessee, custodian, person in charge or any of his employees from rendering service to any person or persons not so forbidden, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-48) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-120. 
Sec. 74-95. - Entering premises of another for purpose of damaging property or interfering with its use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the land, dwelling, outhouse or any other building of another for the purpose of damaging such property or any of the contents thereof or in any manner to interfere with the rights of the owner, user or the occupant thereof to use such property free from interference. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-52) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and conditions under which the above offense is a class 6 felony, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-121. 
Sec. 74-96. - Injuries to churches, church property, cemeteries, burial grounds, etc.; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who willfully or maliciously commits any of the following acts is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor: 
(1)  Destroys, mutilates, defaces, injures or removes any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure placed within any cemetery, graveyard or place of burial, or within any lot belonging to any memorial or monumental association or the enclosure of any cemetery or church, or any fence, railing or other work or enclosure for the protection or ornament of any tomb, monument, tombstone, gravestone, slab or other structure referred to in this subsection, or any inscription or device thereon or of any cemetery lot or grave plot within any cemetery, or in any manner damages any part of the cemetery grounds or anything contained therein; 
(2)  Destroys, removes, cuts, breaks, or injures any tree, shrub, or plant on any church property or within any cemetery or lot of any memorial or monumental association; 
(3)  Destroys, mutilates, injures, or removes and carries away any flowers, wreaths, vases, or other ornaments placed within any church or on church property, or placed upon or around any grave, tomb, monument, or lot in any cemetery, graveyard, or other place of burial; or 
(4)  Obstructs proper ingress to and egress from any church or any cemetery or lot belonging to any memorial or monumental association. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any work which is done by the authorities of a church or congregation in the maintenance or improvement of any church property or any burial ground or cemetery belonging to it and under its management or control and which does not injure or result in the removal of a tomb, monument, gravestone, grave marker or vault. For purposes of this section, the term "church" shall mean any place of worship, and the term "church property" shall mean any educational building or community center owned or rented by a church. 
(Code 1981, §§ 8-27, 21-43) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-127. 
Sec. 74-97. - Trespass upon church or school property. 
(a)  Any person who, without the consent of some person authorized to give such consent, goes or enters upon, in the nighttime, the premises or property of any church or upon any school property for any purpose other than to attend a meeting or service held or conducted in such church or school property, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not a church member or student, to enter upon or remain upon any church or school property in violation of (i) any direction to vacate the property by a person authorized to give such direction or (ii) any posted notice which contains such information, posted at a place where it reasonably may be seen. Each time such person enters upon or remains on the posted premises or after such direction that person refuses to vacate such property, it shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor; however, this subsection shall not apply to any person, other than a parent, who violates this subsection on school property with the intent to abduct a student. 
(c)  For purposes of this section: (i) the term "school property" includes a school bus as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 and (ii) the term "church" means any place of worship and includes any educational building or community center owned or leased by a church. 
(Code 1981, § 21-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-128. 
Sec. 74-98. - Peeping or spying into dwelling or enclosure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another and secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into or through a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure, or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a peephole or other aperture to secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into a restroom, dressing room, locker room, hotel room, motel room, tanning bed, tanning booth, bedroom or other location or enclosure for the purpose of viewing any nonconsenting person who is totally nude, clad in undergarments, or in a state of undress exposing the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breast and the circumstances are such that the person would otherwise have a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a lawful criminal investigation or a correctional official or local or regional jail official conducting surveillance for security purposes or during an investigation of alleged misconduct involving a person committed to the state department of corrections or to a local or regional jail. 
(d)  As used in this section, the term "peephole" means any hole, crack or other similar opening through which a person can see. 
(e)  A violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130. 
Sec. 74-99. - Injuring, etc., any property, monument, etc. 
(a)  If any person unlawfully destroys, defaces, damages or removes without the intent to steal any property, real or personal, not his own, or breaks down, destroys, defaces, damages or removes without the intent to steal, any monument or memorial for war veterans described in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1812, any monument erected for the purpose of marking the site of any engagement fought during the War between the States, or for the purpose of designating the boundaries of any city, town, tract of land, or any tree marked for that purpose, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor; provided that the court may, in its discretion, dismiss the charge if the locality or organization responsible for maintaining the injured property, monument, or memorial files a written affidavit with the court stating it has received full payment for the injury. 
(b)  If any person intentionally causes such injury, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor if the value of or damage to the property, memorial or monument is less than $1,000.00. The amount of loss caused by the destruction, defacing, damage or removal of such property, memorial or monument may be established by proof of the fair market cost of repair or fair market replacement value. Upon conviction, the court may order that the defendant pay restitution. 
(Code 1981, § 21-40) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137. 
Sec. 74-100. - Damaging public buildings, etc.; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who willfully and maliciously (i) breaks any window or door of any courthouse, house of public worship, college, school house, city hall, or other public building or library, (ii) damages or defaces any public building or any statuary in or on any public buildings or public grounds, or (iii) destroys any property in any of such buildings shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor if the damage to the property is less than $1,000.00. 
(b)  Any person who willfully and unlawfully damages or defaces any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, map, picture, manuscript, or other property located in any library, reading room, museum, or other educational institution shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor if the damage to the property is less than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1981, § 21-41) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-138. 
Sec. 74-101. - Damaging or defacing walls, fences, signs, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to maliciously or carelessly mark with chalk, daub with paint, cut, break or otherwise injure or deface any wall, fence, sign, signpost, lamppost, or any other post, lamp or lantern, or any tree box, house or other building, or sidewalk in, upon, along or adjacent to any of the streets, lanes or public squares of the city, or any works or machinery, belonging to the city or any other person. 
(Code 1981, § 21-44) 
Sec. 74-102. - Destruction of trees, shrubs and other plants. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pick, pull, pull up, tear, tear up, dig, dig up, cut, break, injure, burn or destroy, in whole or in part, any tree, shrub, vine, plant, flower or turf found, growing or being upon the land of another, including any city-owned property, or upon any land reserved, set aside or maintained by the commonwealth as a public park, or as a refuge or sanctuary for wild animals, birds or fish, or upon any land reserved, set aside or maintained as a public park by a park authority created under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5702, without having previously obtained the permission in writing of such owner or his agent or of the superintendent or custodian of such park, refuge or sanctuary so to do, unless such activity is done under the personal direction of such owner, his agent, tenant or lessee or superintendent or custodian of such park, refuge or sanctuary. 
(b)  Archaeological resources on city property are an accessible and irreplaceable part of the city's heritage which are increasingly endangered because of their commercial attractiveness. The purpose of this section is to prevent the loss and destruction of these archaeological resources from uncontrolled excavations and pillage and to secure for the present and future benefit of the citizens of the city the protection of archaeological resources and sights which are on city property. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "archaeological resource" means any material remains of past human life or activities which are of archaeological interest which shall include, but not be limited to, pottery, basketry, bottles, weapons, weapon projectiles, tools, structures or portions of structures, pit houses, crockery, eating utensils, or any portion or piece of any of the foregoing items. For purposes of interpreting this section, any of the above enumerated items found below the surface of the ground are presumed to be of archaeological interest. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority of the city council, to hunt, search out for, attempt to find or seek relics, or to use or be in possession of a mineral or metal detector, magnetometer, side scan sonar or other metal detecting device or sub-bottom profiler on city-owned property within the boundaries of the city or on property owned by the city located outside the city boundaries. 
(e)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, that the approval of the owner, his agent, tenant or lessee, or the superintendent or custodian of such park or sanctuary afterwards given in writing or in open court shall be a bar to further prosecution or suit. 
(Code 1981, § 21-42; Ord. No. 05-61, 7-5-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-140. 
Sec. 74-103. - Injuring, tampering with, etc., vehicles, aircraft, etc. 
(a)  Any person who shall, individually or in association with one or more others, willfully break, injure, tamper with, or remove any part of, any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or who shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, into motion, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This subsection shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel by the holder of a lien on such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or by the agents or employees of such lienholder. 
(Code 1981, § 21-45) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-146-18.2-148. 
Sec. 74-104. - Damage or trespass to public services or utilities. 
    Any person who shall intentionally destroy or damage any facility which is used to furnish oil, telegraph, telephone, electric, gas, sewer, wastewater or water service to the public, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the destruction or damage may be remedied or repaired for $200.00 or less. On electric generating property marked with no trespassing signs, the security personnel of a utility may detain a trespasser for a period not to exceed one hour pending arrival of a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1981, § 21-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-162, which makes a violation of provisions similar to the above section a felony if the remedy or repair of the damage or destruction exceeds $200.00. 
Sec. 74-105. - Tampering with metering device; diverting service; civil liability. 
(a)  Any person who (i) tampers with any metering device incident to the facilities set forth in section 74-104, or otherwise intentionally prevents such a metering device from properly registering the degree, amount or quantity of service supplied, or (ii) diverts such service, except telephonic or electronic extension service not owned or controlled by any such company without authorization from the owner of the facility furnishing the service to the public, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The presence of any metering device found to have been altered, tampered with, or bypassed in a manner that would cause the metering device to inaccurately measure and register the degree, amount or quantity of service supplied or which would cause the service to be diverted from the recording apparatus of the meter shall be prima facie evidence of intent to violate and of the violation of this section by the person to whose benefit it is that such service be unmetered, unregistered or diverted. 
(c)  The court may order restitution for the value of the services unlawfully used and for all costs. Such costs shall be limited to actual expenses, including the base wages of employees acting as witnesses for the commonwealth, and suit costs. However, the total amount of allowable costs granted hereunder shall not exceed $250.00, excluding the value of the service. 
(Code 1981, § 21-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-163. 
Secs. 74-106-74-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONCEALING OR TAKING POSSESSION OF MERCHANDISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- See Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-103, 18.2-104, for conditions under which the offenses described in this division are felonies. 

Sec. 74-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agents of the merchant means attendants at any parking lot owned or leased by the merchant, or generally used by customers of the merchant through any contract or agreement between the owner of the parking lot and the merchant. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-106. 
Sec. 74-122. - Concealing or taking possession of merchandise; altering price tags; transferring goods from one container to another; counseling, etc., another in performance of such acts. 
    Whoever, without authority, with the intention of converting goods or merchandise to his own or another's use without having paid the full purchase price thereof, or of defrauding the owner of the value of the goods or merchandise, (i) willfully conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, or (ii) alters the price tag or other price marking on such goods or merchandise, or transfers the goods from one container to another, or (iii) counsels, assists, aids or abets another in the performance of any of the above acts, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the offense is less than $200.00, shall be guilty of petit larceny. The willful concealment of goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, while still on the premises thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to convert and defraud the owner thereof out of the value of the goods or merchandise. 
(Code 1981, § 21-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-103. 
Sec. 74-123. - Reserved. 
Sec. 74-124. - Liability upon conviction under section 74-122. 
    Any person who has been convicted of violating the provisions of section 74-122 shall be civilly liable to the owner for the retail value of any goods and merchandise illegally converted and not recovered by the owner, and for all costs incurred in prosecuting such person under the provisions of section 74-122. Such costs shall be limited to actual expenses, including the base wage of one employee acting as a witness for the commonwealth and suit costs; provided, however, the total amount of allowable costs granted hereunder shall not exceed $250.00, excluding the retail value of the goods and merchandise. 
(Code 1981, § 21-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-104.1. 
Sec. 74-125. - Exemption from civil liability in connection with arrest or detention of suspected person. 
    A merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, who causes the arrest or detention of any person pursuant to the provisions of section 74-122, shall not be held civilly liable for unlawful detention, if such detention does not exceed one hour, slander, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, false arrest, or assault and battery of the person so arrested or detained, whether such arrest or detention takes place on the premises of the merchant, or after close pursuit from such premises by such merchant, his agent or employee, provided that, in causing the arrest or detention of such person, the merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, had at the time of such arrest or detention probable cause to believe that the person had shoplifted or committed willful concealment of goods or merchandise. The activation of an electronic article surveillance device as a result of a person exiting the premises or an area within the premises of a merchant where an electronic article surveillance device is located shall constitute probable cause for the detention of such person by such merchant, his agent or employee, provided such person is detained only in a reasonable manner and only for such time as is necessary for an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the activation of the device, and provided that clear and visible notice is posted at each exit and location within the premises where such a device is located indicating the presence of an antishoplifting or inventory control device. For purposes of this section, "electronic article surveillance device" means an electronic device designed and operated for the purpose of detecting the removal from the premises, or a protected area within such premises, of specially marked or tagged merchandise. 
(Code 1981, § 21-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-105. 
Sec. 74-126. - Detention of suspected shoplifter. 
    A merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, who has probable cause to believe that a person has shoplifted in violation of section 74-122, on the premises of the merchant, may detain such person for a period not to exceed one hour pending arrival of a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1981, § 21-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-105.1. 
Secs. 74-127-74-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING FRAUD 

Sec. 74-151. - Unauthorized wearing or displaying on motor vehicles of buttons, insignia or emblems of certain organizations. 
(a)  No person shall wear the button or insignia of any order of police, trade union or veterans' organization, or display upon any motor vehicle the insignia or emblem of any automobile club, medical society, order of police, trade union or veterans' organization, or use such button, insignia or emblem to obtain aid or assistance, unless entitled to wear, display or use such button, insignia or emblem under the constitution, bylaws, rules or regulations of the organization concerned. 
(b)  No person shall wear any Southern Cross of Honor when not entitled to do so by the regulations under which such Crosses of Honor are given. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-176. 
Sec. 74-152. - Fraudulent use of pay phones, parking meters and other coin-operated machines. 
(a)  No person shall operate, cause to be operated or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine. 
(b)  No person shall obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise, or any other service or property from any such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, lawful coin of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-179. 
Sec. 74-153. - Obtaining or attempting to obtain oil, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph or cable television service without payment; penalty; civil liability. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, with the intent to defraud, to obtain or attempt to obtain, for himself or for another, oil, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph or cable television service by the use of any false information, or in any case where such service has been disconnected by the supplier and notice of disconnection has been given. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain or attempt to obtain oil, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph or cable television service by the use of any scheme, device, means or method, or by a false application for service with intent to avoid payment of lawful charges therefor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain, or attempt to obtain telecommunication service as defined in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-190.1 by the use of an unlawful telecommunication device as defined in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-190.1. 
(d)  The word "notice" as used in subsection (a) of this section shall be notice given in writing to the person to whom the service was assigned. The sending of a notice in writing by registered or certified mail in the United States mail, duly stamped and addressed to such person at his last known address, requiring delivery to the addressee only with return receipt requested, and the actual signing of the receipt for such mail by the addressee, shall be prima facie evidence that such notice was duly received. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provisions of this section, if the value of service, credit or benefit procured is less than $200.00, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. In addition, the court may order restitution for the value of the services unlawfully used and for all costs. Such costs shall be limited to actual expenses, including the base wages of employees acting as witnesses for the commonwealth, and suit costs. However, the total amount of allowable costs granted under this section shall not exceed $250.00, excluding the value of the service. 
(Code 1981, § 21-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-187.1, which makes a violation of similar provisions a class 6 felony if the value of the service, etc., procured is $200.00 or more. 
Sec. 74-154. - Defrauding hotels, motels, campgrounds, boardinghouses, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper to: 
(1)  Put up at a hotel, motel, campground or boardinghouse; 
(2)  Obtain food from a restaurant or other eating house; 
(3)  Gain entrance to an amusement park; or 
(4)  Without having an express agreement for credit, procure food, entertainment or accommodation from any hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant, eating house or amusement park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper out of the pay therefor to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house for food, entertainment or accommodation by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud, to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant, eating house or amusement park for food, entertainment or accommodation through any misrepresentation or false statement. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud, to remove or cause to be removed any baggage or effects from a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house while there is a lien existing thereon for the proper charges due from him for fare and board furnished. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, if the value of service, credit or benefit procured or obtained is less than $200.00, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-188, which makes a violation of similar provisions a class 5 felony if the value of the service, etc., procured or obtained is $200.00 or more. 
Sec. 74-155. - Defrauding keeper of motor vehicles or watercraft. 
    A person shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor if he: 
(1)  Stores a motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft with any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of conducting a garage, marina, watercraft dealership or other facility for the (i) storage of motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft, (ii) furnishing of supplies to motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft, or (iii) alteration or repair of motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft, and obtains storage, supplies, alterations or repairs for such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft, without having an express agreement for credit, or procures storage, supplies, alterations or repairs on account of such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft so stored, without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper of the garage, marina or boat repair facility; 
(2)  With such intent, obtains credit at the garage, marina, watercraft dealership or boat repair facility for such storage, supplies, alterations or repairs through any misrepresentation or false statement; or 
(3)  With such intent, removes or causes to be removed any such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft from any such garage, marina, watercraft dealership or boat repair facility while there is a lien existing thereon for the proper charges due from him for storage, supplies, alterations or repairs furnished thereon, in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 43-32 or 43-33. 
(Code 1981, § 21-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-189. 
Sec. 74-156. - Credit card fraud; conspiracy; penalties. 
(a)  A person is guilty of credit card fraud when, with intent to defraud any person, he: 
(1)  Uses for the purpose of obtaining money, goods, services or anything else of value a credit card or credit card number obtained or retained in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-192 or a credit card or credit card number which he knows is expired or revoked; 
(2)  Obtains money, goods, services or anything else of value by representing (i) without the consent of the cardholder that he is the holder of a specified card or credit card number or (ii) that he is the holder of a card or credit card number and such card or credit card number has not in fact been issued; 
(3)  Obtains control over a credit card or credit card number as security for debt; or 
(4)  Obtains money from an issuer by use of an unmanned device of the issuer or through a person other than the issuer when he knows that such advance will exceed his available credit with the issuer and any available balances held by the issuer. 
(b)  A person who is authorized by an issuer to furnish money, goods, services or anything else of value upon presentation of a credit card or credit card number by the cardholder, or any agent or employee of such person, is guilty of a credit card fraud when, with intent to defraud the issuer or the cardholder, he: 
(1)  Furnishes money, goods, services or anything else of value upon presentation of a credit card or credit card number obtained or retained in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-192, or a credit card or credit card number which he knows is expired or revoked; 
(2)  Fails to furnish money, goods, services or anything else of value which he represents or causes to be represented in writing or by any other means to the issuer that he has furnished; or 
(3)  Remits to an issuer or acquirer a record of a credit card or credit card number transaction which is in excess of the monetary amount authorized by the cardholder. 
(c)  Conviction of credit card fraud is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor if the value of all money, goods, services and other things of value furnished in violation of this section, or if the difference between the value of all money, goods, services and anything else of value actually furnished and the value represented to the issuer to have been furnished in violation of this section, does not exceed $200.00 in any six-month period. 
(Code 1981, § 21-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-195, which makes credit card fraud a class 6 felony if the value exceeds $200.00 in any six-month period. 
Sec. 74-157. - Misrepresentation by real estate purchaser of intention to use as personal residence. 
    It shall be unlawful for any purchaser falsely to represent, in writing in any contract for the purchase of real estate, that the property referred to in such contract is intended for use as the personal residence of such purchaser. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-35) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-202. 
Sec. 74-158. - Unauthorized use of words "official tourist information" or similar language. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to use the words "official tourist information" or "official information service", or other similar language, for the purpose of informing tourists, motorists and other persons that the information offered is free of charge, or is sponsored by, or offered under the authority of, the state or any department or agency thereof, or by the city, any chamber of commerce or any civic agency or group of this or any other state or the District of Columbia. 
(b)  Any person disseminating information as contemplated in this section must state on any signboards, billboards or other similar signs, in large, easily readable and legible letters, and on any advertising or other publicity media, the names of the persons represented or from whom any remuneration whatsoever was received. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or affect the giving or advertising of official tourist information or other such service by gasoline service stations or other organizations which offer such information without a charge and without any inducement to purchase any services or products. 
(d)  Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-211. 
Sec. 74-159. - Calling or summoning emergency medical services vehicle or firefighting apparatus without just cause; maliciously activating fire alarms in public buildings; venue. 
(a)  Any person who without just cause therefor, calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any emergency medical services vehicle, or firefighting apparatus, or any person who maliciously activates a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building used for public assembly or for other public use, including, but not limited to, schools, theaters, stores, office buildings, shopping centers and malls, coliseums and arenas, regardless of whether fire apparatus responds or not, shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  A violation of this section may be prosecuted in the city if the call or summons was made from the city or if the call or summons was received in the city. 
(Code 1981, §§ 13-2, 21-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212. 
Sec. 74-160. - Unlawful carrying of certain canes or walking sticks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, unless totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated, while on any public street or highway, to carry in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is metallic or white in color or white tipped with red. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.1. 
Sec. 74-161. - Furnishing false information for publication. 
    Any person who knowingly and willfully states, delivers or transmits by any means whatever to any publisher, or employee of a publisher, of any newspaper, magazine or other publication, or to any owner, or employee of an owner, of any radio station, television station, news service or cable service, any false and untrue statement, knowing the statement to be false or untrue, concerning any person or corporation, with intent that the statement shall be published, broadcast or otherwise disseminated, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-209. 
Secs. 74-162-74-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING HEALTH AND SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-181. - Inhaling drugs or other noxious chemical substances or causing, etc., others to do so. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, except under the direction of a practitioner as defined in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3401, for any person deliberately to smell or inhale any drugs or any other noxious chemical substances including but not limited to fingernail polish or model airplane glue, containing any ketones, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons or vapors, with the intent to become intoxicated, inebriated, excited, stupefied or to dull the brain or nervous system. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than one duly licensed, deliberately to cause, invite or induce any person to smell or inhale any drugs or any other noxious substances or chemicals containing any ketone, aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons or vapors with the intent to intoxicate, inebriate, excite, stupefy or to dull the brain or nervous system of such person. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-264. 
Sec. 74-182. - Wells; pits. 
(a)  Covers. Every person owning or occupying any land on which there is a well having a diameter greater than six inches and which is more than ten feet deep shall at all times keep the well covered in such a manner as not to be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowl. 
(b)  Filling prior to abandonment. Any person who has caused to be dug on his own land or the land of another any well or pit, shall fill such well or pit with earth so that such well or pit shall not be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowls before such well or such pit is abandoned; and any person owning land whereon any such well or pit is located shall in the same manner fill with earth any such well or pit which has been abandoned, provided such person has knowledge of the existence of such well or pit. But in the case of mining operations in lieu of filling the shaft or pit the owner or operator thereof on ceasing operations in such shaft or pit shall securely fence the shaft or pit and keep the shaft or pit at all times thereafter securely fenced. 
(c)  Violation. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, §§ 21-60, 21-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-316, 18.2-317; authority of city to adopt subsection (a) above, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-318. 
Sec. 74-183. - Abandoned or discarded refrigerators and other airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-55) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319. 
Sec. 74-184. - Expectorating in public places. 
(a)  No person shall spit, expectorate, or deposit any sputum, saliva, mucus, or any form of saliva or sputum upon the floor, stairway or upon any part of any public building or place where the public assembles or upon the floor of any part of any public conveyance, or upon any sidewalk abutting on any public street, alley or lane of any town or city. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-53) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-322. 
Secs. 74-185-74-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 74-201. - Selling or having in possession blackjacks, metal knucks, switchblade knives or similar weapons. 
    If any person sells or barters, or exhibits for sale or for barter, or gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, or has in his possession, or under his control, with the intent of selling, bartering, giving or furnishing, any blackjack, brass or metal knucks, any disc of whatever configuration having at least two points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, or like weapons, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. The having in one's possession of any such weapon shall be prima facie evidence, except in the case of a conservator of the peace, of his intent to sell, barter, give or furnish such weapons. 
(Code 1981, § 39-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-311. 
Sec. 74-202. - Sale, delivery, etc., of toy firearms discharging blank or ball charges. 
(a)  No person shall sell, barter, exchange, furnish or dispose of, by purchase, gift or in any other manner, any toy gun, pistol, rifle or other toy firearm, if the toy gun, pistol, rifle or other toy firearm shall, by means of power or other explosive, discharge blank or ball charges. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each sale of any of the articles specified in this section to any person shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the sale of what are commonly known as cap pistols. 
(Code 1981, § 39-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-284. 
Sec. 74-203. - Furnishing certain weapons to minors; penalty. 
    If any person sells, barters, gives or furnishes, or causes to be sold, bartered, given or furnished, to any minor a dirk, switchblade knife or bowie knife, having good cause to believe him to be a minor, such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 39-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309. 
Sec. 74-204. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
(a)  If any person carries about his person, hidden from common observation, (i) any pistol, revolver, or other weapon designed or intended to propel a missile of any kind; (ii) any dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, razor, slingshot, spring stick, metal knucks, or blackjack; (iii) any flailing instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which may be known as a nun chahka, nun chuck, nunchaku, shuriken, or fighting chain; (iv) any disc, of whatever configuration, having at least two points or pointed blades which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart; or (v) any weapon of like kind as those enumerated in this subsection, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Any weapon used in the commission of a violation of this section shall be forfeited to the commonwealth and may be seized by an officer as forfeited, and such as may be needed for police officers, conservators of the peace, and the state division of forensic science shall be devoted to that purpose, subject to any registration requirements of federal law, and the remainder shall be disposed of as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-310. For the purpose of this section, a weapon shall be deemed to be hidden from common observation when it is observable but is of such deceptive appearance as to disguise the weapon's true nature. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any person while in his own place of abode or the curtilage thereof. 
(c)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308(J1), this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person while in his own place of business; and 
(2)  Any police officers, sergeants, sheriffs, deputy sheriffs or regular game wardens appointed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 29.1-200 et seq. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any of the following individuals while in the discharge of their official duties, or while in transit to or from such duties: 
(1)  Carriers of the United States mail; 
(2)  Officers or guards of any state correctional institution; 
(3)  Conservators of the peace, except that the following conservators of the peace shall not be permitted to carry a concealed handgun without obtaining a permit as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308(D): (i) notaries public; (ii) registrars; (iii) drivers, operators or other persons in charge of any motor vehicle carrier of passengers for hire; or (iv) commissioners in chancery; and 
(4)  Noncustodial employees of the state department of corrections designated to carry weapons by the director of the department of corrections pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 53.1-29. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to any person who has been granted permission to carry a concealed weapon by or in accord with state law. 
(Code 1981, § 39-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of circuit court to grant a permit to carry concealed weapons, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
Sec. 74-205. - Fee for conducting investigation of applicant for permit to carry a concealed weapon. 
    The police department shall charge a $35.00 fee to cover the cost of conducting an investigation of each applicant for a permit to carry a concealed handgun. 
(Code 1981, § 39-5.1; Ord. No. 97-70, § 39-5.1, 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 13-61, 7-2-2013) 
Sec. 74-206. - Carrying dangerous weapon to place of religious worship. 
    If any person shall carry any gun, pistol, Bowie knife, dagger or other dangerous weapon, without good and sufficient reason, to a place of worship while a meeting for religious purposes is being held at such place, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 39-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-283. 
Sec. 74-207. - Possession of firearm, stun weapon, or other weapon on school property. 
(a)  Violations. If any person possesses any (i) stun weapon or taser as defined in this section, (ii) knife having a metal blade of three inches or longer, or (iii) weapon, other than a firearm, designated in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308(A), upon (i) the property of any public, private or parochial elementary, middle or high school, including buildings and grounds, (ii) that portion of any property open to the public used for school-sponsored functions or extracurricular activities while such functions or activities are taking place, or (iii) any school bus owned or operated by any such school, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Exemptions. The exemptions set out in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308, shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the provisions of this section. The provisions of this section shall not apply to (i) persons who possess such weapon or weapons as a part of the school's curriculum or activities, (ii) a person possessing a knife customarily used for food preparation or service and using it for such purpose, (iii) persons who possess such weapon or weapons as a part of any program sponsored or facilitated by either the school or any organization authorized by the school to conduct its programs either on or off the school premises, (iv) any law enforcement officer while engaged in his duties as such, (v) any person who possesses a knife or blade which he uses customarily in his trade, or (vi) a person who possesses an unloaded firearm which is in a closed container, or a knife having a metal blade, in or upon a motor vehicle, or an unloaded shotgun or rifle in a firearms rack in or upon a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "weapon" includes a knife having a metal blade of three inches or longer. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Stun weapon means any mechanism that is (i) designed to emit an electronic, magnetic, or other type of charge that exceeds the equivalency of a five milliamp 60 hertz shock and (ii) used for the purpose of temporarily incapacitating a person; and 
    Taser means any mechanism that is (i) designed to emit an electronic, magnetic, or other type of charge or shock through the use of a projectile and (ii) used for the purpose of temporarily incapacitating a person. 
(Code 1981, § 39-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.1. 
Sec. 74-208. - Discharging firearms generally. 
    Any person who shall shoot any gun or other firearm anywhere within the city limits, except when justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of life or property, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to any person engaged in the repair of firearms who, in connection with such business, shall shoot such firearms, for the purpose of testing such firearms, at a place and under conditions specified in a permit obtained by such person from the chief of police. Upon the filing of an application for such a permit, the chief of police shall give the applicant ten days' notice of a hearing thereon and shall then proceed to investigate the character and reputation and the record of such applicant, the location of the place at which such testing is to be done and the suitability of the location from the standpoint of safety. At such hearing the applicant shall be given an opportunity to be heard on the matters required to be investigated and the chief of police shall grant or refuse the application on the basis of his finding relative to such matters. The chief of police may, in any case where such a permit has been granted, revoke the permit upon ten days' notice to the person holding such a permit of a hearing to be held thereon and, at such hearing, such person shall have an opportunity to be heard on the matters which are required to be investigated and the chief of police shall then revoke or continue the permit on the basis of his findings relative to such matters. 
(Code 1981, § 39-8) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate or prohibit discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; discharging firearms in streets or other public places, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-280, 18.2-286. 
Sec. 74-209. - Hunting and trapping within the city limits. 
    It shall be lawful to trap and hunt, with shotgun using shotgun shells, wildlife, as defined in Code of Virginia, tit. 29.1, except freshwater fish, in those areas of the city zoned agricultural; except that it shall not be lawful to hunt or attempt to hunt in such areas on or within 100 yards of any public highway or public street. 
(Code 1981, §§ 6-10, 39-9) 
State Law reference- "Wildlife" defined, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-100. 
Sec. 74-210. - Pneumatic guns, paintball guns, grit shooters, air guns, etc. 
(a)  Discharging. Any person who shall, anywhere within the corporate limits of the city, discharge any shot, gravel, bullet, pellet, BB or other similar substance from a pneumatic gun, paintball gun, grit shooter, air gun, slingshot or similar implement shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Exceptions. This article shall not apply to the use of pneumatic guns, paintball guns, grit shooters, air guns, slingshots, or similar implements at facilities approved, on other property where firearms or similar implements may be discharged or within private property with the permission of the owner or legal possessor thereof when conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. 
(c)  Carrying in public street. Any person who shall carry in the public streets any pneumatic gun, paintball gun, grit shooter, air gun, slingshot or anything of like kind, which is generally used for shooting, slinging grit, gravel, stone or any other things, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Paintball gun means any implement (i) designed to expel by action of pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with paint, and (ii) used for the purpose of marking the point of impact. 
    Pneumatic gun means any implement (i) designed as a gun, and (ii) designed to expel a BB, bullet, pellet or anything of like kind by action of pneumatic pressure. 
(Code 1981, §§ 39-10, 39-11; Ord. No. 13-62, 7-2-2013) 
Cross reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-915.4. 
Sec. 74-211. - Throwing stones or other missiles. 
(a)  In street. Any person who shall throw stones, sticks or other dangerous missiles in any street shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  From bridge over highway, railway, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stick, stone, missile or object of any character from any bridge of the city leading over a public highway, railway, road or street. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, §§ 39-12, 39-13) 
Sec. 74-212. - Transporting a loaded rifle or shotgun. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, possess or carry a loaded shotgun or loaded rifle in any vehicle on any public street, road or highway within the city. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to duly authorized law enforcement officers or military personnel in the performance of their lawful duties nor to any person who reasonably believes that a loaded rifle or shotgun is necessary for his personal safety in the course of his employment or business. 
(Code 1981, § 39-14) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-287.1. 
Secs. 74-213-74-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MORALS AND DECENCY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-231. - Adultery and fornication generally. 
(a)  Any person, being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his or her spouse shall be deemed guilty of adultery. 
(b)  Any person, not being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any other person shall be deemed guilty of fornication. 
(c)  If any person commits adultery or fornication, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-18) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prevent vice and immorality, § 4-5. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-344, 18.2-365. 
Sec. 74-232. - Lewd and lascivious cohabitation. 
    If any persons, not married to each other, lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together, or, whether married or not, are guilty of open and gross lewdness and lasciviousness, each of them shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Upon a repetition of the offense, and conviction thereof, each of them shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-345. 
Sec. 74-233. - Adultery and fornication by persons forbidden to marry. 
    If any person commits adultery or fornication with any person whom he is forbidden by law to marry, such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to a person who commits adultery or fornication with his child, grandchild, father or mother. 
(Code 1981, § 21-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-366, which declares adultery or fornication by persons mentioned in the proviso to be a felony. 
Sec. 74-234. - Being a prostitute or prostitution. 
(a)  Any person who, for money or its equivalent, commits adultery, fornication or any act in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361, or offers to commit adultery, fornication or any act in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361 and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof, shall be guilty of being a prostitute, or prostitution, which shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who offers money or its equivalent to another for the purpose of engaging in sexual acts as enumerated above and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof shall be guilty of solicitation of prostitution and shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, §§ 21-21, 21-27.2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-346. 
Sec. 74-235. - Bawdy places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to keep any bawdy place, or to reside in or at or visit, for immoral purposes, any bawdy place. Each and every day such bawdy place shall be kept, resided in or visited shall constitute a separate offense. In a prosecution under this section, the general reputation of the place may be proved. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "bawdy place" shall mean any place, within or without any building or structure, which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(Code 1981, § 21-22) 
Charter reference- Authority of City to suppress houses of ill fame, § 4-5. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347; houses of prostitution as nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 48-7 et seq. 
Sec. 74-236. - Aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person or any officer, employee or agent of any person, with knowledge of, or good reason to believe, the immoral purpose of such visit, to take or transport or assist in taking or transporting, or offer to take or transport, on foot or in any way, any person to a place, whether within or without any building or structure, used or to be used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution within this city, or to procure or assist in procuring, for the purpose of illicit sexual intercourse or any act violative of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361, or to give any information or direction to any person with intent to enable such person to commit an act of prostitution. 
(Code 1981, § 21-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-348. 
Sec. 74-237. - Using vehicles to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any owner or chauffeur of any vehicle, with knowledge or reason to believe the vehicle is to be used for such purpose, to use such vehicle or to allow such vehicle to be used for the purpose of prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, or to aid or promote such prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse by the use of any such vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 21-24) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-349. 
Sec. 74-238. - Confinement at city or county farm or hospital of persons violating sections 74-234 through 74-237. 
    Every person convicted of being a prostitute under section 74-234 and every person convicted of violating any of the provisions of sections 74-235 through 74-237 may, in the discretion of the court or judge, be confined in a city or county farm or hospital available for such confinement, in lieu of confinement in jail. 
(Code 1981, § 21-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-350. 
Sec. 74-239. - Commitment of persons convicted of certain offenses. 
(a)  Whenever any circuit court or judge thereof, or any general district court or juvenile and domestic relations district court or judge thereof, in the exercise of sound discretion, shall determine that it is necessary for the protection of the public health or safety or for the promotion of the public welfare, through the rehabilitation of any person, such court or judge may, in lieu of imposing any sentence or fine provided for by law for such offenses, commit to the control and supervision of the director of the state department of corrections, for an indeterminate period of not less than three months nor more than 12 months, any person who, in such court or before such judge, is convicted in this city of: 
(1)  Being a prostitute; 
(2)  Being a keeper, inmate or frequenter of a bawdy place; or 
(3)  Soliciting for immoral purposes. 
(b)  When a person is tried for any offense enumerated in this section or is adjudged guilty of such offense, the court may, before fixing punishment, imposing sentence or ordering a commitment, direct any probation officer or agency performing probation services for such court to thoroughly investigate and report upon the history of the accused and any and all relevant facts, to the end that the court may be fully advised as to the appropriate and just sentence to be imposed or commitment to be ordered. 
(c)  During any period of commitment under this section, the committing court or judge thereof may, upon its own motion or upon application of the director of the state department of corrections, reduce such period of commitment. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 53.1-151 or 53.1-153, no person who, upon conviction of an offense enumerated in this section, is committed to the control and supervision of the director of the state department of corrections pursuant to this section or is otherwise incarcerated in a penal institution shall be eligible for parole. 
(Code 1981, § 21-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-351. 
Sec. 74-240. - Solicitation for prohibited acts. 
    Any person within the limits of the city who solicits another, by word, sign or gesture, to commit any act which is lewd, lascivious or indecent, or who solicits for the purpose of prostitution, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-27.1) 
Sec. 74-241. - Causing or encouraging acts rendering children delinquent, abused, etc.; penalty. 
(a)  Any person 18 years of age or older, including the parent of any child, who (i) willfully contributes to, encourages, or causes any act, omission, or condition which renders a child delinquent, in need of services, in need of supervision, or abused or neglected as defined in Code of Virginia, § 16.1-228, or (ii) engages in consensual sexual intercourse with a child 15 or older not his spouse; child, or grandchild, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person convicted under this section of contributing to the delinquency, neglect or dependency of a minor may be committed to the control and supervision of the director of the state department of corrections pursuant to the provisions of section 74-239 and all of the provisions of such section shall apply to such case. 
(Code 1981, § 21-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-371; commitment of persons convicted of certain offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-351. 
Sec. 74-242. - Profane swearing and intoxication in public; penalty; transportation of public inebriates to detoxification center. 
    If an person profanely curses or swears or is intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center a law-enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1981, § 21-15) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to restrain and punish drunkards, § 4-4. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388; authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-389. 
Secs. 74-243-74-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GAMBLING 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 74-261. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gambling device means: 
(1)  Any device, machine, paraphernalia, equipment, or other thing, including books, records and other papers, which are actually used in an illegal gambling operation or activity; and 
(2)  Any machine, apparatus, implement, instrument, contrivance, board or other thing, including but not limited to those dependent upon the insertion of a coin or other object for their operation, which operates, either completely automatically or with the aid of some physical act by the player or operator, in such a manner that, depending upon elements of chance, it may eject something of value or determine the prize or other thing of value to which the player is entitled; provided, however, that the return to the user of nothing more than additional chances or the right to use such machine is not deemed something of value within the meaning of this subsection; and provided further, that machines that only sell, or entitle the user to, items of merchandise of equivalent value that may differ from each other in composition, size, shape or color, shall not be deemed gambling devices within the meaning of this subsection. 
Such devices are no less gambling devices if they indicate beforehand the definite result of one or more operations but not all the operations. Nor are they any less a gambling device because, apart from their use or adaptability as such, they may also sell or deliver something of value on a basis other than chance. 
    Illegal gambling means the making, placing or receipt, of any bet or wager in this city of money or other thing of value, made in exchange for a chance to win a prize, stake or other consideration or thing of value, dependent upon the result of any game, contest or any other event the outcome of which is uncertain or a matter of chance, whether such game, contest or event, occurs or is to occur inside or outside the limits of this city. 
    Interstate gambling means the conduct of an enterprise for profit which engages in the purchase or sale within the commonwealth of any interest in a lottery of another state or country whether or not such interest is an actual lottery ticket, receipt, contingent promise to pay, order to purchase, or other record of such interest. 
    Operator means any person, firm or association of persons who or which conducts, finances, manages, supervises, directs or owns all or part of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation. 
(Code 1981, § 15-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325. 
Sec. 74-262. - Illegal gambling generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, any person who illegally gambles or engages in interstate gambling as defined in section 74-261 shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. If an association or pool of persons illegally gamble, each person therein shall be guilty of illegal gambling. 
(Code 1981, § 15-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326. 
Sec. 74-263. - Winning by fraud. 
    If any person, while gambling, cheats or by fraudulent means wins or acquires for himself or another money or any other valuable thing, such person shall be fined not less than five nor more than ten times the value of such winnings, to a maximum of $2,500.00. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this division. 
(Code 1981, § 15-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-327. 
Sec. 74-264. - Permitting gambling to continue on one's premises. 
    If the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in control of any place or conveyance knows, or reasonably should know, that it is being used for illegal gambling, and permits such gambling to continue without having notified a law enforcement officer of the presence of such illegal gambling activity, such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 15-4) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to suppress gaming houses, § 4-5. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-329. 
Sec. 74-265. - Accessories to gambling activity; penalty. 
    Any person, firm or association of persons, other than those persons specified in other sections of this division, who knowingly aids, abets or assists in the operation of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 15-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-330. 
Sec. 74-266. - Illegal possession of gambling device. 
    A person is guilty of illegal possession of a gambling device when such person manufactures, sells, transports, rents, gives away, places or possesses, or conducts or negotiates any transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody or use of, any gambling device, while believing or having reason to believe that such device is to be used in the advancement of any unlawful gambling activity. Illegal possession of a gambling device shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 15-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-331. 
Sec. 74-267. - Forfeiture of money, gambling devices, etc., seized from illegal gambling enterprise; innocent owners or lienors. 
    All money, gambling devices, office equipment and other personal property used in connection with an illegal gambling enterprise or activity, and all money, stakes and things of value received or proposed to be received by a winner in any illegal gambling transaction, which are lawfully seized by any law enforcement officer or which shall lawfully come into his custody, shall be forfeited to the city by order of the court in which a conviction under this division is obtained. Such court shall order all money so forfeited to be paid over to the city, and by order shall make such disposition of other property so forfeited as the court deems proper, including award of such property to any state agency or charitable organization for lawful purposes, or in case of the sale thereof, the proceeds therefrom to be paid over to the city. Provided, however, that such forfeiture shall not extinguish the rights of any person without knowledge of the illegal use of such property who is the lawful owner or who has a lien on the property which has been perfected in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1981, § 15-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-336. 
Sec. 74-268. - Certain acts not deemed "consideration" in prosecution under division. 
    In any prosecution under this division, no consideration shall be deemed to have passed or been given because of any person's attendance upon the premises of another; his execution, mailing or delivery of an entry blank; his answering of questions, verbally or in writing, his witnessing of a demonstration or other proceeding; or any one or more thereof, where no charge is made to, paid by, or any purchase required of him in connection therewith. 
(Code 1981, § 15-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-332. 
Secs. 74-269-74-285. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Exceptions 

Sec. 74-286. - Contests of speed or skill. 
(a)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent any contest of speed or skill between persons, animals, fowl or vehicles, where participants may receive prizes or different percentages of a purse, stake or premium dependent upon whether they win or lose, or dependent upon their position or score at the end of such contest. 
(b)  Any participant who, for the purpose of competing for any such purse, stake or premium offered in any such contest, knowingly and fraudulently enters any contestant other than the contestant purported to be entered or knowingly and fraudulently enters a contestant in a class in which such contestant does not belong, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 15-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-333. 
Sec. 74-287. - Games of chance in private residences. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to make it illegal to participate in a game of chance conducted in a private residence, provided such private residence is not commonly used for such games of chance and there is no operator, as defined in section 74-261. 
(Code 1981, § 15-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334. 
Sec. 74-288. - Immunity of witnesses from testifying in prosecution. 
    No witness, called by the city or by the court, giving evidence in any prosecution under this division, shall ever be prosecuted for the offense being prosecuted concerning which such witness testifies. Such witness shall be compelled to testify and for refusing to do so may be punished for contempt. 
(Code 1981, § 15-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-337. 
Secs. 74-289-74-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OBSCENITY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372; adoption of ordinances prohibiting obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-389. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 74-306. - Definition of "obscene." 
    The word "obscene," where it appears in this division, shall mean that which, considered as a whole, has as its dominant theme or purpose an appeal to prurient interest in sex, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, excretory functions or products thereof, or sadomasochistic abuse, and which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters, and which, taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1981, § 20-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372. 
Sec. 74-307. - Obscene items enumerated. 
    Obscene items shall include: 
(1)  Any obscene book; 
(2)  Any obscene leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, booklet, picture, painting, bumper sticker, drawing, photograph, film, negative, slide, motion picture, videotape recording; or 
(3)  Any obscene figure, object, article, instrument, novelty device, or recording or transcription used or intended to be used in disseminating any obscene song, ballad, words, or sounds. 
(Code 1981, § 20-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-373. 
Sec. 74-308. - Production, publication, sale, possession, etc., of obscene items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Prepare any obscene item for the purposes of sale or distribution; 
(2)  Print, copy, manufacture, produce, or reproduce any obscene item for purposes of sale or distribution; 
(3)  Publish, sell, rent, lend, transport in intrastate commerce, or distribute or exhibit any obscene item, or offer to do any of these things; or 
(4)  Have in his possession with intent to sell, rent, lend, transport, or distribute any obscene item. Possession in public or in a public place of any obscene item as defined in this article shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "distribute" shall mean delivery in person, by mail, messenger or by any other means by which obscene items as defined in this article may pass from one person, firm or corporation to another. 
(Code 1981, § 20-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-374. 
Sec. 74-309. - Obscene exhibitions and performances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Produce, promote, prepare, present, manage, direct, carry on or participate in, any obscene exhibitions or performances, including the exhibition or performance of any obscene motion picture, play, drama, show, entertainment, exposition, tableau or scene; provided, that no employee of any person or legal entity operating a theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place which presents such obscene exhibition or performance shall be subject to prosecution under this section if the employee is not the manager of the theatre or an officer of such entity, and has no financial interest in such theatre other than receiving salary and wages; or 
(2)  Own, lease or manage any theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place and lease, let, lend or permit such theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place to be used for the purpose of presenting such obscene exhibition or performance or to fail to post prominently therein the name and address of a person resident in the locality who is the manager of such theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place. 
(Code 1981, § 20-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-375. 
Sec. 74-310. - Advertising obscene items, exhibitions or performances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to prepare, print, publish, or circulate, or cause to be prepared, printed, published or circulated, any notice or advertisement of any obscene item proscribed in section 74-307, or of any obscene performance or exhibition proscribed in section 74-309, stating or indicating where such obscene item, exhibition, or performance may be purchased, obtained, seen or heard. 
(Code 1981, § 20-5) 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-376. 
Sec. 74-311. - Placards, posters, bills, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to expose, place, display, post up, exhibit, paint, print, or mark, or cause to be exposed, placed, displayed, posted, exhibited, painted, printed or marked, in or on any building, structure, billboard, wall or fence, or on any street, or in or upon any public place, any placard, poster, banner, bill, writing, or picture which is obscene, or which advertises or promotes any obscene item proscribed in section 74-307 or any obscene exhibition or performance proscribed in section 74-309, or knowingly to permit the such exhibition or performance to be displayed on property belonging to or controlled by him. 
(Code 1981, § 20-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-377. 
Sec. 74-312. - Coercing acceptance of obscene articles or publications. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation, as a condition to any sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication to require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any other article, book, or other publication which is obscene; nor shall any person, firm, association or corporation deny or threaten to deny any franchise or impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure or refusal of any person to accept such articles, books, or publications, or by reason of the return thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 20-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-378. 
Sec. 74-313. - Punishment for first offense. 
    Any person, firm, association or corporation convicted for the first time of an offense under sections 74-308, 74-309, 74-310, 74-311 or 74-312 shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-380. 
Sec. 74-314. - Obscene photographs, slides and motion pictures. 
    Every person who knowingly: 
(1)  Photographs himself or any other person, for purposes of preparing an obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Models, poses, acts or otherwise assists in the preparation of any obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; 
shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 20-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-382. 
Sec. 74-315. - Indecent exposure. 
    Every person who intentionally makes an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, or procures another to so expose himself, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. No person shall be deemed to be in violation of this section for breastfeeding a child in any public place or any place where others are present. 
(Code 1981, § 20-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387. 
Sec. 74-316. - Urination or defecation in public. 
    Any person who urinates or defecates in public or in a place open to public view, except in public restroom facilities, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 20-9.1) 
Sec. 74-317. - Employing or permitting minor to assist in offense under division. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to hire, employ, use or permit any minor to do or assist in doing any act or thing constituting an offense under this division. 
(Code 1981, § 20-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-379. 
Sec. 74-318. - Exceptions from division. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any book, magazine or other printed or manuscript material by any library, school or institution of higher learning supported by public appropriation. 
(2)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any work of art by any museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning supported by public appropriation. 
(3)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau or motion picture by any theatre, museum of fine arts, school or institution of higher learning supported by public appropriation. 
(Code 1981, § 20-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-383. 
Secs. 74-319-74-335. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Juveniles 

Sec. 74-336. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Harmful to juveniles means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse, when it (i) predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of juveniles, (ii) is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for juveniles, and (iii) is, when taken as a whole, lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for juveniles. 
    Juvenile means a person under the age of 18 years. 
    Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both (i) the character and content of any material described in this subdivision which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant, and (ii) the age of the juvenile; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such juvenile. 
    Nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Sadomasochistic abuse means actual or explicitly simulated flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
    Sexual conduct means actual or explicitly simulated acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such be female, breast. 
    Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(Code 1981, § 20-23) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-390. 
Sec. 74-337. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell, rent or loan to a juvenile, or to knowingly display for commercial purpose in a manner whereby juveniles may examine and peruse: 
(1)  Any picture, photography, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, electronic file or message containing an image, or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles; or 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, electronic file or message containing words, or sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in subsection (a)(1) of this section, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to juveniles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell to a juvenile an admission ticket or pass, or knowingly to admit a juvenile to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts sexually explicit nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to juveniles or to exhibit any such motion picture at any such premises which are not designed to prevent viewing from any public way of such motion picture by juveniles not admitted to any such premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any juvenile falsely to represent to any person mentioned in subsection (a) or this section, or to his agent, that such juvenile is 18 years of age or older, with the intent to procure any material set forth in subsection (a), or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation, as set forth in subsection (b). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make a false representation to any person mentioned in subsection (a) or of this section or to his agent, that he is the parent or guardian of any juvenile, or that any juvenile is 18 years of age, with the intent to procure any material set forth in subsection (a), or with the intent to procure such juvenile's admission to any motion picture, show or other presentation, as set forth in subsection (b). 
(e)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, §§ 20-24-20-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391. 
Sec. 74-338. - Exceptions from subdivision. 
    Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan of any work of art, book, magazine or other printed or manuscript material by any accredited museum, library, school or institution of higher learning. 
(2)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau or motion picture by any theatre, museum, school or institution of higher learning, either supported by public appropriation or which is an accredited institution supported by private funds. 
(Code 1981, § 20-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-391.1. 
Secs. 74-339-74-361. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PEACE AND ORDER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-362. - Obstructing free passage of others. 
    Any person who, in any public place or on any private property open to the public, unreasonably or unnecessarily obstructs the free passage of other persons to and from or within such place or property, and who shall fail or refuse to cease such obstruction or move on when requested to do so by the owner or lessee or agent or employee of such owner or lessee or by a duly authorized law enforcement officer, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit lawful picketing. 
(Code 1981, § 21-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404. 
Sec. 74-363. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
(a)  A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he: 
(1)  In any street, highway, public building, or while in or on a public conveyance, or public place engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; 
(2)  Willfully or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts any meeting of the governing body of any political subdivision of this commonwealth or a division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if the disruption (i) prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the meeting or (ii) has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed; or 
(3)  Willfully or while intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts the operation of any school or any activity conducted or sponsored by any school, if the disruption (i) prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the operation or activity or (ii) has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed. 
(b)  However, the conduct prohibited under subsections (a)(1), (2) or (3) of this section shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter. 
(c)  The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance, meeting, operation or activity may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(d)  A person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 74-364. - Abusive language. 
    If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such other person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language, under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416. 
Sec. 74-365. - Slander and libel. 
    Any person who shall falsely utter and speak, or falsely write and publish, of and concerning any female of chaste character, any words derogatory of such female's character for virtue and chastity, or imputing to such female acts not virtuous and chaste, or who shall falsely utter and speak, or falsely write and publish, of and concerning another person, any words which from their usual construction and common acceptation are construed as insults and tend to violence and breach of the peace or shall use grossly insulting language to any female of good character or reputation, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. The defendant shall be entitled to prove upon trial in mitigation of the punishment, the provocation which induced the libelous or slanderous words, or any other fact or circumstance tending to disprove malice, or lessen the criminality of the offense. 
(Code 1981, § 21-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-417. 
Secs. 74-366-74-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONES; RADIOS 

Sec. 74-381. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency call means a call to report a fire or summon police, or for medical aid or emergency medical services vehicle service, in a situation where human life or property is in jeopardy and the prompt summoning of aid is essential. 
    Telephone party line means a subscribers' line circuit consisting of two or more main telephone stations connected therewith, each station with a distinctive ring or telephone number. 
(Code 1981, § 35-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-426. 
Sec. 74-382. - Duty of telephone company to furnish information relative to violations of division. 
    It shall be the duty, on pain of contempt of court, of each telephone company to furnish immediately, in response to a subpoena issued by the circuit court, such information as it, its officers and employees may possess which, in the opinion of the court, may aid in the apprehension of persons suspected of violating the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 35-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-431. 
Sec. 74-383. - Requesting relinquishment of party line on false pretext. 
    Any person who requests another to relinquish a telephone party line on the pretext that he must place an emergency call, knowing such pretext to be false, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 35-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-425. 
Sec. 74-384. - Certain solicitation calls prohibited; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who uses recorded solicitation calls for initial sales contacts shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who uses recorded solicitation calls which do not disengage or terminate when the party called attempts to terminate the call by any method which is in accordance with normal operating procedures of his receiver shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to permit any fine or penalty against any employee or agent who has been caused, directed or authorized by his employer to violate the provisions of this section. In such cases, the employer shall be subject to the sanctions prescribed in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 35-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-425.1. 
Sec. 74-385. - Use of profane, threatening, etc., language over telephone. 
    If any person shall use obscene, vulgar, profane, lewd, lascivious, or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature, or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate, or harass any person, over any telephone or citizens band radio in this city, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 35-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-427. 
Sec. 74-386. - Giving certain false information to another by telephone. 
    If any person maliciously advises or informs another, over any telephone in this city, of the death of, accident to, injury to, illness of or disappearance of some third party, knowing the information to be false, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 35-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-428. 
Sec. 74-387. - Causing telephone to ring with intent to annoy. 
(a)  Any person who, with or without intent to communicate but with intent to annoy any other person, causes any telephone or digital pager, not his own, to ring or to otherwise signal, and any person who permits or condones the use of any telephone under his control for such purpose shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who, with or without intent to converse, but with intent to annoy, harass, hinder or delay emergency personnel in the performance of their duties as such, causes a telephone to ring, which is owned or leased for the purpose of receiving emergency calls by a public or private entity providing fire, police or emergency medical service, and any person who knowingly permits the use of a telephone under his control for such purpose, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 35-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-429. 
Secs. 74-388-74-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 74-411. - Officer receiving bribe to omit or delay service of process. 
    If any officer authorized to serve legal process receives any money or other thing of value for omitting or delaying to perform any duty pertaining to his office, he shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-440. 
Sec. 74-412. - Obstructing justice. 
    If any person, by threats or force, knowingly attempts to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness, or any law enforcement officer, lawfully engaged in his duties as such, or to obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court, he shall be deemed to be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460. 
Sec. 74-413. - Concealing or compounding offenses. 
    If any person knowing of the commission of an offense takes any money or reward, or an engagement therefor, upon an agreement or understanding, expressed or implied to compound or conceal such offense, or not to prosecute therefor, or not to give evidence thereof, he shall, if such offense be a felony, be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, and if such offense is not a felony, unless it is punishable merely by forfeiture to him, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-462. 
Secs. 74-414-74-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DRUG AND PROSTITUTION-FREE ZONES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-441. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adjudicated juvenile means a juvenile found by a court to be a delinquent child, a child in need of services, or a child in need of supervision pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 16.1-278 et seq. 
    City courts, sentencing court and courts mean the city circuit court, city general district court, and the city juvenile and domestic relations district court. 
    Public area means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot, public transportation facility, or a doorway or entranceway to any building which abuts any such area, or inside a personal motor vehicle in or on any such place. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, §§ 20.1-1(1), (3), (8), 20.1-6(1), (3), (7), 7-1-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 74-442-74-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRUG-FREE ZONES 

Sec. 74-461. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bona fide resident means a person who has presented sufficient evidence to the court that such person owns, leases, or otherwise lawfully occupies a primary residence, or dwelling unit within a drug-free zone. 
    Controlled substance crime means any violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-247-18.2-264.01. 
    Convicted drug user, possessor, or seller means any person who has pleaded guilty to or been convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction, of a violation of those offenses set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-247-18.2-264.01. 
    Court-ordered restriction means a court imposed condition that is placed on an adjudicated juvenile or a convicted drug user, possessor, or seller and restricts their activity in a drug-free zone for a specified period of time. 
    Drug-free zone means those public areas that have been designated and posted by the chief of police as locations that are the site of repeated and documented illicit drug activity. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 20.1-1(2), (4)-(7), 7-1-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-462. - Designation of drug-free zones. 
(a)  The chief of police may designate certain public areas within the city as drug-free zones for a period not to exceed 12 consecutive months. Such designations shall be in writing and supported by data and any other relevant information that assist the chief of police in making his determination, including but not limited to the following factors: 
(1)  Those areas where the number of arrests for illegal drug activity for the 12-month period preceding the designation is significantly higher than other similarly sized areas of the city; 
(2)  Those areas where the number of homicides related to the possession or distribution of illegal drugs for the 12-month period preceding the designation is significantly higher than that for other similarly sized areas of the city; 
(3)  Those areas where there is objective evidence or verifiable information that shows that illegal drugs are being sold and distributed on a public space on public property within the area; 
(4)  Those areas where the chief of police can verify with other reliable information that the health or safety of the residents who live therein is endangered by the purchase, sale, or use of illegal drugs; or 
(5)  Those areas commonly referred to by law enforcement personnel as high drug areas or open air drug markets. 
(b)  The chief of police shall notify the general public, by publication, the city council, the city courts, and all police officers of the boundaries of all drug-free zones. In addition, any area which has been designated shall be conspicuously posted with signs identifying it as a drug-free zone. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 20.1-2, 7-1-1997) 
Sec. 74-463. - Restrictions in drug-free zone; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon the recommendation to a court by the attorney for the commonwealth, or upon a court's own motion, a court within the city may utilize the boundaries of drug-free zones as the basis for imposing restrictions upon an adjudicated juvenile or a convicted drug user, possessor, or seller. Any person who is restricted from entry into any drug-free zones shall be given, as part of his sentence, a written description of the boundaries of such drug-free zones. 
(b)  A sentencing court may grant exceptions or vary the restrictions imposed on an adjudicated juvenile or a convicted drug user, possessor, or seller based upon relevant circumstances including but not limited to the following factors: 
(1)  A person is a bona fide resident of a drug-free zone prior to exclusion by the court; 
(2)  A person is a bona fide owner, principal, or employee of a place of employment in one of the drug-free zones; 
(3)  A person must conduct business with a governmental office or a medical facility located in a drug-free zone; 
(4)  A person desires to attend a house of worship located in a drug-free zone; or 
(5)  A person is required or desires to attend a school located in a drug-free zone. 
Any exceptions granted by the court shall be in writing and in the possession of the restricted person while such person is in a drug-free zone. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 20.1-3, 7-1-1997) 
Sec. 74-464. - Unlawful entry into a drug-free zone. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who has been ordered by a court to refrain from entry into a drug-free zone, or whose activities within a drug-free zone have been otherwise restricted by a court, to thereafter enter or be upon those public areas within the drug-free zone in violation of the court's order, unless the court has authorized an exception to such person as provided by section 74-463. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 20.1-4, 7-1-1997) 
Secs. 74-465-74-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROSTITUTION-FREE ZONES 

Sec. 74-481. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bona fide resident means a person who has presented sufficient evidence to the court that such person owns, leases, or otherwise lawfully occupies a primary residence, or dwelling unit within a prostitution-free zone. 
    Court ordered restriction means a court imposed condition that is placed on an adjudicated juvenile or a person who has pleaded to or been convicted of a prostitution offense, which restricts activity of such juvenile or person in a prostitution-free zone for a mandatory period. 
    Person convicted of prostitution means any person who has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of a violation of section 74-234 or Code of Virginia, § 18.2-346. 
    Prostitution-free zones means those public areas that have been designated and posted by the chief of police as locations that are the site of repeated and documented illicit prostitution activity. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 20.1-6(2), (4)-(6), 7-1-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-482. - Designation of prostitution-free zones. 
(a)  The chief of police may designate certain public areas within the city as prostitution-free zones for a period not to exceed 12 consecutive months. Such designations shall be in writing and supported by data and any other relevant information that assist the chief of police in making his determination, including but not limited to the following factors: 
(1)  Those areas where the number of arrests for prostitution for the 12-month period preceding the designation is significantly higher than other similarly sized areas of the city; 
(2)  Those areas where there is objective evidence or verifiable information that shows that solicitation for prostitution is occurring on public areas within the area; or 
(3)  Those areas where the chief of police can verify with other reliable information that the health and welfare of residents who live therein are disrupted by solicitation for prostitution. 
(b)  The chief of police shall notify the general public, by publication, the city council, the city courts, and all police officers of the boundaries of all prostitution-free zones. In addition, the area which has been designated shall be conspicuously posted with signs identifying it as a prostitution-free zone. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 20.1-7, 7-1-1997) 
Sec. 74-483. - Restrictions in prostitution-free zones; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon the recommendation to a court by the attorney for the commonwealth, or upon a court's own motion, a court within the city may utilize the boundaries of prostitution-free zones as the basis for imposing restrictions upon an adjudicated juvenile or a convicted person. Any person who is restricted from entry into any prostitution-free zones shall be given, as part of his sentence, a written description of the boundaries of such prostitution-free zones. 
(b)  A sentencing court may grant exceptions or vary the restrictions imposed on an adjudicated juvenile or a convicted person based upon relevant circumstances including but not limited to the following factors: 
(1)  A person is a bona fide resident of the prostitution-free zone prior to exclusion by the court; 
(2)  A person is a bona fide owner, principal or employee of a place of employment located in one of the designated prostitution-free zones; 
(3)  A person must conduct business with a governmental office or medical facility in a prostitution-free zone; 
(4)  A person desires to attend a house of worship in the designated prostitution-free zone; or 
(5)  A person is required or desires to attend a school located in a prostitution-free zone. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 20.1-8, 7-1-1997) 
Sec. 74-484. - Unlawful entry on public property in a prostitution-free zone. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person who has been ordered by a court to refrain from entry into a prostitution-free zone to enter or be upon those public areas in a prostitution free zone in violation of the court's order, unless the court has authorized an exception as provided in section 74-483. Violations of this article shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 97-106, § 20.1-9, 7-1-1997) 
Chapter 78 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; waterways, ch. 122. 
State Law reference- Parks, recreation facilities, playgrounds, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1806 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Violations of chapter. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 22-1) 
Sec. 78-2. - General powers and duties of city manager with respect to parks. 
    The city manager shall have full control of the public parks of the city and the buildings and appurtenances thereto belonging. The city manager shall appoint the keepers thereof and employ such labor as he may deem necessary, but no improvements or repairs shall be made or done at any of the parks without the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 22-2) 
Sec. 78-3. - Appointment, term and general powers and duties of director of recreation. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint a director of recreation, whose term of office shall be at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(b)  The director of recreation shall have general charge of all playgrounds maintained by the city and shall have authority to enforce such rules and regulations as will ensure the best results, and shall also have general charge of such recreational activities as may from time to time be authorized by the city council. The director of recreation shall recommend for appointment to the city manager such assistants and employees as may be authorized from time to time to effectively carry out the work of his department. 
(Code 1981, § 22-4) 
Secs. 78-4-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-241 et seq. 

Sec. 78-31. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the word "board" shall mean the recreation advisory board created by section 78-32. 
(Code 1981, § 22-27) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-32. - Created; composition; appointment of members. 
    There is hereby created a board to be known as the Petersburg Recreation Advisory Board, which board shall consist of seven members. The members shall be appointed by the city council, whereby each councilmember shall nominate one member to serve on the board. In addition to the members so appointed, the director of recreation shall be, ex officio, a member of the board. 
(Code 1981, § 22-28) 
Sec. 78-33. - Terms of members; filling of vacancies. 
    Each member of the recreation advisory board shall serve a term concurrent with the term of office of the member of city council who nominated the member of the board. Any vacancy on the recreation advisory board shall be filled by the city council in the same manner set out in section 78-32. 
(Code 1981, § 22-29) 
Sec. 78-34. - Members to serve without compensation. 
    All members of the recreation advisory board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1981, § 22-30) 
Sec. 78-35. - Election of chairman. 
    The chairman of the recreation advisory board shall be designated by majority vote of the recreation advisory board. 
(Code 1981, § 22-31) 
Sec. 78-36. - To act in advisory capacity; recommendations. 
    The recreation advisory board shall act in an advisory capacity with the city manager in all matters pertaining to public recreation in the city. The city manager shall report to the city council the recommendations of the recreation advisory board, when such recommendations relate to matters requiring action by the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 22-32) 
Secs. 78-37-78-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONDUCT IN PARKS 

Sec. 78-61. - Driving motor vehicle on park walkway. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle on any walkway in a city park. 
(Code 1981, § 22-8) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 
Sec. 78-62. - Walking on grass; lying down or sleeping on grass or park benches. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to walk on any of the grass plots in city parks or lie down or sleep on such plots or on park seats or benches. The prohibition against walking on such grass plots shall not apply to children under the age of 12 years, or the nurses in attendance upon them. 
(Code 1981, § 22-9) 
Sec. 78-63. - Noise. 
    No person shall engage in loud singing or make any disorderly noise in any city park. 
(Code 1981, § 22-10) 
Cross reference- Noise, § 50-31 et seq. 
Sec. 78-64. - Pollution of springs or lakes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute any spring or lake in any city park. 
(Code 1981, § 22-11) 
Secs. 78-65-78-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIFIC PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 78-91-78-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LEE MEMORIAL PARK 

Sec. 78-106. - Establishment of Lee Memorial Park; preservation. 
(a)  There shall be established in the property of the city heretofore known as the watershed or the Willcox Dam reservoir tract a park, to comprise all that portion of such tract included in the territory annexed to the city as provided in ordinance of annexation approved September 12, 1921, with the exception, however, of such property as has been sold or shall hereafter be sold by the city. 
(b)  The park established by this section shall be dedicated to the use of the people of the city as a park and to the memory of General Robert E. Lee, as a testimonial to his defense of the city in the siege of 1864-65, and to his greatness as a soldier and his nobility as a man. The park shall be known as Lee Memorial Park. 
(c)  In making improvements in Lee Memorial Park, special care shall be taken to preserve the forts, entrenchments and other fortifications erected under the direction of General Lee, as a memorial to him and to the soldiers who served under him. 
(Code 1981, § 22-5) 
Secs. 78-107-78-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WEST END PARK 

Sec. 78-126. - Designation. 
    The grounds known as West End Park are hereby set apart and shall be kept as a public park. 
(Code 1981, § 22-7) 
Secs. 78-127-78-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POPLAR LAWN 

Sec. 78-146. - Designation. 
    The grounds known as Poplar Lawn are hereby set apart and shall be kept as a public park. 
(Code 1981, § 22-6) 
Sec. 78-147. - Use prohibited between certain hours; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be in Poplar Lawn at any time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.; provided, however, nothing in this section shall be construed as applying to persons walking along, but not loitering, on the concrete walkway along or near the northern boundary of Poplar Lawn; and provided further, this section shall not apply with respect to functions or ceremonies held in Poplar Lawn which have been duly authorized by proper authority of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 22-14) 
Sec. 78-148. - Riding bicycles. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle in Poplar Lawn; provided, however, that children under 15 years of age may ride bicycles along the old bicycle circle in Poplar Lawn. 
(Code 1981, § 22-15) 
Sec. 78-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE 

Sec. 78-150. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult means any person 18 years of age or older. 
    In-season means the period from April 1 through to October 31 within a single 12-month period. 
    Junior means any person aged 17 years or younger. 
    Off-season means the period from November 1 to March 31 within a single 12-month period. 
    Outing means an event in which group of individuals who wish to play golf together reserve a tee time and meet the requirements for group play established by the golf professional. 
    Resident means any person having a personal residence located within the city limits of the City of Petersburg. 
    Senior means any person aged 60 years or older. 
    Student means any person aged 22 years of age or younger, who can present a valid identification card issued by an institution of higher learning authorized to grant academic degrees. 
    Twilight means the period of time beginning after 2:00 pm on weekdays, and after 4:00 pm on weekends, and continuing until the course closes for the day, except that in the off season, twilight shall mean the period of time beginning at 1:00 pm and continuing until course closure for the day. 
    Weekday means Monday through Thursday. 
    Weekend means Friday through Sunday and holidays. 
(Ord. No. 08-30, § 1, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 78-151. - Administration. 
(a)  The city shall operate and maintain a municipal golf course which shall be available for use by city residents and nonresidents alike. The course shall be known as the Dogwood Trace Golf Course. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for ensuring that the course is properly maintained and that it is operated in a professional and efficient manner. The city may procure the services of a management professional to oversee the maintenance and operation of the course and the collection of fees. The golf professional shall establish such policies and procedures to govern course operation and maintenance, including the collection of fees, as he deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 08-30, § 1, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 78-152. - Financial structure. 
    The municipal golf course is established within the city budget as an enterprise fund and as such, is responsible for generating the revenues required to support appropriate operation and maintenance costs. Nothing in this section shall prevent council from making such appropriations as they deem necessary to supplement the operation or maintenance of the course. 
(Ord. No. 08-30, § 1, 4-1-2008) 
Sec. 78-153. - Fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to play golf shall first apply and pay the appropriate fee or fees as follows: 
Resident:  Weekday $20.00  Weekend $30.00 Nonresident:  Weekday $25.00  Weekend $35.00 Seniors:  Weekday $20.00 Juniors: $10.00 Students: $15.00 Twilight: $15.00 Nine holes (weekdays only):  Adults $15.00  Juniors $8.00 Annual passes:  Resident $1,100  Resident senior $1,000  Nonresident $1,300 Nonresident senior $1,200 Junior $400.00 Outings: In-season $35  Off-season $30.00 Cart fees: 18 holes $14.00 9 holes $10.00  
(b)  The following provisions shall govern the calculation of applicable fees: 
(1)  Carts shall be required for play beginning on weekends before 12:00 noon. 
(2)  Outings are available on weekdays only, and the established fee shall include the use of a cart. 
(3)  Annual passes govern admission to the course for the period from April 1 through March 31 of the following year except that persons holding annual passes may not use those for admission where they are accessing the course as participants in an outing. 
(4)  Cart fees do not include tax. 
(5)  Juniors must play with adults before 1:00 p.m. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee may approve the reduction or waiver of the fees established in this section (i) for special occasions, activities or events, or (ii) otherwise to promote the competitive positioning of the course. 
(Ord. No. 08-30, 4-1-2008) 
Chapter 82 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance relative to zoning or to a zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-7(8); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; community development, ch. 38; environment, ch. 50; floods, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98; subdivisions, ch. 102; utilities, ch. 114; waterways, ch. 122. 
State Law reference- Planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200 et seq.; local planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-241 et seq. 

Sec. 82-31. - Created. 
    Under the authority of the applicable provisions of state law, there is hereby created a city planning commission. 
(Code 1981, § 2-156) 
State Law reference- Duty of city to create planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210. 
Sec. 82-32. - Composition; appointment, qualifications, terms and removal of members. 
(a)  The number of voting members of the planning commission shall be nine. They shall be appointed by the city council, with one member being appointed from each ward, and two members at-large, for staggered terms of four years. All voting members shall be residents of the city qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. At least one-half of the members so appointed shall be owners of real property. 
(b)  Two additional members, who are members of the administrative branch of the city, may be appointed to the planning commission by the city council, to serve ex officio without vote. These members shall perform such administrative duties as the commission may prescribe. The term of these members shall be coextensive with the terms of office to which they have been appointed, unless the city council, at its first regular meeting of the year, appoints another to serve as its representative. 
(c)  Members of the planning commission may be removed for malfeasance in office. 
(d)  The terms of the voting members shall expire on September 30. 
(Code 1981, § 2-157; Ord. No. 95-96, § 2-157, 9-5-1995; Ord. No. 02-70, 10-1-2002) 
State Law reference- Composition, etc., of planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
Sec. 82-33. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The planning commission shall have and exercise all such powers and shall discharge all such duties and functions as are set out in applicable provisions of the state law. 
(Code 1981, § 2-158) 
State Law reference- Local planning commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210 et seq. 
Chapter 86 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4000 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Violations of chapter. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any violation of section 86-2 or section 86-3 shall be a misdemeanor. For the first offense, the penalty shall be a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00, and for any second or subsequent offense, the penalty shall be a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and confinement in jail for a period not exceeding 12 months. 
(Code 1981, §§ 21-65(f), 23-1) 
Sec. 86-2. - Daily reports by junk dealers and dealers in secondhand personal property. 
    Every junk dealer and dealers in secondhand personal property, including persons regularly engaged in the business of collecting secondhand materials for resale to junk dealers, shall every day except Sunday before the hour of noon deliver to the chief of police on blank forms to be prescribed and furnished by the chief of police a legible and accurate description of every secondhand article received by him during the business day next preceding, the permit number under which the goods were received by the dealer, the license number of any automobile or vehicle in which the goods or things were delivered, together with a description of the person selling or delivering such goods, including the color, sex, approximate height and age and any distinguishing features of such person, or a photograph of such person, together with a reference to the volume and number of the page where the original entry required by Code of Virginia, § 59.1-120 is made. 
(Code 1981, § 23-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-121. 
Sec. 86-3. - Sale of secondhand building fixtures. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section or in Code of Virginia, §§ 59.1-117-59.1-136, no person shall, within the city, offer for sale or sell any secondhand heating or plumbing fixtures or supplies, electrical fixtures or wiring, or gas fixtures or appliances, water faucets, pipes, locks, bathtubs or other secondhand fixtures of whatever kind or description pertaining to a building, without first obtaining a permit for the sale of such material from the chief of police. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall be construed so as to permit the chief of police to issue to persons who are regularly engaged in the business of collecting secondhand materials for resale a semiannual or annual permit covering all sales to be made by such persons. 
(c)  The chief of police may refuse to issue a permit, and may revoke any permit issued, to any person who has previously been or is convicted of stealing or receiving stolen goods. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale of any secondhand materials mentioned in subsection (a) of this section when such materials are taken from premises occupied by the owner and when they are sold by such owner on the premises. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale of such articles when purchased from a public utilities corporation at its place of business or a governmental agency. 
(e)  No charge shall be made for the issuance of any permit required by this section. 
(Code 1981, § 21-65(a)-(e)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 59.1-117, 59.1-118, 59.1-123. 
Secs. 86-4-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PAWNBROKERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-31. - Limitation on number of pawnshops. 
    Not more than five pawnshops may be operated at any one time within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 23-3) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4002. 
Sec. 86-32. - Closing hours for pawnshops. 
    Each person licensed to conduct the business of a pawnbroker or a pawnshop shall close his place of business, and keep it closed, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the succeeding day on each day from Sunday through Saturday, inclusive. 
(Code 1981, § 23-4) 
State Law reference- Working or transacting business on Sunday, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-341. 
Sec. 86-33. - Daily reports. 
    Every pawnbroker shall prepare a daily report of all goods, articles or things pawned or pledged with him that day and shall file such report by noon of the following day with the chief of police or other law enforcement officer of the city designated by the attorney for the commonwealth to receive it. The report shall include the pledgor's name, residence, and driver's license number or other form of identification, and a description of the goods, articles or other things pledged and shall be in writing and clearly legible to any person inspecting it. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4010. 
Sec. 86-34. - Penalties. 
    Except as otherwise provided in section 82-51, any licensed pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. In addition, the court may revoke or suspend the pawnbroker's license for second and subsequent offenses. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4014. 
Secs. 86-35-86-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 86-51. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  A license for the conduct of business as a pawnbroker shall be authorized by the circuit court of the city. Any person desiring to obtain such a license shall present his written application therefor to the chief of police of the city, signed by himself, at least 30 days prior to the date on which he desires the license to become effective. The application shall state, if made by an individual, the full name of the applicant, and if by a firm, the full name of each member of the firm, and if by a corporation, the full names of the officers or agents who are to conduct the business in the city. The applicant shall also furnish his date of birth and a sworn statement or affirmation disclosing any criminal convictions or any pending criminal charges, whether within or without the commonwealth. 
(b)  If an application under this section is found to be in proper form, the chief of police shall endorse thereon the words "Referred to the circuit court of the City of Petersburg, or to the judge thereof in vacation." The applicant shall forthwith present such application to the circuit court of the city or the judge thereof in vacation, accompanied by a receipt from the collector of city taxes for a certified check, payable to the collector of city taxes, for the amount of the license tax assessed against pawnbrokers under the provisions of chapter 26 of this Code and other ordinances of the city. Such check shall be held by the collector of city taxes until the court or judge shall have passed upon the application. 
(c)  The court or judge shall hear such evidence as may be introduced for or against the applicant for a license, and determine whether such applicant is or is not eligible to be granted such a license and whether the place where the business is proposed to be conducted is or is not a proper and suitable place, and whether the issuance of such license is advisable or expedient, and whether the license may be legally granted under the ordinances of the city and the laws of the city. If the court or judge is of the opinion that the license may be granted, the court or judge, as the case may be, shall require the applicant to execute a bond, in the penalty and conditioned as prescribed in section 86-52, and upon the proper execution thereof, shall certify to the collector of city taxes that the applicant will be entitled to a license to conduct such business when the license tax has been paid. The clerk of the court shall thereupon certify to the collector of city taxes that the license has been granted and the check shall be at once paid into the city treasury. The collector of city taxes shall issue a license to the applicant to conduct such business in the place named in the application, in such form as may be approved by the city attorney. 
(d)  Upon the refusal to grant any license by the court or judge, that fact shall be certified by the clerk of the court to the collector, who shall thereupon return the check held by him to the applicant. 
(e)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 23-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4001. 
Sec. 86-52. - Applicant's bond. 
    No license to conduct the business of a pawnbroker shall be issued to any applicant therefor unless such applicant has given a bond, in the minimum amount of $50,000.00 to secure the payment of any judgement recovered under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4003(B), payable to the city, with surety satisfactory to the city attorney, and also conditioned that, if granted a license, he will make a daily report to the chief of police on a form to be prescribed by the chief of police and give all the information called for by the form, and that he will make use of any such call system as may be installed and maintained by the city or under its authority, in such manner and in strict accord with such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the chief of police, and conditioned also that the holder of such license will observe and faithfully comply with all ordinances of the city relating to the conduct of such business. For any default in any of the conditions of the bond, it shall ipso facto, and without offset, be forfeited and payable to the city and the licensee shall immediately forfeit the license, which shall then and thereafter be null and void. 
(Code 1981, § 23-19) 
Chapter 90 - SOCIAL SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Welfare (social services), Code of Virginia, tit. 63.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1-90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DIRECTOR[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 

Sec. 90-31. - Position created; appointment and term. 
    There is hereby created in the city the position of director of social services. The director of social services shall be appointed by the city manager from a list of eligibles furnished by the state commissioner of social services and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 28-1) 
Sec. 90-32. - To serve as board of public welfare. 
    The director of social services shall serve as the local board of public welfare. 
(Code 1981, § 28-2) 
State Law reference- Local boards of public welfare, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-38 et seq.; authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-43. 
Sec. 90-33. - Assistant. 
    The director of social services may designate either his principal assistant or the chief public assistance supervisor to act in his behalf, in his absence, with respect to approving, canceling or changing grants made under the provisions of Code of Virginia, tit. 63.1. 
(Code 1981, § 28-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-43. 
Secs. 90-34-90-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADVISORY BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-241 et seq. 

Sec. 90-61. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the term "board" means the city social services advisory board created by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 28-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-62. - Created. 
    The city council shall appoint a board, to be known as the City of Petersburg social services advisory board. 
(Code 1981, § 28-15) 
State Law reference- Duty to create advisory board, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-43.1. 
Sec. 90-63. - Composition; appointment of members. 
    The board shall consist of five members. The members shall be appointed for staggered terms of four years each, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired terms. No person shall serve more than two consecutive terms. The director of social services shall be an ex officio member, without vote, of the advisory board. 
(Code 1981, §§ 28-16, 28-17; Ord. No. 95-109, § 28-16, 9-19-1995) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-43.1. 
Sec. 90-64. - Election of chairman; meetings. 
    The board shall elect its own chairman and shall meet at least bimonthly. In addition to regularly scheduled meetings, it may meet at the call of the chairman or on the petition of at least one-half of the members. 
(Code 1981, § 28-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-43.1. 
Sec. 90-65. - General function. 
    The board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the director of social services with respect to the duties and functions imposed upon him by Code of Virginia, tit. 63.1. 
(Code 1981, § 28-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-43.1. 
Sec. 90-66. - Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To interest itself in all matters pertaining to the social welfare of the people of the city. 
(2)  To monitor the formulation and implementation of social welfare programs in the city. 
(3)  To meet with the director of social services at least four times a year for the purpose of making recommendations on policy matters concerning the department of public welfare. 
(4)  To make an annual report to the city council, concurrent with the budget presentation of the department, concerning the administration of the public welfare program. 
(5)  To submit to the city council, from time to time, other reports that the board deems appropriate. 
(Code 1981, § 28-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-43.1. 
Secs. 90-67-90-90. - Reserved. 
Chapter 94 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Littering at city market, § 2-550; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 114. 
State Law reference- Virginia Waste Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 et seq.; removal of trash, garbage, etc., weeds and other foreign growth, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901; garbage and refuse disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-927; regulation of garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, contracts, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-930; contracts for garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, waste recovery facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-932; delivery of garbage, trash and refuse to certain facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-933; mailing summons for violation of trash ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76.2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Removal from premises on order of health director. 
(a)  The health director shall cause an inspection of the premises of all citizens of the city to be made when he may deem it necessary and require that all garbage, trash, filth, ashes, tin cans and all other articles that may endanger the health or safety of the citizens of the city be removed. 
(b)  Any person who fails to comply with a lawful order given pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 30-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require removal of garbage, trash, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901; abatement or removal of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 
Sec. 94-2. - Littering generally. 
(a)  No person shall dump, throw or otherwise deposit any trash, garbage, refuse or other unsightly matter on any street, highway, right-of-way or property adjacent to such street, highway or right-of-way, or on any other property, public or private, within the city, without the written consent of the owner of such property or his agent. 
(b)  When any person is arrested for a violation of this section and the matter alleged to have been deposited in violation of this section has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the arresting officer may comply with the provisions of section 110-35 of this Code in making such arrest. 
(c)  When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person, and the matter deposited in violation of this section has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the person ejecting such matter; provided, however, that such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(d)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of city council to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-346. 
Sec. 94-3. - Deposit of stone, brick or like objects on streets, vacant lots, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to throw or deposit, in or on any street, sidewalk, gutter, open space, vacant lot or space between houses, unless permitted by law or by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city, any stone, brick or other like objects. 
(Code 1981, § 30-3) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 94-4. - Unlawful use of street rubbish receptacles placed by city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use street rubbish cans or receptacles placed on the streets by duly authorized agents or employees of the city for any purpose whatsoever, except for the deposit of material of the kind ordinarily cast away by pedestrians or passersby, such as fruit peelings and refuse from unconsumed fruit, newspapers, letters, wrapping paper and like paper, refuse and trash. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in the street rubbish cans or receptacles referred to in subsection (a) of this section any refuse, paper, trash or other matter which has been removed from, or which has accumulated, in any store, office, restaurant, hotel or other building, room, establishment or place. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 30-4) 
Secs. 94-5-94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION BY CITY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General authority of city relative to collection and disposal of solid waste, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-927 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-31. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 30-16) 
Sec. 94-32. - Director of public works or designee to have charge of collection. 
    Subject to the supervision and control of the director of public works or designee, the superintendent shall have charge of the collection and disposal of garbage, trash, refuse and ashes. 
(Code 1981, § 30-17; Ord. No. 12-66, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 13-06, 1-22-2013) 
Sec. 94-33. - Frequency and days of collection. 
    The collection of garbage and other refuse, shall be weekly which shall be determined by the director of public works with the approval of the city manager. Hours of collection are Monday-Friday 7:00 a.m.-7:00 p.m. and Saturday 7:00 a.m.-12:00 noon. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 30-18; Ord. No. 12-66, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 13-06, 1-22-2013) 
Sec. 94-34. - Reserved. 
Sec. 94-35. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  Every occupant of a lot within the city shall place his garbage, trash and ashes for removal in the provided refuse and recycling receptacles. All receptacles must be placed out for collection by 7:00 a.m. on of the scheduled collection day but not earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding, except for any special times as deemed necessary by the director of public works. Refuse and recycling receptacles shall be placed for collection at a location designated by the director of public works. It shall be unlawful for any person to place hot or live ashes out for collection. 
(b)  All sweepings from stores, including waste paper and paper boxes, shall be placed, at the times named in subsection (a) of this section, in neat receptacles, with tops, on the outer edge of the sidewalk. In cases in which a store adjoins an alley connected with public streets, such receptacles may be placed in such alley at such times. 
(Code 1981, § 30-20; Ord. No. 13-44, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 94-36. - Removal of receptacle after collection. 
    All refuse and recycling receptacles placed in accord with section 94-35 shall be removed no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day following collection from city property and rights-of-way to include, but not be limited to, sidewalks, alleys and median strips between sidewalks and roadways and returned by the occupant to a location not visible from the street or public right-of-way, except during the times prescribed for placement for collection and as soon as practicable after being emptied by collection personnel. However, nothing shall preclude the placement of such receptacles in any area other than the front of any residence or business. The public utility account holder of any property to which a refuse and recycling receptacles have been assigned shall be responsible for removing the refuse and recycling receptacles from city property and public rights-of-way. This provision applies to all residentially-zoned properties. 
(Code 1981, § 30-21; Ord. No. 11-59, 6-7-2011; Ord. No. 13-44, 5-21-2013) 
Sec. 94-37. - Certain waste matter not to be collected. 
    Waste matter from abattoirs, vegetable and fruit dealers, commission houses and hucksters' stalls and any other foodstuffs condemned by the health director or his representative shall not be collected by the city but shall be hauled to an approved landfill by the persons responsible for waste matter. 
(Code 1981, § 30-22) 
Sec. 94-38. - Penalties. 
    The public utility account holder of any property to which a refuse receptacle and recycling receptacle has been assigned shall be responsible for removing each receptacle from city property by 7:00 a.m. on the day following collection. Any account holder who allows a refuse receptacle or recycling receptacle to remain on city property after 7:00 a.m. on the day following collection shall receive a notice from the department of public works advising of the violation and allowing the account holder an opportunity to remove each such receptacle. If each refuse receptacle or recycling receptacle is not timely removed from city property, the department of public works shall cause the account holder to be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00 for each and every calendar day that each and every receptacle remains on city property beginning with the date of the most recent past scheduled pick up time from the department of public works. Such civil penalty shall be included on the account holder's monthly utility statement and shall be subject to collection in the same manner as other utility charges including delinquent charges for utilities. 
(Ord. No. 13-44, 5-21-2013) 
Secs. 94-39-94-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FEES 

Sec. 94-56. - Fees established. 
    For providing or making available solid waste collection and disposal services to citizens, residences and commercial establishments located within the corporate limits of the city, there shall be a fee of $20.00 per month, or any part of a month. Such fee shall be for each single-family dwelling unit, for each unit in multi-family dwelling facilities, for each business unit, including retail, wholesale and commercial units. Only two carts, one trash cart and one recycling cart, are to be issued per each single family dwelling, multi-family or each business unit, each and for all other facilities where such collection and disposal services are provided or made available. Only one additional trash cart and recycling cart shall be provided for $58.00 each per each single family dwelling and multi-family and shall be a fee of $2.25 per month, or any part of a month. The director of public works shall have the authority to determine if additional carts are needed for any business unit. The fee for such carts provided shall be $58.00 per cart each and $2.25 per month, or any part of a month for each such business unit. 
(Code 1981, § 30-40; Ord. No. 97-60, § 30-40, 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 01-30, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 12-66, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 13-06, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. 16-38, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 94-57. - Persons responsible for fees; schedule and place of payments; penalties and interest; priority of crediting payments. 
    All payment of fees for the collection and disposal of solid waste shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises unless the premises are occupied by a person other than the owner and such person is the recipient of the service and is responsible for the payment of water and sewage charges; in which event, such person shall be responsible for the payment of the solid waste collection and disposal fee. This fee shall be paid on the same schedule as are the water and sewage charges, due and payable in the office of the collector of city taxes in the manner prescribed for water and sewage charges as established by this Code and, if not so paid, shall carry the same penalties and interest as prescribed therein. If the moneys received in payment of the water and sewage charges and the solid waste collection and disposal fees are not sufficient to pay the outstanding balance in full, including any penalties or interest, the solid waste collection and disposal fee and any penalties or interest attributed thereto shall be considered to be paid first out of the moneys collected. 
(Code 1981, § 30-41; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 94-58. - Exceptions, exclusions from fees. 
(a)  Any owner or person responsible for the payment of the solid waste collection and disposal fee, if such owner or person so elects, may have the solid waste collected and disposed of by a person duly licensed to perform such services, such to be accomplished in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations controlling such collection and disposal. Such owner or person shall notify the director of public works of this election, and the director of public works shall have the authority to verify from time to time compliance with this section. Such owner or person shall be relieved of the obligation to pay the fees as are established by this article. 
(b)  The city shall not charge a fee for the collection of the following residential brush and yard waste: 
  Prunings, grass clippings, weeds, leaves, brush, and general yard and garden wastes must be bagged and securely tied together or bundled. 
  Yard waste and bundled brush will be collected up to ten cubic yards. Limbs shall be six feet or less in length and 60 pounds per contract. Brush must be tied in bundles less than four feet in length and weighing less than 75 pounds. 
  Bagged leaves will be collected year round. The limit per collection is up to 30 bags, each weighing no more than 50 pounds. 
  Limited amounts of bulky trash (like furniture, water heaters and appliances) will also be collected at the curb on your regular collection day. The amount should not exceed the capacity of a one-half ton pickup truck. 
(c)  Industrial waste, large-volume waste and similar refuse, construction debris disposal or garbage which the city does not collect and dispose of shall be excluded from the fees established by this article and it shall be the responsibility of the person generating such matter to properly collect and dispose of such matter. 
(Code 1981, § 30-42; Ord. No. 12-66, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 13-06, 1-22-2013) 
Sec. 94-59. - Bulk waste fee. 
(a)  The city will remove items of residential waste, such as furniture or similar large items including but not limited to items too large to fit inside a trash cart/can and for unbundled brush debris, construction debris and excessive appliances with the regulations herein set forth, which have been placed on the edge of the street according to the following fee schedule. 
  Bulk and yard waste not exempted under section 94-58 collection fee for up to two cubic yards (approximately four feet × four feet × four feet) will be a minimum of $75.00; for every cubic yard (approximately three feet × three feet × three feet) over the initial two cubic yards, there will be an additional $35.00 charge. 
  Appliance collection fee will be $25.00 per appliance. 
  Furniture collection fee will be $20.00 per piece of furniture. 
(b)  This service is provided on an on-call basis and residents need to call and schedule a pick-up and prior to placing the material at the street right-of-way. 
(c)  Industrial waste, large-volume waste and similar refuse, construction debris disposal or garbage which the city does not collect and dispose of shall not be placed on the curb and it shall be the responsibility of the person generating such matter to properly collect and dispose of such matter. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00 for the first violation, or violations arising from the same set of operative facts. The civil penalty for subsequent violations not arising from the same set of operative facts within 12 months of the first violation shall be $200.00. Each business day during which the same violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same set of operative facts result in civil penalties that exceed a total of $3,000.00 in a 12-month period. Such violations shall be a class 3 misdemeanor in the event three civil penalties have previously been imposed on the same defendant for the same or similar violation, not arising from the same set of operative facts, within a 24-month period. Classifying such subsequent violations as criminal offenses shall preclude the imposition of civil penalties for the same violation. 
(Ord. No. 12-66, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 13-06, 1-22-2013) 
Secs. 94-60-94-80. - Reserved. 
Chapter 98 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Toll bridges, ch. 5. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any specific public improvement or making any assessment saved from repeal, § 1-7(7); health department inspection of streets and premises, § 2-215; distribution of advertising matter on or in street, sidewalk or public parking lot, § 6-4; deposit of advertising matter on street, sidewalk or public parking lot, § 6-5; painting or marking advertisements, signs, etc., on streets and sidewalks, § 6-6; operation of pool rooms or billiard rooms at other than street level, § 14-33; obstruction of view of pool rooms or billiard rooms from street, § 14-34; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; cemeteries, ch. 30; community development, ch. 38; environment, ch. 50; floods, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 78; planning, ch. 82; deposit of stone, brick or like objects on streets, vacant lots, etc., § 94-3; powers and duties regarding off-street parking facilities, § 110-67; designation of one-way streets and alleys, § 110-72; designation of through streets, § 110-73; operation of go-carts on streets, § 110-219; washing, polishing or greasing vehicle on street or sidewalk, § 110-262; pedestrians, § 110-401 et seq.; interurban buses taking on or discharging passengers on streets, § 118-285. 
State Law reference- Local streets and alleys, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2000 et seq.; state highway plat book, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-238; state highway system, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-25 et seq.; local authority over highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-224 et seq.; pipelines and other works in streets, alleys, etc., Code of Virginia, § 56-257 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Certain ordinances relating to streets and alleys not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance opening, relocating, closing, altering or naming any street or alley, or fixing the grade thereof, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 32-1) 
Sec. 98-2. - General powers and duties of director of public works with respect to streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  The director of public works shall exercise a general supervision over the streets, sidewalks, bridges and culverts in the public streets, or belonging to the city, and all matters connected therewith, under the direction of the city manager. 
(b)  The director of public works shall superintend the public streets, sidewalks, bridges and culverts in the public streets, or belonging to the city, see that such streets, sidewalks, bridges and culverts are kept in good order, remove obstructions therefrom, clean, construct and make such repairs and improvements therein as may be possible and recommend to the city manager such others as may be necessary, but which cannot be done by his personnel. Subject to the direction of the city manager, he shall have control and superintendence of city vehicles and employees employed on city streets. The director of public works shall also measure and make estimates for work ordered by the city manager or city council and, as far as possible, prevent violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 32-2) 
Sec. 98-3. - Appointment and general powers and duties of director of public works or director's designee. 
    The city manager shall appoint the director of public works or the director's designee, who shall, subject to the approval of the director of public works, have charge of the streets and sidewalks of the city. The director of public works or the director's designee shall have the powers of a police officer to the extent that it shall be necessary in performing his duties. 
(Code 1981, § 32-3; Ord. No. 12-66, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 13-06, 1-22-2013) 
Sec. 98-4. - Minimum standards for entrances to state highways adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted, by reference, the latest publication of Minimum Standards of Entrances to State Highways, traffic and safety division of the state department of transportation, and such publication is hereby incorporated as fully as if set forth in this section verbatim and is to be in full force and effect in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 32-4) 
Sec. 98-5. - Repair of defective private works located in streets. 
    If any part of the works of any aqueduct, gas, telegraph, railroad or other company, or of any individual, located in any street shall, by reason of decay or other cause, do injury to such street, or endanger persons or property on the street or occasion inconvenience in the use thereof to a greater extent than would be the case if such works were kept in good repair, it shall be the duty of such company or person, on notice from the city manager or director of public works to such person, or any officer of such company having charge of such works, to repair or improve the works, so as to remedy the defect. If such person or company shall fail to repair or improve such works within a reasonable time after such notice, such works shall be deemed an obstruction, within the meaning of subsection 98-10(b) and such failure shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-5) 
Sec. 98-6. - Adjustment of street works or structures when street graded. 
    Whenever the city shall determine to grade any street, the grade line of which has been or may hereafter be fixed by the city council, all persons lawfully having works or structures on the surface of the street shall, without delay, adjust and place such works and structures in a good and workmanlike manner, so as to conform to the grade line thus established. All persons lawfully having underground structures or works in such streets shall lower the underground structures or works where a cut will be made in grading the streets, so that such structures or works shall not be less than two feet below the surface. The director of public works shall promptly give notice in writing to all persons having such surface or underground structures or works of the action of the city and that they are required at once to adjust and place the surface or underground structures or works as required by this section. If any person shall fail to do so within 30 days after service of such notice, he shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor and the director of public works, under the direction of the city manager, shall, when ordered by the city council, cause the work to be done and charge the cost thereof to the person so in default, to be collected as any other debt due the city and, in case of water service pipes connected with the city water mains, the water shall not be turned on again until such cost is paid. 
(Code 1981, § 32-6) 
Sec. 98-7. - Testing, repair, etc., of gas or water lines when street to be paved. 
(a)  Whenever the city shall determine to pave any street with any material, except cobble or rubble stones, before the paving shall be begun, all persons having gas mains, gas service pipes or water mains in the street where the paving is to be done shall examine and test them thoroughly, renew or repair them wherever needed, and put them in good order and condition, and at least two feet below the surface. All persons having water service pipes in the street where the paving is to be done shall renew the water service pipes by putting in new pipes, which shall conform to the requirements of this Code with reference to plumbing, at least two feet below the surface, all the way from the water main to the inner side of the curbline, or to the water meter, if one is in place on the service pipe, and shall fit the pipe with the new valves, cutoffs and the like, of the weight, thickness, diameter and style prescribed by the director of public works. 
(b)  The director of public works shall promptly give notice, in writing, of the action of the city, to all persons having structures or works referred to in subsection (a) of this section, that they are required to thoroughly examine, test, repair, renew, adjust and place such structures or works as required by this section. If any person shall fail to do so within 30 days after service of such notice, he shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor; and the director of public works, under the direction of the city manager, shall, when ordered by the city council, cause the work to be done and charge the cost thereof to the person so in default, to be collected as any other debt due the city. In the case of a water service pipe connected with the city water main, the water shall not be turned on again until such cost is paid. 
(c)  If there is any lot abutting on a street where paving is to be done, into which city water has not been introduced, the director of public works, under the direction of the city manager, shall lay and construct a water service pipe, of the character and in the manner provided for in this section, from the city water main to some convenient point at the inner side of the curbline opposite such lot, and connect the water service pipe with the city water main. 
(d)  The director of public works shall preserve in his office a record of the cost and location of water supply pipes renewed, where one existed, or constructed, where none existed, as required by this section. Before city water shall be introduced into any such lot through such pipes, the owner thereof shall pay to the collector of city taxes the cost of renewing or constructing such water service pipe, as the case may be. When such payment has been made to the collector of city taxes and the permission of the director of public works obtained, such owner may introduce city water into his lot. 
(Code 1981, § 32-7; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 98-8. - Stopcocks on water, steam or gas supply pipes from street mains. 
(a)  All persons supplying water, steam or gas to customers from mains on the streets of the city, through supply pipes introduced into their property, shall fit such supply pipes with suitable and proper stopcocks, under the sidewalks next to the curb or outer edge of such curb. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-8) 
Sec. 98-9. - Removal of encroachments. 
    In every case of an encroachment upon a sidewalk or street by a building, fence or other thing, the city manager shall require the owner thereof to remove the building, fence or other thing. For failure to make such removal within the time ordered, such owner shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and the city manager may cause such encroachment to be removed at the risk and cost of such owner. 
(Code 1981, § 32-9) 
Sec. 98-10. - Obstructions generally. 
(a)  Any person who shall cause any unlawful obstruction in any public street, sidewalk, gutter or bridge, or in any culvert or drain, public or private, shall, unless otherwise specifically provided, be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each day that any person shall fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section, after 24 hours from the time of being notified by the director of public works or designee to do so, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works to cause all obstructions to be removed from the public streets, sidewalks and bridges and from culverts and drains, public or private, either by the person causing such obstruction or otherwise, as the exigency of the case may require. If any person causing an obstruction shall fail to remove the obstruction after being notified to do so by the director of public works or designee, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to have the removal done at the expense of the city. In every such case, and also in every case where an obstruction is removed by the director of public works, or by order of the director of public works or designee, the city shall be reimbursed for its expenses for removal and any fees associated with current landfill rates, billable to the owner of the property which sum shall be collected as fines are collected. 
(Code 1981, § 32-10; Ord. No. 12-66, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 13-06, 1-22-2013) 
Sec. 98-11. - Damage or obstruction to street or sidewalk resulting from defective walls, etc., or demolition of walls, etc. 
    If any sidewalk or street shall be damaged or obstructed by reason of the wall or other part of any lot or building on the street being out of repair or being demolished, such damage or obstruction shall be subject to all the provisions of subsection 98-10(b). 
(Code 1981, § 32-12) 
Sec. 98-12. - Overhead utility facilities prohibited on portion of Sycamore Street. 
(a)  No overhead utility facilities, including electric, telephone, telegraph, CATV and fire alarm facilities, shall be installed or maintained on Sycamore Street, between Wythe and Bank Streets. Temporary overhead facilities may be permitted by special permission of the city in such designated area of Sycamore Street in cases of emergency. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standard utility practices. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-15) 
Sec. 98-13. - Signs or flags over streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  No sign shall be hung, kept in place, maintained or erected over any street or sidewalk within the city, nor shall any flag or sign in the nature of a flag be hung or remain across any street within the city, without the permission of the city manager. The city manager may grant such permission when the street or sidewalk will be kept open to normal public travel, free from obstruction, interference, or fire hazards, reduced visibility or light, or other danger. 
(b)  No sign shall be hung, kept in place, maintained or erected over any street or sidewalk within the city, unless the owner or tenant of the building or structure to which such sign is or may be attached shall have secured and deposited with the city manager a policy of insurance against public liability and property damage, issued by some solvent insurance company licensed and duly authorized to execute such policies within the state, or a proper certificate of such insurance company showing that such owner or tenant has obtained such policy, insuring the city against liability for bodily injuries, including death, in an amount of at least $300,000.00 for injury to any one person or $500,000.00 for injuries arising out of any one accident, and against liability for property damage in an amount of at least $25,000.00 for any one accident, where such liability arises out of the erection, maintenance or presence of any such sign or on account of any damages or injuries caused thereby. Such policy of insurance shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the policy to give ten days' written notice to the city manager before cancellation thereof. In lieu of such policy of insurance the owner or tenant of such building or other structure shall be permitted to enter into a bond, with surety satisfactory to the city manager and in a form approved by the city attorney, payable to the city with conditions therein similar to the conditions provided in this subsection with respect to such policies of insurance. 
(c)  Every sign or flag in the nature of a sign that is hung, erected or maintained in violation of this section shall be deemed an obstruction within the meaning of subsection 98-10(b). 
(d)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-16) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate signs etc., over public rights-of-way, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2010. 
Sec. 98-14. - Packing or unpacking goods on street or sidewalk. 
(a)  No person shall deposit on any street or sidewalk of the city any boxes, barrels, hogsheads or packages in which goods are received, for the purpose of packing or unpacking such goods on such street or sidewalk, unless they shall have been broken in transit or are too large to be put through the cellar doors of the sidewalk or passageway of the stores, in which case, the person so unpacking on the sidewalk or street shall consume as little time as possible in so doing, and shall, as soon as the goods are unpacked, remove all trash, dirt and boxes incident to such unpacking. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-19) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 110. 
Sec. 98-15. - Stands, trucks, etc., on streets for display or sale of merchandise, purchase, etc. 
(a)  No person shall erect, place, park, station, hold, keep or maintain any stand or other structure, whether on wheels or not, or any kind of container, or any truck, automobile, cart, wagon or other vehicle of any kind whatsoever, at any place on the streets of the city, for the display or sale of goods, wares, merchandise or produce. Persons duly licensed as hucksters or peddlers and persons exempt from obtaining a peddler's license under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717, while engaged in selling or soliciting from door to door, shall be permitted to park their vehicles in a lawful manner upon the streets for such length of time as may be reasonably necessary to permit them to sell to, or solicit, persons residing in the immediate vicinity of the place at which any such vehicle may be parked. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-21) 
Sec. 98-16. - Dispensing gasoline on street or sidewalk. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 2 misdemeanor for any person to permit a gasoline dispensing device to occupy any street, sidewalk or other public way, or to dispense gasoline to a vehicle standing in a street. 
(Code 1981, § 32-22) 
Sec. 98-17. - Gutters and snowbreaks for buildings along streets. 
(a)  Every building, the eaves of which drop water on the sidewalk of any street or alley, or within 18 inches thereof, shall be furnished with gutters and conductors, on the side next to such street or alley, to carry off rain water, and also with suitable eaves, or upright boards, along the edge of the roof to prevent snow from sliding from the roof and falling upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks. Where the sidewalk is paved, the spout of such conductor shall be discharged in the street gutter through a terracotta, iron or other suitable drain under the sidewalk, covered either with pavement of the same character and quality as that of the sidewalk, or with an iron cover roughened so as to prevent slipping. If the sidewalk is not paved, a covered or open drain sufficient to carry the rain water shall be laid from the spout across the sidewalk to the street gutter, and in case of an open drain, such drain and ground under the spout of such conductor shall be covered with stone or brick, so as to prevent injury to the sidewalk. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-28) 
Sec. 98-18. - Barriers on retaining walls for embankments abutting street or sidewalk. 
    Whenever earth embankments abut on any street or sidewalk, it shall be the duty of the owner of the property in question to erect suitable barriers or retaining walls to prevent loose mud or earth from falling on such street or sidewalk. Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor, and if any person fails to conform hereto within a reasonable time after being notified to do so by the city manager or director of public works, each day of failure shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 32-29) 
Sec. 98-19. - Enclosure of dangerous places below grade of adjoining street. 
    All dangerous places below the grade of the adjoining street shall be enclosed with proper fences or walls, and should the owner fail to conform to the provisions of this section, within a reasonable time after being notified to do so by the city manager or the director of public works, he shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor and each day of such failure shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 32-30) 
Sec. 98-20. - Emptying slop or wastewater in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 4 misdemeanor for any person to empty or cause to be emptied, into the streets or street gutters or drains, any slop or wastewater of any kind. 
(Code 1981, § 32-32) 
Sec. 98-21. - Deposit of hazardous or injurious material on street or sidewalk; removal. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be deposited, upon any street or sidewalk within the city, any glass bottle, glass, nail, tack, wire, can or other substance or material likely to injure any person or animal or damage any vehicle upon such street or sidewalk, nor shall any person throw or deposit, or cause to be deposited, upon any street or sidewalk, any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substance, so as to create a hazard to the traveling public. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or sidewalk, any destructive, hazardous or injurious material shall immediately remove such material or cause it to be removed. If any such person shall fail to remove such destructive, hazardous or injurious material immediately, the material may be removed by the city and the expense thereof shall be paid to the city by the person who failed to remove the material, which sum shall be collected as fines are collected. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon such street from such vehicle. 
(d)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-33) 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 50. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324. 
Sec. 98-22. - Duty of property owners and occupants to cut grass and other vegetation between sidewalk and curbline and roadside ditches. 
(a)  Where grass, weeds or other vegetable matter grows between any sidewalk and the curbline, and roadside ditches, it shall be the duty of the occupant of any land or premises abutting upon such sidewalk and ditches to have such grass, weeds and other vegetable matter cut to prevent such space from becoming unsightly or offensive. If any such land or premises is unoccupied, it shall be the duty of the owner thereof to have such grass, weeds or other vegetable matter cut as provided in this section. 
(b)  The director of public works or designee shall give a 48-hour notice of the provisions of this section to any occupant or owner and shall cause the provisions of this section to be enforced. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and each day that grass, weeds or other vegetable matter shall remain uncut after notice to cut such grass, weeds or other vegetable matter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 32-36; Ord. No. 12-66, 10-2-2012; Ord. No. 13-06, 1-22-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require removal of weeds from private and public property, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 
Sec. 98-23. - Dangerous, diseased or decayed trees near parks, school grounds, streets or sidewalks. 
    No property owner shall maintain or allow to remain, on his property within the city, any dangerous, diseased or decayed tree near enough to any park, park place, school ground, sidewalk or street within the city to endanger the safety of persons making lawful use of such park, park place, school ground, sidewalk or street. Any property owner having any such tree on his premises shall be notified, in writing, by the city manager or the director of parks and grounds to remove such tree within a reasonable time, to be specified in such notice. Upon failure of the property owner to comply with such notice, he shall be summoned before the judge of the general district court and, if found guilty of violating the provisions of this section, shall be ordered to remove such tree, at his cost, within a reasonable time to be specified in the order. If the property owner fails to remove the tree within the time thus specified, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-57) 
Sec. 98-24. - Crossing curb and gutter with vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall cross any curb and gutter in the city with any vehicle except at established driveways, unless with the approval in writing of the director of public works. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and, in addition, shall be held responsible for any damage to the curb and gutter. 
(b)  In any provision charging a violation of this section, proof that the vehicle was located on property that is adjacent to curb and gutter with no established driveways, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-80, 11-18-2003) 
Secs. 98-25-98-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET AND CITY BUILDING NAMES; STREET NUMBERS FOR BUILDINGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to name street, roads and alleys, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2019. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-51. - City street and city building names, changes thereto. 
(a)  In order to further the public health, safety and welfare, the city council shall name new city streets and new city buildings, and existing city streets and city buildings that have not been previously named. The city council may, whenever it deems advisable, change the name of city streets and city buildings. Prior to the naming or renaming of a street, the proposed name shall be forwarded to the appropriate regional authority to avoid duplication of street names within the region. 
(b)  In determining the names of city streets and city buildings, consideration shall be given to local citizens who have made positive contributions to the city. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Any citizen (hereinafter "petitioner") interested in renaming streets within the City of Petersburg must file a request with the director of public works, or his/her agent, which shall include: 
(1)  The current street name, the proposed street name, a contact name and number (address, phone number and email address if available), reason for the change; 
(2)  Statement that the petitioner agrees to pay all costs associated with the request, including the cost of new street sign(s); 
(3)  An administrative fee of $200.00, due upon completion and submission of the application (this fee shall not be waived); 
(4)  A map showing the location of the street; and 
(5)  A listing of property owner's affected by the proposed street name and their addresses. Affected property owners include owners of all properties that abut the street in question whether containing an occupied dwelling or not. 
(e)  The request for a name change must be approved by 100 percent of all affected property owners. 
(f)  If the name change has 100 percent approval, the request will then go before city council for a public hearing. 
(g)  Upon approval by city council, the street name change will not be effective for 60 days so that sign costs can be paid by the petitioner and the signs can be fabricated and posted. Petitioner has no more than six months from the date of council approval to provide full payment. 
(h)  If the six months elapse, the permit will no longer be valid and a new application request must be submitted. No refunds will be given for failure to meet the six-month deadline. 
(i)  The director of public works, or his/her agent, shall notify all affected property owners, and all applicable entities, to include city departments, the post office, and utility companies, of the street name change and effective date. A notice will be placed in the local newspaper and on the city website to make city residents aware of the change. 
(j)  Failure of the director of public works to notify all entities and owners shall not void city council approval. 
(k)  The street names established under this section shall take precedence over any other designation except those primary highways conforming to Code of Virginia, § 33.1-12, and shall be employed in references to property abutting thereon. 
(Code 1981, § 2-11; Ord. No. 14-24, 4-15-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 15.2-2019. 
Secs. 98-52-98-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREET NAMES 

Sec. 98-71. - Subdivisions of city; dividing lines. 
(a)  Sycamore Street shall be the line dividing the city into east and west from Old Street to the junction of South Sycamore Street and South Crater Road, from which junction to the southern city limits South Crater Road shall be the east-west division street. Washington Street shall be the line dividing the city into north and south. From the eastern terminus of Washington Street, the line dividing the city into north and south shall be a line running due east from the centerline of the street at such terminus. The four subdivisions shall be called "northwest," "northeast," "southeast" and "southwest" respectively, with reference to the intersection of Sycamore and Washington Streets. 
(b)  That part of Sycamore Street north of Washington Street shall be called North Sycamore Street and that part of it south of Washington Street shall be called South Sycamore Street. That part of Washington Street east of Sycamore Street shall be called East Washington Street and that part of it west of Sycamore Street shall be called West Washington Street. 
(Code 1981, § 32-49) 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 102. 
Sec. 98-72. - East and west and north and south streets. 
    All streets coming into or crossing Sycamore Street shall be called east or west, respectively, as they may run east or west from such street. All streets coming into or crossing Washington Street shall be called north or south, respectively, as they may run north or south from such street. 
(Code 1981, § 32-50) 
Secs. 98-73-98-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STREET NUMBERS FOR BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 

Sec. 98-91. - Laying off and numbering of street spaces generally. 
(a)  The director of public works shall lay off each street in the city into 20-foot or 25-foot spaces, beginning at the intersection of Sycamore and Washington Streets, or at the terminus of streets nearest one of those streets. Such spaces shall be numbered in succession as provided in this article and shall be used as the street address of the property. 
(b)  When the director of public works lays off spaces, as provided in this section, he shall make a record thereof and file a copy in his office. 
(Code 1981, § 32-51) 
Sec. 98-92. - Method of numbering street spaces. 
    The spaces provided for in section 98-91 shall be numbered upon the centenary plan. Beginning at the east side of Sycamore Street and going east, the spaces on streets intersecting or crossing Sycamore Street, or running in the same general direction, shall be numbered from one upward. Beginning at the west side of Sycamore Street and going westward, the spaces on all streets intersecting or crossing Sycamore Street, or running in the same general direction, shall be numbered from one upward. Beginning at the north side of Washington Street and going northward, the spaces on all streets intersecting or crossing Washington Street, or running in the same general direction, shall be numbered from one upward. Beginning at the south side of Washington Street and going southward, the spaces on all streets intersecting or crossing Washington Street, or running in the same general direction,shall be numbered from one upward. A new hundred shall be begun whenever an intersecting street is crossed, not counting intersecting lanes and alleys. When one street does not intersect or intersects, but does not cross another and it is inconvenient to apply the centenary plan, the numbering shall conform as near thereto as convenient, making the corresponding numbers parallel streets as near opposite each other as may be practicable. The odd numbers beginning with one shall be given to spaces on the right-hand side of the street looking north or west, as the case may be, from the intersection of Sycamore and Washington Streets, in the direction in which the numbering is to proceed, and the even numbers shall be given to spaces on the left-hand side of the street looking in the same direction. Looking in the opposite direction, the odd numbers beginning with one shall be given to spaces on the left-hand side and even numbers shall be given to spaces on the right-hand side. 
(Code 1981, § 32-52) 
Sec. 98-93. - Numbering on streets which do not run into or cross dividing lines. 
    All streets which do not run into or cross either Sycamore Street or Washington Street shall be numbered thus: If they have a direction north or south and are north of Washington Street, the numbering shall commence at their southern extremity, and if south of that street, at their northern extremity. All streets which do not run into or cross Sycamore Street shall be numbered thus: If they have a direction east and west and are east of Sycamore Street, the numbering shall commence at their western extremity, and if west of that street, the numbering shall commence at their eastern extremity. The first number on each street that does not run into or cross either Sycamore Street or Washington Street shall be as many hundreds, plus one, as there are squares between it and one of the before-mentioned streets. 
(Code 1981, § 32-53) 
Sec. 98-94. - Duty of property owners to obtain street address and number buildings. 
(a)  When any building is built or erected in the city, the owner shall obtain from the director of public works a street address prior to the completion of construction. When a property owner occupies more than one space, he may, at his option, receive any or all of the numbers of all the spaces which, or the greater part of which, he occupies. When any property owner occupies less than half of a lot, or less than half of each of two adjoining lots, he shall receive the number of the lot first reached in affixing the number, plus one-half. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works or his authorized agent to assign a street address to every existing main structure within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the property owner to conspicuously place street address numbers on, above or at the side of the main entrance door of such structure, so that the number is plainly visible from the public right-of-way. When the entrance is not clearly visible from the public right-of-way, the number shall be placed at the walk, driveway or other suitable location that is easily discernable from the public right-of-way. Numbers shall be in Arabic numbers and shall not be less than three inches in height and of a durable and clearly visible material. The numbers shall be of a high-contrasting color with the surface upon which they are placed and may be in either horizontal or vertical order. 
(d)  The failure of any owner of a building to follow any provision of this section within 90 days after a number has been assigned shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-54) 
Secs. 98-95-98-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 98-121. - Cellar doors and vaults in sidewalks. 
(a)  Not more than three feet of any public sidewalk, next to the wall, shall be occupied by any cellar door, which door shall, in all cases, be on a level with the sidewalk and shall not be enclosed with a railing or otherwise. All such doors shall be kept closed except when in actual use and shall then be carefully guarded so as to prevent accidents. 
(b)  Every owner of a building on a street which has a cellar door or vault in a public sidewalk shall keep such cellar door or vault in good repair. For failure to repair such door or vault within three days after being notified so to do by the city manager, the director of public works or a police officer, such owner shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and every day that shall elapse thereafter, without the door or vault being repaired, shall constitute a separate offense. If such owner shall fail, for five days after such notice, to repair such door or vault, it shall be the duty of the city manager or the director of public works to repair such door or vault at the expense of the city, which shall be reimbursed for its expenses by such owner. If there are several owners of any such building, it shall be sufficient to give the notice to any one of them. If the owner resides out of the city, the notice may be given to his agent or to the occupant of the building. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or install any new cellar door in any public sidewalk in the city after February 1, 1982. 
(d)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-11) 
Sec. 98-122. - Gates and doors in fences or walls opening across sidewalk. 
    Every gate or door in any fence or wall along the line of any street shall either open inwardly from the line of the street or there shall be attached to it a swing of sufficient weight, or it shall be hung upon hinges in such manner, as to keep it closed so that such gate or door shall not be allowed to stand open upon the sidewalk. Any agent, renter or owner of property who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-13) 
Sec. 98-123. - Awnings, sheds, etc., over sidewalks. 
(a)  No awning, frame, shed or other projection shall be placed or maintained over any sidewalk of any street within the city, unless every part of such awning, frame, shed or other projection, except the curtain of cloth or other material, including any fringe or other portion thereof, is at least seven feet above the surface of the sidewalk, and unless such curtain of cloth or other material, including any fringe or other portion thereof, is at least 61/2 feet above the surface of the sidewalk. Every such awning, frame, shed or other projection shall be supported by iron brackets extending from the building to which such awning, frame, shed or other projection is fastened. 
(b)  Every awning, frame, shed or other projection not conforming to the requirements of this section shall be deemed to be an obstruction within the meaning of subsection 98-10(b). 
(c)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-14) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate awnings, etc., over public rights-of-way, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2010. 
Sec. 98-124. - Storing or displaying merchandise or maintaining advertising signs on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall place, keep or store, or exhibit or display for sale, any goods, wares or merchandise, or maintain any advertising signs, on the sidewalks of the city. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed as requiring the removal of any sign or object used for advertising, attached to the front wall of a building and projecting no more than 12 inches therefrom, or as requiring the removal of any pole or post on which a sign or other object used for advertising shall be maintained; provided, that such pole or post shall be in the line of telephone, telegraph or electric lines on the street on which such pole or post is located; and provided, that the sign or other object used for advertising was erected prior to May 20, 1941. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to sidewalk sales conducted by licensed retail establishments located adjacent to the sidewalk, at times and places authorized in writing by the city manager, at his discretion, upon the request of such retail establishment or organization representing the interests of several establishments. Such authorization of the city manager shall preserve adequate space for pedestrian traffic, and no such authorization shall be granted for any particular place more than four continuous time periods in any one calendar year. 
(Code 1981, § 32-17) 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6. 
Sec. 98-125. - Use of sidewalks for receiving and delivering merchandise. 
(a)  Nothing in section 98-124 shall prevent the use of the sidewalks upon any of the streets of the city for the purpose of receiving or delivering goods, wares or merchandise, upon or from the abutting property. Only so much of a sidewalk as may be necessary for this purpose shall be so used. A sufficient passageway shall at all times be kept open and clear of any obstructions, and such sidewalk shall be used for such purposes for such time only as may be necessary for the purpose of receiving or delivering such goods, wares or merchandise. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-18) 
Sec. 98-126. - Planting of shade trees on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall plant any shade tree on any sidewalk of the city, without first obtaining a permit so to do from the city manager. The city manager may, when there will be no interference with the abutting owner's right of ingress and egress, and subject to the provisions of this section, grant such permit; provided, however, that no permit shall be granted for the planting of any shade tree on a sidewalk on the following streets or portions thereof: 
(1)  Sycamore Street, from Washington Street to Old Street. 
(2)  Bank Street. 
(3)  Short Market Street. 
(4)  Bollingbrook Street, from Sycamore Street to Second Street. 
(5)  Lombard Street, from Sycamore Street to Second Street. 
(b)  No permit required by this section shall be granted until the applicant files with the city manager the written consent of the abutting landowners to plant the trees. 
(c)  A permit granted under this section shall authorize the holder thereof to make proper and suitable excavations in the sidewalk, of such size and depth, and in such manner, as is prescribed by the director of public works. The permit holder shall keep each such excavation properly guarded to prevent accidents, until the excavation is properly filled, and no such excavation shall be left open at night. 
(d)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-24) 
Sec. 98-127. - Protection of sidewalks when building being erected. 
    All sidewalks in front of buildings in the course of erection shall be securely protected against materials falling from the structure or scaffolding. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-25) 
Sec. 98-128. - Duty of property owners or occupants to construct driveways across sidewalks. 
    On every paved or partially paved street, of a width of 25 feet or more, where premises are entered in such a manner as to make it necessary to cross the sidewalk with vehicles or pedestrian traffic, the owner or occupant of such premises shall construct a suitable crossing, of the same width as the sidewalk and of material and in manner approved by the director of public works pursuant to uniform city standards. If the owner of occupant of such premises neglects or refuses to construct such crossing, the city manager may direct the director of public works to cause such crossing to be constructed, and unless the cost thereof is paid by the owner or occupant of the premises, upon demand made upon him by the director of public works, the director of public works shall report to the director of finance, in writing, the amount with which such owner or occupant is charged, and the amount shall be collected in the same manner as city taxes are collected, together with a penalty of 20 percent, or the city manager may give notice to the owner or occupant of such premises and require him to construct such crossing, and if such owner or occupant shall fail so to do within ten days after such notice is given, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and each day, after such period of ten days, during which such crossing is not constructed, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 32-26) 
Sec. 98-129. - Drainage across sidewalks generally. 
(a)  No water from any lot, gutter or spout shall be permitted to flow across any sidewalk, whether paved or not, except in a covered drain, the cover of which shall not be above the surface of the sidewalk, or, when required by the director of public works pursuant to uniform city standards, in a paved gutter, either of which shall be of sufficient capacity to convey the water to be discharged by it, and shall be built, kept open and in good repair by the owner or occupant of the premises from whence it proceeds. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant violating this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. If the owner or occupant shall, after due notice, fail to comply with the requirements of this section, the director of public works may order the work to be done and report the costs to the director of finance, who shall cause such costs to be collected from such owner or occupant. 
(Code 1981, § 32-27) 
Sec. 98-130. - Skating. 
(a)  No person, except children under 12 years of age, shall skate on any of the sidewalks of the city nor shall the parent or guardian of any minor over that age permit such minor so to do. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-34) 
Sec. 98-131. - Duty of property owners and occupants to keep sidewalks clean. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 4 misdemeanor for the occupant, owner or agent in charge of any lot in the city to permit the accumulation of leaves, wastepaper or other litter on the sidewalks in front of or abutting upon such property for a period of more than 24 hours, or to sweep or otherwise move such leaves, wastepaper or other litter across or off any sidewalk into any street or other public place. 
(Code 1981, § 32-35) 
Sec. 98-132. - Removal of snow, ice or sleet from sidewalks. 
(a)  Snow, ice or sleet in front of and along the boundaries of all buildings or lots which abut on paved streets within the limits of the city shall be cleaned from the public sidewalks by the occupants of such buildings or lots, within four hours after the snow or sleet ceases to fall or the ice ceases to form, unless the snow or sleet fell or the ice formed during the night, in which case it shall be removed by 12:00 noon on the following day, Sundays excepted. If any such building or lot is unoccupied, it shall be the duty of the owner or the person having charge thereof to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  If ice or sleet on any public sidewalk cannot be removed without injury to such sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be covered, by the persons and within the period of time specified in subsection (a) of this section, with sand, ashes or some other substance which will render the sidewalk safe for use. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for each day of 24 hours during which the conditions prohibited by this section are allowed to remain, and if such snow, ice or sleet is not removed by the persons whose duty it is to remove the snow, ice or sleet, or if such ice or sleet is not covered as required by this section, the city manager shall cause the necessary work to be done in accordance with the provisions of subsection 98-10(b) relating to the removal of obstructions from public streets. 
(Code 1981, § 32-37) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require removal of snow from sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 
Secs. 98-133-98-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-151. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "excavation" shall mean any opening, caused by breaking, digging or any other means, in any street, alley or sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 32-67) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-152. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-66) 
Sec. 98-153. - Filling of trenches; notice of completion of work; barriers and lights. 
    Any person who makes any excavation in any portion of any street, alley or sidewalk shall fill the trenches immediately upon the completion of the work and ram the earth well and properly, under the supervision of the director of public works or his representative. The director of public works shall then be notified by such person that the work is ready for paving or repairing, and until such time as the city takes charge of the work, not more than three days after such notice, the person doing the work, or causing it to be done, shall protect the excavation by the erection of sufficient barriers, and place and keep sufficient lights burning around and over the excavation, to enable all persons passing to see and avoid it. 
(Code 1981, § 32-73) 
Secs. 98-154-98-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 98-171. - Required; deposit. 
    No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in any portion of a street, alley or sidewalk, without having first obtained a permit so to do from the director of public works and without having first paid to the collector of city taxes such sums of money as the director of public works shall determine to be sufficient to secure the permanent repair and replacement of such street, alley or sidewalk by the city, which deposit shall not be returned. 
(Code 1981, § 32-68; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 98-172. - Permit not to be granted within five years after street paved. 
    The director of public works shall not grant a permit for the making of any excavation, for any purpose, in the pavement of any street, within five years after the completion of such pavement or its acceptance by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 32-69) 
Sec. 98-173. - Permit to be kept at site and exhibited upon demand. 
    Any person making an excavation pursuant to a permit granted under this article shall keep the permit at the site of the excavation and exhibit it, upon demand, to any police officer or representative of the director of public works. Upon failure to exhibit the permit, the work shall be ordered suspended. 
(Code 1981, § 32-72) 
Secs. 98-174-98-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOND 

Sec. 98-191. - Persons engaged in business requiring excavations. 
(a)  No permit required by this article shall be issued to any person engaged in any business that requires the making of excavations in streets, sidewalks or alleys, unless such person has executed to the city a bond, with the premium paid for one year in advance, approved by the city attorney, in the penalty of $1,000.00, with some surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety, conditioned that the provisions of this chapter be complied with and also to indemnify and save the city harmless against any damage which it may suffer or become liable for by reason of failure to conform to or comply with this article, and on account of any injury which may be caused to any person or property by reason of such failure. 
(b)  When a bond required by this section is approved by the city attorney, he shall transmit it to the director of finance to be filed in his office, and notify the director of public works, in writing, of its execution, giving the date thereof with the names of the principal and surety therein. The director of public works shall register all such bonds, with their dates and the names of the principals and sureties therein. 
(c)  The bond required by this section shall continue in force and both the principal and surety thereon shall be bound thereby until they, or one of them, shall notify the director of public works, at least 30 days in advance, of the date when such bond will be cancelled, or until a permit issued under this article is revoked by the director of public works, and thereafter as to all liability incurred thereunder until such liability shall have been discharged. 
(d)  After the expiration of each year from the date of a bond required by this section, no permit required by this article shall be given to the principal obligor, until he has filed with the director of public works a certificate from his surety that he has paid an additional premium for such bond for a period of one year. When such certificate is so filed, the director of public works shall note the filing, and the period it embraces, opposite the entry of the bond to which it applies, and transmit the certificate to the director of finance, who shall file the certificate with the bond. 
(Code 1981, § 32-70) 
Sec. 98-192. - Persons not engaged in business requiring excavations. 
(a)  Every person not engaged in a business referred to in section 98-191, who desires to make an excavation in any street, sidewalk or alley opposite his premises, for any purpose in connection with the use or occupancy of his premises, and who does not employ, to do such work, a person who has given the bond required by section 98-191, shall execute to the city a bond, approved by the city attorney, in the penalty of $50.00, with good security, conditioned to save harmless and indemnify the city against any accident that may occur in connection with such work and against any damage it may suffer or become liable for by reason of the failure of such person to do such work, or on account of any injury which may be caused to any person or property by reason of such failure. 
(b)  No permit required by this article shall be granted to any person to whom this section is applicable, until he has complied with this section. 
(Code 1981, § 32-71) 
Secs. 98-193-98-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SNOW-MELTING AND LAWN-WATERING DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-211. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "devices" shall mean pipes, conduits or wires installed below the surface of a street or sidewalk for snow-melting or lawn-watering purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 32-87) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-212. - Violations of article. 
    A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-86) 
Sec. 98-213. - Performance by city of permit holder's obligations under article. 
    Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of a person holding a permit under this article to comply with the provisions of this article, the city shall have the right to perform such person's obligations under this article, at such person's cost and expense, without liability to such person for damages sustained on account thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 32-92) 
Sec. 98-214. - Plans and specifications for installation. 
    The installation of devices pursuant to a permit issued under this article shall be according to plans and specifications approved by the director of public works pursuant to uniform city standards. 
(Code 1981, § 32-93) 
Sec. 98-215. - Maintenance. 
    Every person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall at all times keep the devices authorized by such permit in proper repair and shall make repairs thereto from time to time as the director of public works shall deem necessary, with materials and in a manner satisfactory to the director, for the safety of persons and property using or occupying the public streets and sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 32-94) 
Sec. 98-216. - Protection of utilities. 
    When, because of the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, operation, existence or removal of devices, the public utility of a corporation that has been granted a franchise or permit by the city to use the public streets and sidewalks of the city for its purposes is disturbed or in any way affected thereby, the person to whom the permit was issued under this article shall reconstruct, repair or replace the utility in a manner satisfactory to and under the supervision of such corporation. 
(Code 1981, § 32-95) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 114. 
Sec. 98-217. - Removal to accommodate city work. 
    A person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall immediately remove the devices should they interfere with any work program of the city, when so requested by the director of public works, and shall resurface the sidewalk area with materials and in a manner that will restore such sidewalk area to a condition that is at least the quality of its former condition, as determined by the director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 32-96) 
Secs. 98-218-98-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 98-236. - Permit to install, repair, etc. 
    No person shall install, construct, reconstruct, repair, maintain or remove any devices for the purposes mentioned in section 98-211 until a permit so to do has been issued by the director of public works. Any such permit issued shall reserve to the director of public works the right to revoke the permit if the work shall not, in all respects, conform to the provisions of this article and all other provisions of this Code and other ordinances relating thereto and the standards now or hereafter established and enforced by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 32-88) 
Sec. 98-237. - Indemnification of city generally. 
    Every person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall indemnify, reimburse and save the city harmless from all charges, damages or costs that the city may be required to pay or otherwise sustain by reason of the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, operation, existence or removal of the devices and by reason of any person being injured or damaged in any way, in person or property, by the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, operation, existence or removal of the devices; and in the event that suit is brought against the city, either independently or jointly with the permit holder, on account thereof, the permit holder shall defend the city in any such suit at the cost of the permit holder, and in the event of a final judgment being obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with the permit holder, the permit holder shall pay such judgment, with all costs, and hold the city harmless therefrom. 
(Code 1981, § 32-89) 
Sec. 98-238. - Permit holder's insurance. 
    Every person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall furnish the city a liability insurance contract to indemnify, reimburse and hold the city harmless from all charges, damages or costs that the city may be required to pay or otherwise sustain by reason of the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance, operation, existence and removal of the devices. The contract shall be for not less than $100,000.00 to cover the injury to or death of one person and $300,000.00 to cover the injury to or death of more than one person in any one accident, together with property damage coverage of not less than $50,000.00. The contract shall be approved by the city attorney. The permit holder shall pay all premiums chargeable for the contract and shall keep the contract in full force and effect at all times during the construction, existence and removal of the devices. The contract shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or otherwise allowed to expire prior to 60 days after written notice to that effect is given the director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 32-90) 
Sec. 98-239. - Permit holder's bond. 
    Every person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall furnish the city a bond, with corporate surety approved by the city attorney, in the sum of $5,000.00, conditioned upon the removal of the devices and replacement and restoration of the sidewalk area and any public utility therein damaged, disturbed or destroyed thereby, in a manner satisfactory to the director of public works, when ordered so to do by the director of public works or upon repeal of this article or upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the permit holder to comply fully and in all respects with the provisions of this article or any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance relative thereto. The permit holder shall pay all premiums chargeable for the bond and shall keep the bond in full force and effect at all times during the existence and removal of the devices and replacement and installation of the sidewalk area and any public utility therein damaged, disturbed or destroyed thereby. The bond shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or otherwise allowed to expire prior to 60 days after written notice to that effect is given the director of public works. 
(Code 1981, § 32-91) 
Secs. 98-240-98-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PARADES; PROCESSIONS; DEMONSTRATIONS; PERFORMANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-261. - Violations of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 32-109) 
Sec. 98-262. - Funeral processions exempt from article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be construed to apply to funeral processions. 
(Code 1981, § 32-108) 
Secs. 98-263-98-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 98-281. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to promote, organize or hold, or to assist in organizing or holding, or to take part or participate in, any parade, procession or other public demonstration, or to perform as an organ grinder, bagpipe blower, violin, guitar or mandolin player, or the like, on the streets or other public ways of the city, unless a permit therefor has been secured from the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 32-121) 
Sec. 98-282. - Application and fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall file a written application therefor with the chief of police, setting forth: 
(1)  The hour and date of the proposed parade, procession, demonstration or performance; 
(2)  The probable number of persons, vehicles and animals to be engaged in the proposed parade, procession, demonstration or performance; 
(3)  The purpose for which it is to be held or had; and 
(4)  The streets to have or hold such parade, procession, demonstration or performance. 
(b)  No application for a permit required under this division shall be accepted or considered by the chief of police unless the person applying for the permit pays to the city a fee of $50.00, to aid in defraying the cost involved in considering the application for the permit and taking action with respect thereto, which fee shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1981, § 32-122) 
Sec. 98-283. - Issuance or refusal; streets to be designated; use of undesignated streets prohibited. 
    Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this division, the chief of police shall grant a written permit for the parade, procession, demonstration or performance in question, prescribing the streets or other public ways which may be used therefor, unless, in his judgment, the public welfare, peace, safety, health, decency, good order, morals or convenience require that the permit be refused. It shall be unlawful for any person to use for such purposes, at the hour and on the date requested, any other streets or public ways than those set out in the permit. 
(Code 1981, § 32-123) 
Chapter 102 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance pertaining to the dedication or acceptance of any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-7(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; community development, ch. 38; environment, ch. 50; floods, ch. 58; planning, ch. 82; street names for subdivisions of city, § 98-71; utilities, ch. 114; waterways, ch. 122. 
State Law reference- Codification of subdivision ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433; land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq.; mandatory provisions of a subdivision ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2241; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq.; Subdivided Land Sales Act of 1978, Code of Virginia, § 55-336 et seq. 

Sec. 102-1. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance pertaining to the regulation of subdivisions, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1981, §§ 33-1-33-84) 
Chapter 106 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Civil warrants for collection of city taxes, § 3-19; taxation, ch. 6. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(1); any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget saved from repeal, § 1-7(3); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-311 et seq.; businesses, ch. 26; exceptions to business taxes in urban enterprise zone; solicitation, ch. 35; aggressive solicitation, ch. 36. 
State Law reference- Municipal taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104; advertising certain tax ordinances in codification, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433; taxation generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq.; priority of taxes in distribution of assets of person or corporation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-6 et seq.; Setoff Debt Collection Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-520 et seq.; local sales and use taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605 et seq.; local bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208 et seq.; local taxes generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3000 et seq.; enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 106-1. - Rate of taxation on real and personal property. 
    The city council shall annually fix the rate of taxation which shall be assessed upon real and personal property. 
(Code 1981, § 34-1) 
Sec. 106-2. - Exemptions generally. 
    No tax shall be assessed or collected on any property, real or personal, which, by the Constitution or laws of the state, is exempt from taxation by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 34-2) 
Sec. 106-3. - Exemption of certified pollution control equipment and facilities. 
(a)  Declared separate class of property. Certified pollution control equipment and facilities, as defined in this section, are hereby declared to be a separate class of property and shall constitute a classification for local taxation separate from other such classification of real or personal property and such property. Such property shall be exempt from local taxation. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certified pollution control equipment and facilities means any property, including real or personal property, equipment, facilities, or devices, used primarily for the purpose of abating or preventing pollution of the atmosphere or waters of the commonwealth and which the state certifying authority having jurisdiction with respect to such property has certified to the state department of taxation as having been constructed, reconstructed, erected, or acquired in conformity with the state program or requirements for abatement or control of water or atmospheric pollution or contamination. 
    State certifying authority means the state water control board, for water pollution; the state air pollution control board, for air pollution; the state department of mines, minerals and energy, for coal, oil, and gas production, including gas, natural gas, and coalbed methane gas; and the state waste management board, for waste disposal facilities, and shall include any interstate agency authorized to act in place of a certifying authority of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1981, § 34-3) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3660. 
Sec. 106-4. - Exemption of certain personal property. 
    The following items shall be classified separately from other tangible personal property and no tax shall be assessed or collected thereon: 
(1)  Horses, mules and other kindred animals. 
(2)  Cattle. 
(3)  Sheep and goats. 
(4)  Hogs. 
(5)  Poultry. 
(6)  Grains and other feeds used for the nurture of farm animals. 
(7)  Farm machinery other than the farm machinery described in subsection (8) of this section, and farm implements, which shall include equipment and machinery used by farm wineries as defined in Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100, in the production of wine. 
(8)  Farm machinery designed solely for the planting, production or harvesting of a single product or commodity. 
(Code 1981, § 34-4) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3505. 
Sec. 106-5. - General duties of commissioner of the revenue. 
    The duties of the commissioner of the revenue, except so far as modified by this chapter, the license ordinances of the city and the ordinances passed by the city council with respect to the imposition, assessment and collection of taxes, shall be the same as those prescribed for him by state law. 
(Code 1981, § 34-5) 
Charter reference- General duties of commissioner of the revenue, §§ 3-11, 6-8. 
State Law reference- Commissioners of the revenue, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3100 et seq. 
Sec. 106-6. - Commissioner of the revenue to obtain returns from taxpayers. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall obtain full and complete tax returns from every taxpayer within his jurisdiction who is liable under the law to file such return with him for all taxes assessed by his office. This duty of the commissioner of the revenue to obtain such returns shall in no manner diminish the obligation of the taxpayer to file the required returns without being called upon to do so by the commissioner of the revenue or any other officer. 
(Code 1981, § 34-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3107. 
Sec. 106-7. - Refusal of taxpayer to furnish information to commissioner of the revenue. 
    Any person who refuses to (i) furnish to the commissioner of the revenue access to books of account or other papers and records, (ii) furnish information to the commissioner of the revenue relating to the assessment of taxes, (iii) answer under oath questions touching any person's tax liability, or (iv) exhibit to the commissioner of the revenue any subject of taxation liable to assessment by the commissioner of the revenue, shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each day's refusal to furnish such access or information shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 34-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3111. 
Sec. 106-8. - Personal property tax lists; personal property assessments to be furnished to collector of city taxes. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall ascertain and list such personal property and subjects as are taxable by the city, which lists shall be embraced in his annual return. The original of such lists shall be retained by the commissioner of the revenue as long as he shall remain in office and shall then be delivered to his successor. The commissioner of the revenue shall furnish a copy of the personal property assessments to the collector of city taxes by January 20 and April 30 of each year, and in default of his furnishing such copy to the collector of city taxes, as required, he shall pay a fine of $10.00 per day for every day thereafter until the personal property assessment is furnished. 
(Code 1981, § 34-8; Ord. No. 14-83, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-9. - Objections to personal property assessments; authority of commissioner of the revenue to examine witnesses, administer oaths, etc. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall hear and consider all objections which may be made as to the assessment of personal property, and shall have power to alter, add to, take from and otherwise correct and revise his assessment. The commissioner of the revenue shall have power to examine any person, on oath, as to the value of his personal property, and also to examine, under oath, such other persons, as witnesses in relation thereto, as he may deem proper, and for that purpose, may administer oaths and issue process to compel the attendance of witnesses before him. 
(Code 1981, § 34-9) 
Sec. 106-10. - Proration of personal property tax. 
(a)  The tangible personal property tax, at a rate established by the ordinance which annually fixes such rate, shall be levied upon motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers and boats which have acquired a situs within the city on January 1 of any tax year. The tax shall be due and owed on or before February 28 of each year and June 10 of each year after being billed by the collector of city taxes. Any person failing to pay any taxes on or before the due date shall incur penalties and interest as established in the ordinance which annually fixes the rate for personal property tax. 
(b)  When any person acquired a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or boat with situs in the city after January 1 or situs day, the tax shall be assessed for the portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or boat and it has situs in the city. 
(c)  When any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or boat loses it situs after January 1 or after the day on which it acquired situs ("situs day"), the tax shall be relieved and the appropriate amount of tax which shall be prorated on a monthly basis, shall be refunded if such tax has already been paid. 
(d)  When any person sells or otherwise transfers title to a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or boat with a situs in the city after January 1 or situs day, the tax shall be relieved, prorated on a monthly basis, and the appropriate amount of tax already paid shall be refunded. 
(e)  For the purposes of proration under subsections (a) through (d) of this section, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. 
(f)  Any refund shall be made within 30 days of the date the city determines that the tax is properly relieved. At the option of the tax payer, any refund due under subsections (c) and (d) of this section may be credited against the tax due on any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or boat owned by the taxpayer during the same tax year. 
(Code 1981, § 34-10; Ord. No. 97-12, § 34-10, 1-21-1997; Ord. No. 14-83, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 17-16, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. 17-17, 5-2-2017; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-11. - Filing of returns; late penalty; interest. 
    All returns of motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers and boats which acquire situs in the city or are transferred to a new owner in the city after January 1 or situs day, shall be filed by every person liable for the tax with the office of the commissioner of the revenue on or before the 30th day from: 
(1)  Situs day; or 
(2)  The date of transfer to the new owner if situs remains in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 34-11; Ord. No. 97-12, § 34-11, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 106-12. - Exemptions. 
    Property shall be exempt from the levy of such tax for any tax year or portion thereof during which the property was legally assessed by another jurisdiction in the commonwealth and the tax was paid and not refunded in whole or in part. 
(Code 1981, § 34-12; Ord. No. 97-12, § 34-12, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 106-13. - Minimum assessments. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall not make an assessment under the provisions of this article if the assessment would result in the issuance of a tax bill in an amount less than $5.00. 
(Code 1981, § 34-13; Ord. No. 97-12, § 34-13, 1-21-1997) 
Sec. 106-14. - Permanent board of equalization. 
(a)  Created; membership. There is hereby created, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3373, a permanent board of equalization. Such board shall consist of three members, to be appointed by the circuit court. 
(b)  Terms of members. The members of the permanent board of equalization shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years. 
(Code 1981, §§ 34-80, 34-81) 
Sec. 106-15. - Personal property tax relief. 
(a)  Purpose; definitions; relation to other ordinances. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the implementation of the changes to PPTRA effected by legislation adopted during the 2004 Special Session I and the 2005 Regular Session of the General Assembly of Virginia. 
(2)  Terms used in this section that have defined meanings set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3523, as amended. 
(3)  To the extent that the provisions of this section conflict with any prior ordinance or provision of the City Code, this section shall control. 
(b)  Method of computing and reflecting tax relief. 
(1)  For tax years commencing in 2006, the city adopts the provisions of Item 503.E of the 2005 Appropriations Act, providing for the computation of tax relief as a specific dollar amount to be offset against the total taxes that would otherwise be due but for PPTRA and the reporting of such specific dollar relief on the tax bill. 
(2)  The council shall, as part of the annual budget, set the rate of tax relief at such a level that it is anticipated fully to exhaust PPTRA relief funds provided to the city by the commonwealth. Any amount of PPTRA relief not used within the city's fiscal year shall be carried forward and used to increase the funds available for personal property tax relief in the following year. 
(3)  Personal property tax bills shall set forth on their face the specific dollar amount of relief credited with respect to each qualifying vehicle, together with an explanation of the general manner in which relief is allocated. 
(c)  Allocation of relief among taxpayers. 
(1)  Allocation of PPTRA relief shall be provided in accordance with the general provisions of this section, as implemented by the specific provisions of the city's annual budget relating to PPTRA relief. 
(2)  Relief shall be allocated in such a manner as to eliminate personal property taxation of each qualifying vehicle with an assessed value of $1,000.00 or less. 
(3)  Relief with respect to qualifying vehicles with assessed values of more than $1,000.00 shall be provided at a rate, annually fixed in the city budget and applied to the first $20,000.00 in value of each such qualifying vehicle, but is estimated fully to use all available state PPTRA relief. The rate shall be established annually as a part of the adopted budget for the city. 
(d)  Transitional provisions. 
(1)  Pursuant to authority conferred in Item 503.D of the 2005 Appropriations Act, the collector of city taxes is authorized to issue a supplemental personal property tax bill, in the amount of 100 percent of tax due without regard to any former entitlement to state PPTRA relief, plus applicable penalties and interest, to any taxpayer whose taxes with respect to a qualifying vehicle for tax year 2005 or any prior tax year remain unpaid on September 1, 2006, or such date as state funds for reimbursement of the state share of such bill have become unavailable, whichever earlier occurs. 
(2)  Penalty and interest with respect to bills issued pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be computed on the entire amount of tax owed. Interest shall be computed at the rate otherwise authorized by the City Code or general law. 
(Ord. No. 05-116, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Secs. 106-16-106-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY TREASURER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Collector of city taxes, § 3-14 et seq. 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 

Secs. 106-31-106-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-30, adopted July 11, 2017, repealed §§ 106-31-106-33. Former § 106-31 pertained to bond, compensation, general powers and duties and derived from the Code of 1981, § 34-21. Former § 106-32 pertained to the office of the city treasurer and the keeping of the books and accounts and derived from the Code of 1981, § 34-22. Former § 106-33 pertained to a limitation on the keeping of city money and derived from the Code of 1981, § 34-23. 
Sec. 106-34. - Reports to finance department. 
    The collector of city taxes shall report on a daily basis, to the finance department, all funds collected by him. 
(Code 1981, § 34-24; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-35. - Reports to city council and city manager generally. 
    The collector of city taxes shall report to the city council, as soon as possible after the close of each fiscal year, the total amount of taxes collected from all sources for the previous year, and at the same time make a return of the uncollected and uncollectible taxes for the fiscal year ending June 30 of the previous year. The collector of city taxes shall also make reports to the city council and the city manager, from time to time as he may be directed by the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 34-25; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-36. - Duties and powers with respect to delinquent taxes. 
(a)  The duties of the collector of city taxes with respect to delinquent taxes and levies shall be the same as those prescribed by general law for treasurers with respect to such taxes and levies. 
(b)  The collector of city taxes shall collect all delinquent taxes due to the city and, for that purpose, he shall have full power and authority to levy for all taxes due and unpaid by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of the delinquent taxpayer or any goods and chattels legally liable therefor, in like manner as is now or may hereafter be provided by the laws of the state in case of nonpayment of county levies, or by any other laws of the state, or as is now or may hereafter be provided by the charter and ordinances of the city. The collector of city taxes is hereby granted, for the purpose aforesaid, the power of garnishment which is vested in the state officers by state law. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the collector of city taxes to turn over to the director of finance, at such time as the city council shall direct, the tax books for any preceding year or years, containing the list of the names of the delinquent taxpayers for such year or years, and the director of finance shall thereupon credit the collector of city taxes with the amount of taxes shown upon such list and return the list to the collector of city taxes and charge him with the amount of taxes shown thereon. 
(d)  The collector of city taxes shall submit to the city council annually, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year, a statement of all money collected under this section by him during the preceding fiscal year, and the particular assessment or account upon which collected, and at the expiration of his term of office, shall submit to the city council a statement of the amount remaining uncollected. If the collector of city taxes shall return as not paid any taxes upon real and personal property for which he found, or by due diligence might have found, sufficient property within the city, liable to distress for such taxes, upon settlement of his annual account he shall be charged and held liable for all such taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 34-26; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Collection by treasurers, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3910 et seq. 
Sec. 106-37. - Fees for administrative costs, etc. 
    There is hereby imposed on delinquent taxpayers a fee to cover the administrative costs associated with the collection of delinquent taxes. Such fee shall be $20.00 for taxes collected subsequent to the filing of a warrant or other appropriate legal document in the appropriate court but prior to judgment, and $25.00 for taxes collected subsequent to judgment. Such fee shall be in addition to the tax and all penalties and interest owing thereon. Additionally, there is hereby imposed on delinquent taxpayers a fee to cover the reasonable attorney's or collection agency's fees actually contracted for. The attorney's or collection agency's fees shall not exceed 20 percent of the taxes or other charges so collected. 
(Code 1981, § 34-27; Ord. No. 99-05, § 34-27, 1-5-1999) 
Secs. 106-38-106-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REAL ESTATE TAXES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Assessment and reassessment of real estate, § 6-5 et seq. 
State Law reference- Real property tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3200 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-61. - Assessments generally. 
    There shall be, in accordance with methods prescribed by general law, a biennial assessment, reassessment and equalization of assessments of real estate for local taxation in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 34-37; Ord. No. 19-10, 2-5-2019) 
State Law reference- Real estate assessments, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3250 et seq. 
Sec. 106-62. - Assessment office established. 
    There is hereby established in the city, under the provisions of article II of chapter 6 of the Charter, a city real estate assessment office. 
(Code 1981, § 34-38) 
Sec. 106-63. - Time of biennial assessment and reassessment of real estate. 
    Pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3253, 1950, as amended, there shall be a biennial assessment and reassessment and equalization of assessments of all real estate in the city, such real estate to be assesed as of January 1 of each even numbered year, such biennial assessment shall become effective August 1, 2018 with the next reassessment being in 2020. The January 1 assessed value shall become effective for taxes on July 1. There shall be a lien on real estate for the taxes assessed thereon, with charges and interest thereon, as provided by law. 
(Code 1981, § 34-39; Ord. No. 19-10, 2-5-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-10, adopted Feb. 5, 2019, amended § 106-63 by changing the title from "time for assessment; tax lien" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 106-64. - Transfer of property upon land book. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall transfer upon the land book all land which appears by competent evidence to have changed ownership. 
(Code 1981, § 34-40) 
Charter reference- Duty of commissioner of the revenue relative to land book, § 6-8. 
Sec. 106-65. - Additional authority to sell land for delinquent taxes. 
    In addition to the authority provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3965, subsection A, as amended, and in accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3965.1, the city may also institute proceedings to sell in accordance with law any real estate when taxes on such real estate are delinquent on December 31 following the first anniversary of the date on which such taxes have become due. The ordinance from which this section derives shall stand as the ordinance of institution for each and every such proceeding commenced in accordance with this section. Notice shall be given in accordance with relevant law. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, 3-6-2001) 
Sec. 106-66. - Reserved. 
Sec. 106-67. - Deadline for appeal of assessment to city assessor. 
    Any property owner in the city shall have the right to appeal any real estate assessment to the city assessor between January 28 and March 1, or 30 days after the mailing date of a change of assessment notice, whichever is later. All appeals shall be submitted on forms supplied by the city assessor. Any appeal not timely filed shall not be considered. 
(Ord. No. 19-11, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 106-68. - Deadline for appeal of assessment to the board of equalization. 
    Any appellant to the city assessor remaining unsatisfied with the action taken on appeal to the city assessor may further appeal to the city's board of equalization. Application to the board of equalization may be made between January 28 and April 1, or 60 days after the mailing date of a change of assessment notice, whichever is later. All appeals shall be submitted on forms supplied by the board of equalization. Any appeal not timely filed shall not be considered. Any appellant unsatisfied with the action taken by the board of equalization may appeal such decision to the circuit court; however, timely appeal to, and final disposition by the county's board of equalization shall be a prerequisite to the jurisdiction of the circuit court in hearing any application for relief made under this article. 
(Ord. No. 19-11, 2-5-2019) 
Sec. 106-69. - Assessment of new buildings substantially complete, etc; extension of time for paying assessment. 
    Pursuant to the authority of the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3292, all new buildings substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy prior to May 1 of the year of completion shall be assessed when so completed or fit for use and occupancy, and the commissioner of the revenue shall enter in the books the fair market value of such building. No partial assessment as provided herein shall become effective until information as to the date and amount of such assessment is recorded in the office of the official authorized to collect taxes on real property and made available for public inspection. The total tax on any such new building for that year shall be the sum of (i) the tax upon the assessment of the completed building, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building is substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire year, and (ii) the tax upon the assessment of such new building as it existed on July 1 of that assessment year, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building was not substantially complete or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire year. With respect to any assessment made under this section after March 1 of any year, the penalty for nonpayment by June 30 shall be extended to September 30 of the succeeding year. 
(Ord. No. 19-12, 2-5-2019) 
Secs. 106-70-106-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR LAND PRESERVATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt ordinance to provide for certain use value assessment and taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.2-3231. 

Sec. 106-81. - Finding of fact. 
    The city council has determined that the preservation of real estate devoted to agricultural, horticultural, forest and open space uses within its boundaries is in the public interest and, having heretofore adopted a land use plan, hereby ordains that such real estate shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of this division and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3230 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 34-51; Ord. No. 01-29, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 01-43, 6-10-2001) 
Sec. 106-82. - Application for classification, assessment, etc., generally. 
(a)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3230 and 58.1-3233(2), may, on or before May 1 of each year, apply to the city assessor for the classification, assessment and taxation of such property for the next succeeding tax year on the basis of its use, under the procedures set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3234 and 58.1-3236. Such application shall be on forms provided by the state department of taxation and supplied by the city assessor and shall include such additional schedules, photographs and drawings as may be required by the assessor. 
(b)  A separate application under this section shall be filed for each use for which qualification is sought. 
(Code 1981, § 34-52; Ord. No. 01-29, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 01-43, 6-10-2001) 
Sec. 106-83. - Determinations of assessor. 
(a)  Promptly upon receipt of any application under this division, the city assessor shall determine whether the property meets the criteria for taxation under this division. If the assessor determines that the property meets the criteria, he shall determine the value of such property for its qualifying use, as well as its fair market value. 
(b)  In determining whether the real estate meets the criteria set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3230, and the standards prescribed thereunder to qualify for one of the classifications set forth therein, the assessor may request an opinion from the director of the state department of conservation and recreation, the state forester or the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services. Upon the refusal of the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services, the state forester or the director of the state department of conservation and recreation to issue an opinion or in the event of an unfavorable opinion which does not comport with standards set forth in the statements filed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3240, the party aggrieved may seek relief in the circuit court of the city, and in the event that the court finds in his favor, it may issue an order which shall serve in lieu of an opinion for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 34-53; Ord. No. 01-29, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 01-43, 6-10-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3233, 58.1-3240. 
Sec. 106-84. - Land book entries; tax to be extended from use value. 
    The use value and fair market value of any property qualifying under this division shall be placed on the land book before delivery of such book to the collector of city taxes, and the tax for the next succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value. 
(Code 1981, § 34-54; Ord. No. 01-29, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 01-43, 6-10-2001; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-85. - Change in use or zoning; roll-back tax. 
    There is hereby imposed a roll-back tax, in such amount as shall be determined under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3237, upon any property as to which the use changes to a nonqualifying use under any special real estate tax assessment for land preservation (land use)or the zoning is changed to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent, plus simple interest on such roll-back taxes at the same interest rate applicable to delinquent real estate taxes pursuant to applicable ordinances enacted in accordance with section 106-1 of this Code. The owner of any real estate liable for roll-back taxes shall report to the collector of city taxes, on forms to be prescribed, any change in the use of such property to a nonqualifying use, or any such change in the zoning of the property to a more intensive use, and shall pay the roll-back tax then due. On failure to report and pay the taxes due within 60 days following such change, the owner shall be liable for an additional penalty equal to ten percent of the amount of the roll-back tax, which penalty shall be collected as a part of the tax. In addition to such penalty, there is hereby imposed interest of one-half percent of the amount of the entire roll-back tax due for each month or fraction thereof during which the failure to pay the tax continues. 
(Code 1981, § 34-55; Ord. No. 01-21, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 01-29, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-86. - Misstatements in application filed under division. 
    Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any application filed pursuant to this division shall be liable for all taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if such property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate in the city, together with interest and penalties thereon. if such material misstatement was made with the intent to defraud the city, he shall be further assessed with an additional penalty of 100 percent of such unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 34-56; Ord. No. 01-29, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 01-43, 6-10-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3238. 
Sec. 106-87. - Application of general tax law. 
    The provisions of Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1, applicable to local levies and real estate assessment and taxation shall be applicable to assessments and taxation under this division mutatis mutandis , including, without limitation, provisions relating to tax liens, boards of equalization and the correction of erroneous assessments, and for such purposes, the roll-back taxes shall be considered to be deferred real estate taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 34-57) 
Secs. 106-88-106-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTION FOR ELDERLY AND DISABLED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for the exemption provided in this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210. 

Sec. 106-106. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Permanently and totally disabled means to be unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity, by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity, which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of the person's life. 
(Code 1981, § 34-69) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-107. - Authorized. 
    Exemption from taxation of real estate and manufactured homes as defined in Code of Virginia, § 36-85.3, is provided for qualified property owners who are not less than 65 years of age or who are permanently and totally disabled, and who are eligible according to the terms of this division and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210. Persons qualifying for such exemption are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth. 
(Code 1981, § 34-70) 
Sec. 106-108. - Administration; rules and regulations of commissioner of the revenue. 
    The exemption provided for in this division shall be administered by the commissioner of the revenue according to the provisions of this division. The commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations in conformance with the provisions of this division, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption as specified by this division. The commissioner of the revenue may require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income or financial worth. 
(Code 1981, § 34-71) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 106-109. - General prerequisites to grant. 
    The exemption provided for in this division shall be granted to persons subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  That the title to the property for which the exemption is claimed is held, or partially held, on July 1 of the taxable year, by the person claiming the exemption. 
(2)  That the head of the household occupying the dwelling and owning the title, or partial title, thereto is 65 years or older, or is permanently and totally disabled, on June 30 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year. 
(3)  That the gross combined income of the owner during the year immediately preceding the taxable year shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue to be in an amount not to exceed $35,000.00. The gross combined income shall include all income from all sources of the owner and of the owner's relatives living in the dwelling for which exemption is claimed; except that the first $4,000.00 of income of each relative, other than the spouse of the owner, who is living in the dwelling, shall not be included in such total. 
(4)  That the total combined financial worth of the owner and of the spouse of the owner, as of May 1 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year, shall be determined by the commissioner of the revenue to be in an amount not to exceed $70,000.00. The total financial worth shall include the value of all assets, including the equitable interest, of the owner and the owner's relatives living in the dwelling for which the exemption is claimed but shall not include the fair market value of the dwelling and the land upon which it is situated, not exceeding one acre, for which the exemption is claimed. 
(Ord. No. 04-49, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 08-15, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 12-83, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 106-110. - Effect of residency in hospital, nursing home, etc. 
    The fact that a person who is otherwise qualified for tax exemption by the provisions of this division is residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care for an extended period of time shall not be construed to mean that the real estate or manufactured home for which exemption is claimed ceases to be the sole dwelling of such person during such period of other residence, so long as the real estate in question is not used by or leased to others for consideration. 
(Code 1981, § 34-73) 
Sec. 106-111. - Application for exemption; commissioner's certification to collector of city taxes. 
(a)  The person claiming an exemption under this division shall file annually with the commissioner of the revenue, on forms to be supplied by the city, an affidavit or written statement setting forth, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue, (i) the names of the related persons occupying the real estate for which exemption is claimed and (ii) that the total combined net worth, including equitable interests and the combined income from all sources, of the persons specified in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3211, does not exceed the limits prescribed in this division. 
(b)  If the applicant for exemption is under 65 years of age, such form shall have attached thereto a certification by the Social Security Administration, the state department of veterans affairs or the railroad retirement board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors who are either licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth or are military officers on active duty who practice medicine with the United States Armed Forces, to the effect that the person is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in section 106-106; however, a certification pursuant to 42 USC 423(d) by the Social Security Administration so long as the person remains eligible for such social security benefits shall be deemed to satisfy such definition in section 106-106. The affidavit of at least one of the doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of the person by such doctor. The affidavit of one of the doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability as defined in section 106-106. 
(c)  Such affidavit or written statement shall be filed after January 1 of each year, but not later than May 1. 
(d)  If, after audit and investigation, the commissioner of the revenue determines that the person is qualified for exemption, he shall so certify to the collector of city taxes who shall deduct the amount of the exemption from the claimant's tax liability. 
(Code 1981, § 34-74; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213. 
Sec. 106-112. - Amount of exemption. 
    The person qualifying for and claiming exemption under this division shall be relieved of 100 percent of the real estate tax levied on the qualifying dwelling and land if the combined household income of the owner is $0-$25,000.00 with a maximum tax relief of $1,200.00. The person qualifying for and claiming exemption under this division shall be relieved of 50 percent of the real estate tax levied on the qualifying dwelling and land if the combined household income of the owner is $25,001.00-$35,000.00 with a maximum tax relief of $1,200.00. 
(Code 1981, § 34-75(a); Ord. No. 12-83, § 1, 12-18-2012) 
Sec. 106-113. - False claims. 
    Any person falsely claiming an exemption under this division shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 34-76) 
Secs. 106-114-106-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS EXEMPTIONS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 106-131. - Rehabilitated residential real estate; qualifications; application; fee; building permits; verification. 
(a)  Exemption from taxation of real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated shall be granted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, any real estate shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a structure which is no less than 50 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 40 percent without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 15 percent. 
(2)  The exemption provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the residential structure, as determined by the city assessor; and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. The exemption shall be limited to the first $500,000.00 of increased value. 
(3)  The exemption shall run with the real estate for a period of five years. 
(b)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in this section may apply to the city assessor for exemption, on forms provided by the city assessor. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid by the owner to the city assessor for processing such application. 
(c)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired, and the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed and meets the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 34-78) 
Sec. 106-132. - Rehabilitated residential real estate located in the urban enterprise zone; qualifications; applications; fee; building permits; verification. 
(a)  Exemption from taxation of real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated shall be granted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, any real estate located within the urban enterprise zone, as described by section 38-62, shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a structure which is no less than 25 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 40 percent without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 15 percent. 
(2)  The exemption provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the residential structure, as determined by the city assessor; and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. The exemption shall be limited to the first $2,000,000.00 of increased value. 
(3)  The exemption shall run with the real estate for a period of five years. 
(b)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in this section may apply to the city assessor for exemption on forms provided by the city assessor. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid by the owner to the city assessor for processing such application. 
(c)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired, and the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed and meets the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 34-78.1; Ord. No. 98-131, § 34-78.1, 7-21-1998; Ord. 17-20, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-133. - Rehabilitated commercial real estate; qualifications; application and fee; building permits; verification. 
(a)  Exemption from taxation of real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated shall be granted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, any real estate shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a structure which is no less than 50 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 60 percent without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 15 percent. 
(2)  The exemption provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the commercial or industrial structure, as determined by the city assessor; and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. The exemption shall be limited to the first $500,000.00 of increased value. 
(3)  The exemption shall run with the real estate for a period of five years. 
(b)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in this section may apply to the city assessor for exemption, on forms provided by the city assessor. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid by the owner to the city assessor for processing such application. 
(c)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired, and the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed and meets the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 34-79) 
Sec. 106-134. - Rehabilitated commercial real estate located in the urban enterprise zone; qualifications; application and fee; building permits; verification. 
(a)  Exemption from taxation of real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated shall be granted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, any real estate located in the urban enterprise zone, as described by section 38-62, shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a structure which is no less than 25 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 60 percent without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 25 percent. 
(2)  The exemption provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be an amount equal to the rehabilitation of the commercial or industrial structure, as determined by the city assessor; and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. The exemption shall be limited to the first $2,000,000.00 of increased value. 
(3)  The exemption shall run with the real estate for a period of five years. 
(b)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in this section may apply to the city assessor for exemption on forms provided by the city assessor. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid by the owner to the city assessor for processing such application. 
(c)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired, and the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed and meets the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 34-79.1; Ord. No. 98-131, § 34-79.1, 7-21-1998; Ord. 17-20, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-135. - Rehabilitated real estate located in the Folly Castle Historic District. 
(a)  Exemption from taxation of real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated shall be granted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, any real estate located within the Folly Castle Historic District as established by duly enacted ordinance of the city council, shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a structure which is no less than 25 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 40 percent without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 15 percent. 
(2)  The exemption provided in subsection (1) shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the structure, as determined by the city assessor; and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. The exemption shall be limited to the first $6,000,000.00 of increased value. 
(3)  The exemption shall run with the real estate for a period of five years. 
(b)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in this section may apply to the city assessor for exemption on forms provided by the city assessor. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid by the owner to the city assessor for processing such application. 
(c)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired, and the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed and meets the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-40, 6-20-2000; Ord. 17-20, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-136. - Rehabilitated real estate located in the Prides Field/Commerce Street Industrial Federal Historic District. 
(a)  Exemption from taxation of real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated shall be granted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, any real estate located within the Prides Field/Commerce Street Industrial Federal Historic District as established by the National Park Service and listed in the National Register of Historic Places, shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a structure which is no less than 25 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 40 percent without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 15 percent. 
(2)  The exemption provided in subsection (1) shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the structure, as determined by the city assessor; and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. The exemption shall be limited to the first $6,000,000.00 of increased value. 
(3)  If construction was not started prior to April 1, 2010, the exemption shall run with the land each year for a period of five years at 100 percent of the allowable exemption. The exemption shall commence on January 1 of the year following completion of the rehabilitation. 
(4)  The exemption shall not be applicable to any real estate that is used or operated in whole or in part as affordable rental housing described in the provisions of 26 U.S.C. § 42. 
(b)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in this section may apply to the city assessor for an exemption on forms provided by the city assessor. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid by the owner to the city assessor for processing such application. 
(c)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired, and the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed and meets the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, § 1, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 10-88, 10-26-10; Ord. 17-20, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-137. - Rehabilitated real estate located in the Virginia Trunk and Bag Building Complex Historic Site. 
(a)  Exemption from taxation of real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated shall be granted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, any real estate located within the Virginia Trunk and Bag Building Complex Historic Site as established by the National Park Service and listed in the National Register of Historic Places, shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a structure which is no less than 25 years of age and has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 40 percent without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 15 percent, providing that construction has not started prior to February 1, 2010. 
(2)  The exemption provided in subsection (1) shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the structure, as determined by the city assessor; and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. The exemption shall be limited to the first $6,000,000.00 of increased value. 
(3)  The exemption shall run with the land each year for a period of five years. 
(b)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in this section may apply to the city assessor for exemption on forms provided by the city assessor. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid by the owner of the city assessor for processing such application. 
(c)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired, and the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed and meets the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-17, § 1, 4-6-2010; Ord. 17-20, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 106-138. - Miscellaneous exemptions. 
(a)  This section is enacted pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3651. 
(b)  Pursuant to Section 6(a)(6) of Article X of the Constitution of Virginia, and on and after January 1, 2003, the city may by designation or classification exempt from real or personal property taxes, or both, by ordinance adopted by this body, the real or personal property, or both, owned by a nonprofit organization that uses such property for religious, charitable, patriotic, historical, benevolent, cultural, or public park and playground purposes. 
(c)  The ordinance shall state the specific use on which the exemption is based, and continuance of the exemption shall be contingent on the continued use of the property in accordance with the purpose for which the organization is classified or designated. No exemption shall be provided to any organization that has any rule, regulation, policy, or practice that unlawfully discriminates on the basis of religious conviction, race, color, sex, or national origin. 
(d)  Any ordinance exempting property by designation pursuant to subsection (b) shall be adopted only after holding a public hearing with respect thereto, at which citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of this hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall include the assessed value of the real and tangible personal property for which an exemption is requested as well as the property taxes assessed against such property. The public hearing shall not be held until at least five days after the notice is published in the newspaper. The city shall collect the cost of publication from the organization requesting the property tax exemption. Before adopting any such ordinance the governing body shall consider the following questions: 
(1)  Whether the organization is exempt from taxation pursuant to § 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; 
(2)  Whether a current annual alcoholic beverage license for serving alcoholic beverages has been issued by the state alcoholic beverage control board to such organization, for use on such property; 
(3)  Whether any director, officer, or employee of the organization is paid compensation in excess of a reasonable allowance for salaries or other compensation for personal services which such director, officer, or employee actually renders; 
(4)  Whether any part of the net earnings of such organization inures to the benefit of any individual, and whether any significant portion of the service provided by such organization is generated by funds received from donations, contributions, or local, state or federal grants. As used in this subsection, donations shall include the providing of personal services or the contribution of in-kind or other material services; 
(5)  Whether the organization provides services for the common good of the public; 
(6)  Whether a substantial part of the activities of the organization involves carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting to influence legislation and whether the organization participates in, or intervenes in, any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office; 
(7)  The revenue impact to the locality and its taxpayers of exempting the property; and 
(8)  Any other criteria, facts and circumstances that the governing body deems pertinent to the adoption of such ordinance. 
(e)  Any ordinance exempting property by classification pursuant to subsection (b) shall be adopted only after holding a public hearing with respect thereto, at which citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. The local governing body shall publish notice of the hearing once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The public hearing shall not be held until at least five days after the notice is published in the newspaper. 
(f)  Exemptions of property from taxation under this article shall be strictly construed in accordance with Article X, Section 6(f) of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall affect the validity of either a classification exemption or a designation exemption granted by the General Assembly prior to January 1, 2003, pursuant to Division 2 (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3606 et seq.), 3 (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3609 et seq.) or 4 (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3650 et seq.) of this article. An exemption granted pursuant to Division 4 (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3650 et seq.) of this article may be revoked in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3605. 
(Ord. No. 13-92, 7-16-2013) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3651. 
Subdivision II. - Improvement of Real Property in Redevelopment Districts[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Partial exemption for structures in redevelopment or conservation areas or rehabilitation districts, Code of Virginia § 58.1-3219.4. 

Sec. 106-139. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this subdivision is to reduce or eliminate concentrations of blight, stimulate investment and encourage new construction and improvement of real property in redevelopment districts. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 106-140. - Generally; evaluation of exemption program; fiscal impact statement. 
(a)  The city assessor shall, upon application made and within the limits as hereinafter provided, order the partial exemption from real property tax of real property upon new structures or other improvements that have been constructed within a redevelopment district established in the city. 
(b)  The city assessor, the city manager, and the deputy city manager/finance director, at the end of each fiscal year, in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, shall present the program evaluation results to the city council and make recommendations concerning the program in general. 
(c)  The evaluation criteria shall include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  The number of applications submitted; 
(2)  The number of applications approved for consideration by the city assessor; 
(3)  The number, type and description of properties qualifying for partial tax exemption under this subdivision; 
(4)  The total dollar amount of the resulting assessment credit ordered; 
(5)  The revenue impact on the city both with and without the existence of the program; and 
(6)  Any other quantifiable data that can be used to measure the overall effect of the program. 
(d)  The city assessor, the deputy city manager/finance director, and the city manager by September of each year, shall provide the city council with the fiscal impact statement of the program's operation. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 106-141. - Rules and regulations for administration. 
    The city assessor, with the advice and comment of the city manager and the director of finance, shall promulgate such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this subdivision as the city assessor deems necessary for the effective administration of this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 106-142. - Eligibility of residential property. 
(a)  In order to qualify for partial exemption from real property taxation for real property constructed for residential use, throughout the exemption period established by section 106-144, the new structure must be: 
(1)  An owner occupied dwelling used as a single-family residential structure; 
(2)  A rental property used as a single-family dwelling with a fully-executed lease agreement containing a rent-to-buy option; 
(3)  A residential duplex, containing two separate units, which is either owner occupied or has a fully-executed lease agreement containing a rent-to-buy option, held by one of the tenants; 
(4)  A residential tri-plex, containing three separate units, which is either owner occupied or has a fully-executed lease agreement containing a rent-to-buy option, held by one of the tenants; 
(5)  A residential quad, containing four separate units, which is either owner occupied or has a fully-executed lease agreement containing a rent-to-buy option, held by one of the tenants; and 
(6)  The new structure and other improvement, if any, must be built on a lot that has been vacant for at least two years prior to the date upon which an application for the partial tax exemption established by this subdivision statute is filed. 
Improvements such as garages, swimming pools, patios, and similar facilities that are not used as living areas for the main residential structure shall not be eligible for this exemption. 
(b)  The new structure and other improvements that are still owned by the initial developer shall be eligible for the exemption for a period of three years after the partial exemption becomes effective. If the property transfers to an individual that meets the eligibility requirements outlined in section 106-142(a), the exemption will transfer to the new owner. The effective date of the partial exemption will still follow the guidelines stated in section 106-144(a). If the property does not transfer to an individual that meets the eligibility requirements outlined in this subdivision, the partial exemption will be removed. If the property does not transfer from the initial developer within three years of the effective date of partial exemption, or remain owner occupied, the partial exemption will be removed. 
(c)  In order for partial exemption for a property to continue in effect, such property shall be maintained in compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and or the city building code provisions. If, after receiving notice of a building code violation, the owner of the property refuses to complete the necessary corrections within the time required or stated for such action, or refuses to allow city inspectors, city appraisers, or city personnel access to such property for the purpose of determining eligibility under this section, then such eligibility shall terminate. 
(d)  The new structure and other improvements, if any, must be completed within two years after the date the application is made for the building permit. 
(e)  The new structure and other improvements, if any, must be in conformity with the general character and quality of the existing structures in the surrounding community, as determined by the planning director and the local zoning ordinance. 
(f)  In order for partial exemption granted for a rental property used as a single-family dwelling, a residential duplex, a residential tri-plex, or a residential quad, with a fully-executed lease agreement containing a rent-to-buy option to remain in effect, the property must be purchased within the first three years of the exemption by an individual who will occupy the property. If a rental property used as a single-family dwelling, a residential duplex, a residential tri-plex, or residential quad, with a fully-executed lease agreement containing a rent-to-buy option is not purchased within the first three years of the exemption by an individual who will occupy the property, the partial exemption for the property will terminate after the third year. It shall be the responsibility of the purchaser to provide proof of the closing date and the purchaser's ownership to the city assessor so that the city assessor can note the continuation of the partial exemption on the land book. Absent any evidence submitted by a purchaser showing that a rental property used as a single-family dwelling, a duplex, a residential tri-plex, or a residential quad, with a fully-executed lease agreement containing a rent-to-buy option has not been purchased within the first three years of the exemption by an individual that will occupy the property, the city assessor shall remove the partial exemption from the land book after the third year. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 106-143. - Application. 
(a)  As a prerequisite for qualifying for partial tax exemption under this subdivision, the owner, or agent of the owner, of such property shall file an application for partial exemption from real property taxation with the city assessor simultaneously with making application for a building permit and prior to any work being started on the subject property. Each application for such exemption shall be accompanied by a processing fee in the amount of $125.00 for residential properties. 
(b)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless all appropriate building permits have been acquired and the city assessor has verified that the new structure or other improvements indicated on the application have been completed and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. Furthermore, no property shall be eligible for such exemption if the city assessor or any other city employee has been denied access to the entire premises before, during or after the work for which a partial exemption has been applied. 
(c)  Partial exemption will not be allowed under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Failure by owner or such owner's agent to submit an application to the city assessor for partial tax exemption in accordance with this subdivision prior to construction; 
(2)  Failure by owner or owner's agent to pay any amount of non-exempt real property taxes; 
(3)  Failure by owner to submit design plans to the director of planning and the city assessor; 
(4)  Including property that is not located within a redevelopment district established in the city; 
(5)  Receiving any other real estate tax exemption authorized by this Code; or 
(6)  Qualification of an IRS-42 low income housing credit. 
(d)  The applicant shall bear the burden of proof to show that the property for which a partial exemption has been applied complies with all requirements established by this subdivision. The city assessor may require documented proof of eligibility and compliance with the requirements of this subdivision, including, but not limited to, a fully executed lease agreement with an option to buy and proof of purchaser's ownership, which includes a closing date. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 106-144. - Amount of exemption; basis for taxes during construction. 
(a)  With the exception of the phase out period provided in this subdivision, the amount of the partial exemption from real property taxation provided for by this subdivision shall be an amount equal to 50 percent of the increase in assessed value resulting from the completed construction of the new structure or other improvement to the real property as determined by the city assessor. This amount only, on a fixed basis, shall constitute the exemption, notwithstanding subsequent market appreciation or depreciation, assessment, reassessment, or future improvements. In no event shall the exemption exceed the increase in assessed value or percentage of such increase resulting from the construction of the new structure or other improvement to the real estate as determined by the city assessor. 
(b)  The partial exemption will remain static and will not grow with any increase in the assessed value of the property or market inflation. The partial exemption shall commence on January 1 of the year following completion of the new construction or improvements. For the first five years after January 1 following completion of the new construction or improvement the exemption will remain at 100 percent; in years six through ten following January 1 of the year of completion of the new construction or improvements, the exemption shall phase out with only zero percent of exemption allowed in year ten as follows: 
Year       Portion of Exemption Received (%) 
6 ..... 40 
7 ..... 30 
8 ..... 20 
9 ..... 10 
10 ..... 0 
(d)  No partial exemption under this subdivision shall be ordered during the construction phase of the new structure or other improvements. Prior to completion of the new structure or other improvements, taxes shall be based upon the full assessed value of the property when assessed. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 106-145. - Penalty for nonpayment of real estate taxes; forfeiture of exemption. 
    Whenever the owner of real property which has qualified for partial exemption of real estate taxes under this subdivision fails to pay the non-exempted amount of real estate taxes on the property on or before September 30th of any tax year; 
(1)  A penalty of ten percent shall be applied to the taxes due on the full assessed value of the property for that billing period and or tax year; 
(2)  The partial exemption claimed for that tax year shall be forfeited; and 
(3)  The annual credit issued for that tax year shall be canceled and of no effect. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 106-146. - Land book. 
    Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed so as to permit the commissioner of revenue to list upon the land book any reduced value due to the exemption provided by this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 106-147. - Demolition. 
    The exemption provided in this subdivision shall not apply when the structure to be demolished is a Virginia registered landmark or is determined by the Virginia Department of Historic Resources to contribute to the significance of a registered historic district. 
(Ord. No. 16-01, 1-5-2016) 
Secs. 106-148-106-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF REAL PROPERTY TAXATION 

Sec. 106-151. - Service charge on certain real property. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3600 et seq., relating to the exemption of property from taxation, there is hereby levied and imposed a service charge upon the owners of all real estate situated within the city that is exempted from property taxation under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3606(A)(1), except property owned by the commonwealth, and Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3606(A)(3), (A)(4) and (A)(7), 58.1-3607(A)(2)-(A)(7), and all sections in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3609 et seq. and 58.1-3650 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 34-82) 
Sec. 106-152. - Valuation of property; establishment of the rate of service charge. 
    The service charge authorized in section 106-151 shall be 20 percent of the real estate tax rate of the city applied against the assessed value of the tax exempt real estate. However, in no event shall the service charge exceed the amount authorized in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3401. 
(Code 1981, § 34-83) 
Sec. 106-153. - Exemptions from service charge. 
(a)  Buildings with land they actually occupy, together with additional adjacent land reasonably necessary for the convenient use of any such building, located within the city shall be exempt from such service charge if the buildings are: (i) lawfully owned and held by churches or religious bodies and wholly and exclusively used for religious worship or for the residence of the minister of any church or religious body or for use as a religious convent, nunnery, monastery, cloister or abbey or (ii) used or operated exclusively for nonprofit private educational or charitable purposes, other than faculty or staff housing of any such educational institution. 
(b)  The service charge shall also not be applicable to public roadways or property held for future construction of such roadways. 
(Code 1981, § 34-84) 
Secs. 106-154-106-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL SALES TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Retail sales and use tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq. 

Sec. 106-171. - Levied; rate; price brackets; no discount. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind, a general retail sales tax at the rate of one percent to provide revenue for the general fund of the city. Such tax shall be added to the rate of the state sales tax imposed by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-603 and 58.1-604, and shall be subject to all the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq., and the rules and regulations published with respect thereto. The applicable brackets of prices shall be as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-628, for the combined state and local tax. No discount made under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-622, shall be allowed on the tax levied in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 34-89) 
Sec. 106-172. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the city council in adopting this article to levy the general retail sales tax authorized to be levied by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605. 
(Code 1981, § 34-90) 
Secs. 106-173-106-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMISSION TAX[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to impose and levy an admission tax, § 6-1. 
State Law reference- Local sales taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605; municipal excise tax on admissions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 106-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Admission charge means the charge made for admission to any amusement or entertainment, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, including a charge made for season tickets, whether obtained by contribution or subscription, a cover charge or a charge made for the use of seats or tables, reserved or otherwise, and similar accommodations, in the city. 
    Place of amusement or entertainment means any place in the city wherein or whereat any of the following are located, conducted, performed, exhibited and operated and for which an admission charge is made: circuses, carnivals, menageries, moving picture shows, fairs, shows and exhibitions of all kinds, dances, baseball, basketball, football, wrestling, boxing, and sports of all kinds, swimming pools, concerts, theatrical vaudeville, dramatic, operatic and musical performances, and performances similar thereto, such attractions as merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, roller coasters, leap-the-dips and the like, and all other public amusements, performances and exhibitions not specifically named in this definition. 
(Ord. No. 97-145, § 34-101, 11-4-1997) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-202. - Establishment of classes for taxation purposes. 
    In accordance with the state Constitution and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3817, events to which admission is charged shall be divided into the following classes for the purposes of taxation: 
(1)  Admissions charged for attendance at any event, the gross receipts of which go wholly to a charitable purpose or purposes. 
(2)  Admissions charged for attendance at public and private elementary, secondary, and college school-sponsored events, including events sponsored by school-recognized student organizations. 
(3)  Admissions charged for entry into museums, botanical or similar gardens, and zoos. 
(4)  Admissions charged to participants in order to participate in sporting events. 
(5)  All other admissions. 
(Ord. No. 97-145, § 34-102, 11-4-1997) 
Sec. 106-203. - Levied; amounts. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied a tax in the amount of five percent of the gross admission charged to any event included within class (5) established in section 106-202. 
(b)  There shall be no tax on admission charges for any event included in classes (1), (2), (3) and (4) established in section 106-202. 
(Ord. No. 97-145, § 34-103, 11-4-1997) 
Sec. 106-204. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Generally. No tax shall be payable under this article by the following, if admitted to any place of amusement or entertainment free: 
(1)  Bona fide officers and employees of such place. The term "officers" shall include any director, if such place is operated by a corporation. 
(2)  Any federal, state, city, county or town official or employee on official business. 
(3)  Any person whose admission to such place is required for the performance of some duty to or to work for the proprietor thereof. 
(4)  Any newspaper reporter, photographer, telegrapher, radio announcer or person pursuing a similar vocation who is admitted for the performance of special duties in connection with any event and whose special duties are the sole reason for his presence. 
(5)  Children under 12 years of age. 
(b)  Charges less than $0.10. Where the admission charge is less than $0.10, no tax shall be payable under this article. Amounts paid for admission by season tickets or subscription shall be exempt only if the amount to be charged the holder or subscriber for a single admission is less than $0.10. 
(Code 1981, § 34-105, 34-106) 
Sec. 106-205. - Tax based on admission charge exclusive of federal tax. 
    The amount paid for admission on which the tax imposed by this article is based shall be the amount paid for admission, exclusive of any federal tax thereon. 
(Code 1981, § 34-107) 
Sec. 106-206. - Collection. 
    Every person receiving any payment for admission to any place of amusement or entertainment on which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of tax imposed by this article from the person making an admission payment, at the time of the payment of such admission, or from the person admitted free, at the time of such admission. If tickets or cards of admission are issued, the tax shall be collected at the time of the issuance of such tickets or cards. The taxes required to be collected by this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect them until remitted as provided in section 106-207. 
(Code 1981, § 34-108) 
Sec. 106-207. - Report and remittance to commissioner of the revenue generally. 
    The person collecting any admission tax under this article shall make out a report, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of admission charges collected, exclusive of the federal tax thereon, and the tax from the admissions for which he is liable, and shall sign and deliver such report to the commissioner of the revenue, with a remittance of the tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the last day of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. If the remittance is by check or money order, it shall be payable to the collector of city taxes. All remittances received by the commissioner of the revenue shall be promptly turned over to the collector of city taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 34-109; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-208. - Report and remittance when collector goes out of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate his business or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1981, § 34-110) 
Sec. 106-209. - Interest and penalty for failure to remit. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of the revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month on the amount of the tax for each month or portion thereof from the date upon which the tax is due. If such tax shall remain delinquent and unpaid for a period of one month from the date it is due and payable, there shall be added thereto an amount equal to five percent of the amount of the tax. 
(Code 1981, § 34-111) 
Sec. 106-210. - Procedure when tax not collected or remitted. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to collect any tax and to make, within the time provided for in this article, any report and remittance required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base his assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect it and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the amount of such tax and the interest and penalties provided for by section 106-209 and shall notify such person, by registered or certified mail sent to his last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1981, § 34-112) 
Sec. 106-211. - Collectors' records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of two years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable to collect and pay to the city, which records the commissioner of the revenue shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1981, § 34-113) 
Sec. 106-212. - Special provisions for temporary or transient places of amusement or entertainment. 
(a)  Whenever any place of amusement or entertainment makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax levied by this article and such place is of a temporary or transitory nature, the commissioner of the revenue may require the report and remittance of the tax to be made on the day following its collection, or on the day following the conclusion of a series of performances or exhibitions, or at such other reasonable times as he shall determine. Failure to comply with any such requirement of the commissioner of the revenue as to the report and remittance of the tax so required shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Before any temporary or transient amusement or entertainment shall begin operation, and before any license shall be issued therefor, pursuant to chapter 26 of this Code, if a license is required, the person operating the amusement or entertainment shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum of money, to be estimated by the commissioner of the revenue, sufficient to cover the admission tax required to be collected by such person under the provisions of this article, as security for the collection of and payment to the city of such admission tax. At the conclusion of such temporary or transient operation in the city, such person shall file with the commissioner of the revenue the report required by this article and pay the tax collected to the city. Upon such report being filed and payment being made, the city treasurer shall refund the deposit, or if the amount due is in excess of the deposit, the city treasurer may credit the deposit against the amount of the tax due. 
(c)  Should any person conducting a temporary or transient amusement or entertainment in the city fail to file the requisite report and pay the requisite amount of tax collected within five days from the termination of the operation of the amusement or entertainment, the commissioner of the revenue may assess such person with such tax at the amount of the deposit and the city treasurer shall retain the deposit in full payment of the tax collected by and due the city by such person. 
(Code 1981, § 34-114) 
Sec. 106-213. - Violations of article. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and each such violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-115) 
Secs. 106-214-106-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX 

Sec. 106-231. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Bank means and shall be defined as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1201. 
    Net capital means a bank's net capital, computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1205. 
(Code 1981, § 34-127) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-232. - Tax imposed; apportioned. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq., there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of this city, a tax on net capital equaling 80 percent of the state rate of franchise tax, as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1204. 
(b)  If any bank located within the boundaries of this city has offices that are located outside the corporate limits of the city, the tax shall be apportioned as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211. 
(Code 1981, § 34-128) 
Sec. 106-233. - Filing of return and documentation; payment of tax; due dates. 
(a)  On or after January 1 of each year, but not later than March 1 of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within the city shall prepare and file with the commissioner of the revenue, a return, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207, in duplicate, which shall set forth the tax on net capital, computed pursuant Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq. The commissioner of the revenue shall certify a copy of the bank's return and schedules and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  If the principal office of a bank is located outside the boundaries of this city, and such bank has branch offices located within the city, in addition to the filing requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any bank conducting such branch business shall file, with the commissioner of the revenue of this city, a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1207, 58.1-1211 and 58.1-1212. 
(c)  Each bank, on or before June 1, of each year, shall pay the collector of city taxes office all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-129; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-234. - Penalty for failure to comply with article. 
    Any bank which fails to file a return or pay the tax required by this chapter or fails to comply with any other provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the tax due. If the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that such failure is due to providential or other good cause, such return and payment of tax shall be accepted exclusive of such penalty, but with interest determined in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-15. 
(Code 1981, § 34-130) 
Secs. 106-235-106-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAX ON TRANSIENT LODGERS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal excise tax on transient room rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 106-261. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Hotel means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse or other lodging place within the city offering lodging, for compensation, to any transient. 
    Lodging means a room or space furnished any transient. 
    Transient means any person who, for a period of not more than 90 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging at any hotel. 
(Code 1981, § 34-142) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-262. - Imposed; amount. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed by law, on each transient, a tax equivalent to ten percent of the total amount paid for lodging by or for such transient to any hotel. 
(Code 1981, § 34-143; Ord. No. 06-56, 6-6-2006; Ord. No. 16-34, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 106-263. - Use. 
    The proceeds from the tax imposed by this article shall be used by the city for the promotion and development of tourism. 
(Code 1981, § 34-144) 
Sec. 106-264. - Collection. 
    Every person receiving any payment for lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax from the transient on whom such tax is levied, or from the person paying for such lodging, at the time payment for such lodging is made. Such taxes shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person collecting the taxes until the taxes have been remitted to the city in accord with this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-145) 
Sec. 106-265. - Collector's report and remittance generally. 
    The person collecting any tax, as provided in this article shall make out a report thereof, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of lodging charges collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver such report to the collector of city taxes with the remittance of such tax. Such report and remittance shall be made as required by the commissioner of the revenue, which shall be at least once in every 30-day period. 
(Code 1981, § 34-146; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-266. - Report and remittance when collector goes out of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay the city a tax pursuant to provisions of this article shall cease to operate, go out of business or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax then payable to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due the collector of city taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 34-147; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-267. - Penalty and interest for nonremittance. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the collector of city taxes the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, within the time and in the amount as provided for in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the collector of city taxes a penalty in the amount of five percent thereof and interest thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, which shall be computed upon the tax and penalty from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Code 1981, § 34-148; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-268. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report and remit. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances required, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall secure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax due and payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax and penalty and interest as in this article provided for, and shall notify such person, by registered or certified mail sent to his last place of known address, of the amount of such tax and interest and penalty, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days after such notice. The commissioner of the revenue shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article as are provided by law. 
(Code 1981, § 34-149) 
Sec. 106-269. - Collector's records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of two years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the city. The commissioner of the revenue may inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1981, § 34-150) 
Sec. 106-270. - Violations of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 34-151) 
Secs. 106-271-106-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAX ON PURCHASE OF MEALS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal excise tax on meals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 106-291. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Meal means the food and drink, except alcoholic beverages, purchased by a person in or from a restaurant, to be consumed by a human being at one time to satisfy his appetite, for which the charge made by the seller against the purchaser is $0.30 or more, including, but not limited to, breakfast, lunch, dinner and supper. 
    Purchaser means any person who purchases a meal. 
    Restaurant means any place where or from which meals are sold, including, but not limited to, confectioneries, delicatessens, places of business known as restaurants, drug stores, eating houses, public and private clubs, resorts, vending machines and places where vending machines are located. 
    Seller means any person, including the city, who sells a meal. 
(Code 1981, § 34-166) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-292. - Imposed; amount. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed by law, upon each and every purchase of a meal within the city, a tax equal to seven percent of the charge made by the seller against the purchaser for the meal. 
(Code 1981, § 34-167; Ord. No. 01-31, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 12-22, § 1, 4-3-2012; Ord. No. 16-35, 9-16-2016) 
Sec. 106-293. - Use. 
    The proceeds from the tax imposed by this article shall be used by the city for the promotion and development of tourism. 
(Code 1981, § 34-168) 
Sec. 106-294. - Duty of purchaser to pay. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall, in every case, be paid by the purchaser to the seller, for the use of the city, at the time that the charge for the meal becomes due and payable. 
(Code 1981, § 34-169) 
Sec. 106-295. - Duty of seller to collect. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax imposed and levied by this article at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the meal. 
(Code 1981, § 34-170) 
Sec. 106-296. - Collection by collector of city taxes. 
    The collector of city taxes shall have the power and the duty of collecting the tax imposed and levied under this article and shall cause such tax to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 34-171; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-297. - Seller's report and remittance generally. 
    Taxes collected under this article during each calendar month shall be reported and remitted by each seller to the commissioner of the revenue, on or before the twentieth day of the following calendar month. Taxes collected by a seller shall be deemed to be held in trust by such seller until they have been remitted to the commissioner of the revenue. The required report shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. All remittances received hereunder by the commissioner of the revenue shall be turned over promptly by him to the collector of city taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 34-172; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-298. - Report and remittance when seller goes out of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and remit the tax imposed and levied by this article shall go out of business, dispose of his business or otherwise cease to operate, all of such taxes collected shall thereupon be reported and remitted to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1981, § 34-173) 
Sec. 106-299. - Penalty and interest for nonremittance. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to remit the taxes collected, as required by this article, there shall be added to such taxes a penalty in the amount of five percent thereof, and interest thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the first day following the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Code 1981, § 34-174) 
Sec. 106-300. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report and remit. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed and levied by this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the report and remittance required, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax due and payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax and penalty and interest as are provided for in this article, and shall notify such person, by registered mail sent to his last known address, of the amount of such tax, penalty and interest, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1981, § 34-175) 
Sec. 106-301. - Seller's records. 
    Every seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases taxed by this article, which records shall show the charge made against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1981, § 34-176) 
Sec. 106-302. - Violations of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-177) 
Secs. 106-303-106-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CONSUMER UTILITY TAXES[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to levy and impose tax on amount paid for utility services, § 6-2. 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 114. 
State Law reference- Consumer utility taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 106-331. - Exemptions. 
    The United States of America, the commonwealth, and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof, including this city, are hereby exempt from the payment of the taxes imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of utility services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Code 1981, § 34-192) 
Sec. 106-332. - Computation. 
    In all cases where the seller collects the price for utility service at monthly periods, the taxes imposed and levied by this article may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such month or period; provided that the amount of the taxes to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1981, § 34-193) 
Sec. 106-333. - Duty of purchaser to pay. 
    The taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller, for the use of the city, at the time that the purchase price or charge for the utility service shall become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser and the seller. 
(Code 1981, § 34-194) 
Sec. 106-334. - Duty of seller to collect, report and remit. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collection agency for the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax imposed and levied by this division at the time of collecting the purchase price charged, and the taxes imposed, levied and collected during each calendar month shall be reported and paid by each seller to the collector of city taxes on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, less three percent of the tax due, which shall be retained by the seller for expenses related to the collection of the tax. 
(Code 1981, § 34-202; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-335. - Seller's records. 
    Each seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases of utility service in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the amount of taxes imposed under this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during regular business hours and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1981, § 34-196) 
Sec. 106-336. - Powers and duties of collector of city taxes. 
    The collector of city taxes shall be charged with the power and the duty of collecting the taxes levied and imposed by this article and shall cause such taxes to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 34-197; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-337. - Violations of article. 
    Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the taxes imposed or levied by this article, where the seller has not elected to assume or pay such taxes, and any seller violating the provisions of this article and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 34-198) 
Secs. 106-338-106-344. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELEPHONE SERVICE, CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE AND WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 106-345. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning 
    Purchaser means every person who purchases a utility service. 
    Seller means every person, whether a public service corporation, or private corporation or the city, who sells or furnishes a utility service. 
    Utility service means local telephone service, basic service charge for cable television, and water service, except bottled water, furnished and used in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 34-189; Ord. No. 00-67, 10-3-2000) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-346. - Levied; amount; exclusions. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each purchaser of utility service for residential use, a tax for general purposes in the amount of 20 percent of the charge made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each purchase of utility service; provided, however, that such tax shall not apply to: 
(1)  That portion of monthly basic service charge for cable television which shall exceed $15.00. 
(2)  That portion of monthly bills for local telephone service for domestic or residential use which shall exceed $15.00. 
(3)  That portion of the monthly bills for each purchase of water utility service for domestic or residential use which shall exceed $15.00. The purchase of water for each dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling served by one or more master meters shall be an individual purchase of water for domestic or residential use. 
If bills for utility service are rendered other than monthly, the foregoing maximum bills on which the tax is computed shall be varied in proportion to the time such billings shall be greater or less than one month. 
(b)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each purchaser of utility service for industrial or commercial use, a tax for general purposes in the amount of 15 percent of the charge made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each purchaser of utility service; provided, however, that such tax shall not apply to: 
(1)  That portion of monthly basic service charge for cable television which shall exceed $15.00. 
(2)  That portion of the monthly bills for water utility service for industrial or commercial use which shall exceed $15.00. 
If bills for utility service are rendered other than monthly, the foregoing maximum bills on which the tax is computed shall be varied in proportion to the time such billings shall be greater or less than one month. 
(Code 1981, § 34-190; Ord. No. 96-56, § 34-190, 5-14-1996; Ord. No. 00-67, 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 106-347. - Applicability to telephone service. 
    The tax imposed and levied by this division on purchasers with respect to local telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone service, except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones. The total amount of the guaranteed charge on each bill rendered for semipublic coin-box telephone service shall be included in the basis for the tax with respect to the purchaser of such service. 
(Code 1981, § 34-191; Ord. No. 00-67, 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 106-348. - Tax on consumers of mobile telecommunication services. 
    Pursuant to the authority set forth in and in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812, and with the incorporation of those relevant definitions contained in subsection J of such section, there is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each consumer of mobile local telecommunications service a tax for general purposes in the amount of ten percent of the charge made by the mobile service provider, provided, however, that such tax shall not apply to any amount so charged in excess of $30.00 per month for each mobile service consumer. 
(Ord. No. 96-56, § 34-191.1, 5-14-1996; Ord. No. 00-67, 10-3-2000) 
Secs. 106-349, 106-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRIC SERVICE AND GAS SERVICE 

Sec. 106-351. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CCF means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic feet. 
    Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services in this jurisdiction. 
    Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in Virginia. 
    Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means 1,000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity. 
    Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
    Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Service provider means a person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer. 
    Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 00-67, 10-3-2000) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-352. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Levied. In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax shall be $1.40 plus the rate of $0.015063 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed $3.00 monthly. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on non-residential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of non-residential consumers as set forth below: 
a.  Commercial consumers: Such tax shall be $1.72 plus the rate of $0.010327 on each kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $75.00 monthly. 
b.  Industrial consumers: Such tax shall be $1.72 plus the rate of $0.010533 on each kWh delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $75.00 monthly. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this section to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this section: The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, paragraphs F. and G., and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The kWh will be divided by two; 
(2)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; 
(3)  The tax determined by subsection (2) shall be multiplied by two; 
(4)  The tax in subsection (3) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax." 
(Ord. No. 00-67, 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 106-353. - Local natural gas utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Levied. In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814 J., as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be $2.45 plus at the rate of $0.0920 on CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed $3.00 per month. 
(2)  Non-residential consumers: Such tax on non-residential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below: 
a.  Commercial consumers: Such tax shall be $3.49 plus the rate of $0.063 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $7.50 monthly. 
b.  Industrial consumers: Such tax shall be $3.49 plus the rate of $0.063 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $7.50 monthly. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this section to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following consumers of natural gas shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section: The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, paragraphs H. and I., and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The CCF will be divided by two; 
(2)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; 
(3)  The tax determined by subsection (2) shall be multiplied by two; 
(4)  The tax in subsection (3) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax." 
(Ord. No. 00-67, 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 106-354-106-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ENHANCED EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE 

Sec. 106-361. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    E-911 system means a telephone service which utilizes a computerized system to automatically route emergency telephone calls placed by dialing the digits "911" to the proper public safety answering point serving the jurisdiction from which the emergency telephone call was placed. An E-911 system includes selective routing of telephone calls, automatic telephone number identification, and automatic location identification performed by computers and other ancillary control center communications equipment. 
    Local telephone service means switched local exchange access service. 
    Public safety answering point means a communications facility operated on a 24-hour basis which first receives E-911 calls from persons in an E-911 service area and which may, as appropriate, directly dispatch public safety services (fire, police and/or rescue), or extend, transfer, or relay E-911 calls to appropriate public safety agencies. 
    Purchaser means every person who purchases a local exchange telephone service. 
    Seller means every person who sells or furnishes local exchange telephone service within the city. 
    Utility services means local exchange telephone service furnished within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 34-199) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-362. - Amount of tax on telephone service. 
    Pursuant to the authority set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813, there is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each purchaser of local exchange telephone service a tax in the amount of $2.00 per telephone line per month. This tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller of local exchange telephone service for the use by the city to pay the initial capital, installation and maintenance costs, recurring maintenance costs, upgrade costs, and salaries of dispatchers of its E-911 system. Such tax shall include three percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction for the purpose of compensating the seller (telephone utility) for accounting for and remitting the tax levied in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 34-200; Ord. No. 96-56, § 34-200, 5-14-1996; Ord. No. 99-90, 6-15-1999) 
Sec. 106-363. - Exemptions. 
    The following persons shall be exempt from the payment of the tax provided for in this division: 
(1)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and all political subdivisions, boards, agencies, commissions and authorities of the state. 
(2)  Purchasers or lessee of local exchange telephone service who utilize coin-operated telephones. 
(Code 1981, § 34-201) 
Sec. 106-364. - Collection and remittance by seller. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collection agency for the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax imposed and levied by this division at the time of collecting the purchase price charged, and the taxes imposed, levied and collected during each calendar month shall be reported and paid by each seller to the collector of city taxes on or before the fifteeth day of each calendar month, less three percent of the tax due, which shall be retained by the seller for expenses related to the collection of the tax. 
(Code 1981, § 34-202; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-365. - Records of sale. 
    Each seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the city which shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this division. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the city at reasonable times, and the city shall have the right to make transcriptions thereof during such time as it may desire. 
(Code 1981, § 34-203) 
Secs. 106-366-106-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RECORDATION TAX 

Sec. 106-391. - Imposed; amount. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-814 and 58.1-3800 et seq., and subject to the conditions and limitations thereof, there is hereby imposed a recordation tax in an amount equal to one third of the amount of the state recordation tax collectible for the state on the first recordation of each taxable instrument admitted to record in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 34-211) 
Secs. 106-392-106-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TAX ON WILLS AND ADMINISTRATIONS 

Sec. 106-411. - Imposed; amount. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1718 and 58.1-3805 et seq., and subject to the conditions and limitations thereof, there is hereby imposed a tax on the probate of every will or grant of administration in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state tax on such probate of a will or grant of administration. 
(Code 1981, § 34-223) 
Secs. 106-412-106-440. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - CIGARETTE TAX[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal cigarette tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3830 et seq., 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 106-441. - Definitions. 
    The following words, when used in this article, shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer means any manufacturer, jobber, wholesale dealer or other person who supplies a seller with cigarettes. 
    Package means any package, box, can or other container of any cigarettes, irrespective of the material from which such container is made, to which the internal revenue stamp of the United States government is required to be affixed by and under federal statutes and regulations and in which retail sales of such cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or otherwise, and any combination of individuals. 
    Purchaser means any person to whom title to any cigarettes is transferred by a seller within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Sale means any act or transaction, irrespective of the method or means employed, including the use of mechanical devices, whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller, as defined in this section, to any other person within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Seller means any person who transfers title to any cigarettes, or in whose place of business title to any cigarettes is transferred within the corporate limits of the city, for any purpose other than resale. 
    Stamp means a small gummed piece of paper or decal to be sold by the collector of city taxes and to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold at retail in the city, and also any insignia or symbols printed by a meter machine upon any such package under the authorization of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1981, § 34-230; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-442. - Levy; rate and amount of tax; payment generally. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city upon every person who sells or uses cigarettes within the city an excise tax equivalent to $0.90 for each package of cigarettes sold or used within the city. The tax shall be paid by the seller, if not previously paid, in the same manner and at the time provided in the following provisions of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-231; Ord. No. 16-36, 9-6-2016) 
Sec. 106-443. - To be construed as additional tax. 
    The tax levied and imposed by this article shall be construed to be in addition to all other taxes of every kind levied and imposed by any other ordinance of the city or law. 
(Code 1981, § 34-232) 
Sec. 106-444. - Manner of payment. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be paid by affixing or causing to be affixed a stamp or stamps, of the proper denominational or face value, to every package of cigarettes sold within the city, in the manner and at the time or times provided in the following provisions of this article. Every dealer and every seller in the city shall have the right to buy such stamps from the collector of city taxes and to affix the stamps to packages of cigarettes as provided in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-233; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-445. - Duty of local dealers and sellers as to purchasing, affixing, etc., stamps. 
(a)  Every local dealer in cigarettes shall purchase such stamps at the office of the collector of city taxes as shall be necessary to pay the tax levied and imposed by this article and to affix, or cause to be affixed, a stamp or stamps of the monetary value prescribed by this article to each package of cigarettes prior to delivery or furnishing of such cigarettes to any seller; provided, however, that nothing contained in this article shall preclude any dealer from using a stamp meter machine in lieu of gummed stamps to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Stamps or the printed markings of a meter machine shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such manner as to be readily visible to the purchaser. 
(c)  Every seller shall examine each package of cigarettes prior to exposing the package for sale, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such package has the proper stamps affixed thereto or imprinted thereon, as provided by this article. 
(d)  If, upon such examination, unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes are discovered, the seller, where such cigarettes were obtained from a local dealer, shall immediately notify such dealer, and upon such notification, such dealer shall forthwith either affix to, or imprint upon, such unstamped or improperly stamped packages the proper amount of stamps or shall replace such packages with others to which stamps have been properly affixed or imprinted thereon. 
(e)  Should a seller have in his possession any unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes, or should a seller obtain or acquire possession, from any person other than a local dealer, of any unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes, such seller shall, forthwith before selling, offering or exposing such cigarettes for sale in the city, purchase and affix or cause to be affixed to such packages of cigarettes the proper stamps, or the markings of a meter machine, covering the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-234; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-446. - Preparation, sale, etc., of stamps. 
    For the purpose of making stamps available for use, the commissioner of the revenue shall prepare and furnish to the collector of city taxes, and the collector of city taxes shall sell, stamps of such denominations and in such quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the taxes imposed by this article. In the sale of such stamps, the collector of city taxes shall allow a discount of five percent of the denominational or face value thereof to cover the costs which will be incurred in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. If printing by an authorized meter machine is used in lieu of gummed stamps, there shall be allowed a discount of six percent of the denominational or face value of the imprints of such stamps so printed by such meter machine to cover the costs incurred in printing such imprints. 
(Code 1981, § 34-235; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-447. - Change in design of stamps. 
    The commissioner of the revenue may, from time to time, and as often as he may deem advisable, provide for the issuance and exclusive use of stamps of a new design, and forbid the use of stamps of any other design. 
(Code 1981, § 34-236) 
Sec. 106-448. - Use of meter machine. 
    The commissioner of the revenue may permit the payment in advance of the tax levied and imposed by this article by the method of placing imprints of such stamps upon original packages by the use of meter machines in lieu of the methods of paying such tax by the purchase and affixing of gummed stamps and may prescribe and enforce the necessary regulations setting forth the method to be employed and the conditions to be observed in the use of such meter machines. 
(Code 1981, § 34-237) 
Sec. 106-449. - Use by wholesaler of dual die or stamp to evidence payment of cigarette taxes. 
    The commissioner of the revenue may enter into an arrangement with the state department of taxation under which any tobacco wholesaler who so desires may use a dual die or stamp to evidence the payment of both the tax levied by this article and the state tax on cigarettes. 
(Code 1981, § 34-238) 
Sec. 106-450. - Refund for unused stamps and imprints. 
(a)  Should any person, after acquiring from the collector of city taxes any stamps provided for in this article cease to be engaged in a business necessitating the use thereof, or should any such stamps become mutilated and unfit for use other than by cancellation as provided in this article, such person shall be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount of stamps so acquired and not used by him, less five percent of the denominational or face amount thereof, upon presenting such stamps to the commissioner of the revenue and furnishing the commissioner of the revenue with an affidavit showing to his satisfaction that such stamps were acquired by such person and have not in any manner been used, and the reason for requesting such refund. 
(b)  In the case of any authorized meter machine, should any imprints of such machine theretofore paid for not be used, such persons shall, upon furnishing the commissioner of the revenue with a similar affidavit, be entitled to a refund of the denominational or face amount thereof less six percent of the denominational or face amount of such imprints of such machines not so used. 
(Code 1981, § 34-239; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-451. - Seizure and sale of cigarettes by commissioner of the revenue. 
(a)  Whenever the commissioner of the revenue shall discover cigarettes described in subsection (b) of this section that are subject to the tax imposed by this article and upon which the tax has not been paid or upon which stamps have not been affixed or evidence of such tax shows thereon by the printed markings of an authorized meter machine, as in this article required, the commissioner of the revenue may forthwith seize and take possession of such cigarettes, which shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the city, and he may, within a reasonable time thereafter, after written notice posted at the front door of the city hall of at least five days before the date of sale, sell such forfeited cigarettes at the time and place designated in such notice, and from the proceeds of such sale shall collect the tax due thereon, together with a penalty of 50 percent thereof and the costs incurred in such proceedings, and pay the balance, if any, of such proceeds to the person in whose possession such forfeited cigarettes were found; provided, however, that such seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from any fine provided for the violation of the provisions of this article. All monies collected under the provisions of this section shall be paid to the collector of city taxes and treated as other taxes collected under this article. 
(b)  Cigarettes found in quantities of more than six cartons within the city shall be conclusively presumed for sale or use within the city and may be seized and confiscated if: 
(1)  They are in transit, and are not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and of the consignee or purchaser, and the brands and quantity of cigarettes so transported, or are in transit and accompanied by a bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent, in whole or in part; or 
(2)  They are in transit and are accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating: 
a.  A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such tobacco products on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid, unless the tax of the state or district of destination has been paid and such products bear the tax stamps of that state or district; or 
b.  A consignee or purchaser in the commonwealth but outside the city who does not possess a commonwealth sales and use tax certificate, a commonwealth retail cigarette license and, where applicable, both a business license and retail cigarette license issued by the local jurisdiction of destination; or 
(3)  They are not in transit and the tax has not been paid, nor have approved arrangements for payment been made, provided that this subsection shall not apply to cigarettes in the possession of distributors or public warehouses which have filed notice and appropriate proof with the city that those cigarettes are temporarily within the city and will be sent to consignees or purchasers outside the city in the normal course of business. 
(c)  The mere possession of untaxed cigarettes in quantities of not more than six cartons shall not be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-240; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3832. 
Sec. 106-452. - Presumption against seller consequent upon possession of unstamped cigarettes. 
    In the event cigarettes described in section 106-451 are found in the possession of a seller without the proper stamps being affixed there to or without authorized printed markings of a meter machine thereon, and the seller shall be unable to submit evidence establishing that he received such cigarettes within the immediately preceding 48 hours, and that he has not offered the cigarettes for sale, the presumption shall be that such cigarettes are being kept by such seller in violation of the provisions of this article and shall subject him to the penalties provided. 
(Code 1981, § 34-241) 
Sec. 106-453. - Records of local dealers and sellers. 
    Every local dealer and seller shall maintain and keep, for a period of two years, such record of cigarettes sold and delivered by him as may be required by the commissioner of the revenue and shall make all such records available for examination by the commissioner of the revenue, upon demand, at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1981, § 34-242) 
Sec. 106-454. - Examination of books, cigarettes, etc. 
    The commissioner of the revenue, at reasonable times, may examine books, records, invoices, papers and all cigarettes in and upon any premises where the cigarettes are placed, stored, sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale by a seller. 
(Code 1981, § 34-243) 
Sec. 106-455. - Rules and regulations. 
    The commissioner of the revenue may prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the method and means to be used in the cancellation of stamps and to all other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 34-244) 
Sec. 106-456. - Illegal acts. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person: 
(1)  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof; for any dealer or seller with intent to violate any provision of this article to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this article or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which the commissioner of the revenue may issue under this article; 
(2)  To falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp or the printed markings of any meter machine, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp or printed markings of a meter machine, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps or printed markings of a meter machine; 
(3)  To sell, as defined in this article, any cigarettes upon which the tax imposed by this article has not been paid and upon which evidence of payment thereof is not shown on each package of cigarettes; 
(4)  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid, have been removed; or 
(5)  To remove from any package any stamp or the printed markings of a meter machine with intent to use or cause the stamps or printed markings to be used after the stamps or printed markings have already been used, or to buy, sell, or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps or printed markings of a meter machine, to any person, or to reuse any stamp or printed markings of a meter machine which had theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article, or, except as to the collector of city taxes, to sell, or offer to sell, any stamp or printed markings of a meter machine provided for this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-245; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 106-457. - Violations of article generally. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Conviction and punishment for such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment of any tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 34-246) 

Chapter 107 - COMMERCIAL PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY FINANCING PROGRAM

Sec. 107-1. - Commercial property assessed clean energy financing program; established; purpose.
(a)City Council hereby establishes the commercial property assessed clean energy financing program; (C-PACE), under the authority of Code of Virginia § 15.2-958.3. Under C-PACE, the City may authorize contracts to provide loans for the initial acquisition and installation of clean energy improvements with free and willing property owners of both existing properties and new construction. In addition, private lending institutions shall be provided the opportunity to participate in C-PACE.(b)The purpose of C-PACE is to promote the renovation and construction of commercial, nonprofit and multi-family buildings and structures by incorporating renewable energy production and distribution facilities, energy usage efficiency improvements, or water usage efficiency improvements. City council finds that this will promote the general health and welfare of the community. Water usage efficiency improvements, in particular, benefit the public water supply and wastewater treatment services provided by the city.(c)In establishing C-PACE, the city council finds that Petersburg has numerous older buildings with many years of remaining life, and that the renovation, retrofit, or rehabilitation of these buildings with qualifying clean energy improvements would make them more efficient and reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. The rehabilitation of commercial and industrial buildings and structures that are at least 40 years old, in particular, supports the same public purposes advanced by the historic preservation efforts of this city.(d)City council further finds that the promotion and development of new buildings and structures with energy efficient or water efficient features that exceed current building code requirements, or which use renewable energy will enhance the real property tax base of the city, make these buildings, if rented, more attractive to tenants, and thereby promote employment and economic growth in the city.
(Ord. No. 19-37, § 1, 7-2-2019)

Sec. 107-2. - Definitions.
Borrower means the person, as defined in Code of Virginia § 1-230, who owns or leases an eligible property and voluntarily applies for and obtains a C-PACE loan, or that person's successor in title.

Borrower certificate means a notarized certificate from borrower, certifying that (i) borrower is (A) current on payments on all loans secured by a mortgage or deed of trust lien on the property, (B) current on real and personal property tax payments, (C) current on all federal, state, and local taxes and that there is no federal income tax lien, judgment lien, or other involuntary lien against the property, and (D) not insolvent or in bankruptcy proceedings, and (ii) that the title of the benefitted property is not in dispute as evidenced by a title report or title insurance commitment from a title insurance company acceptable to capital provider and city.

C-PACE Memorandum means a Memorandum of C-PACE assessment lien, which shall (i) be executed by borrower, capital provider, and the city, (ii) include the amortization schedule, and (iii) be recorded in the clerk's office against the property at closing to evidence the C-PACE voluntary special assessment lien and to secure the repayment of the C-PACE financing to the capital provider.

Capital provider means the private lending institution that originates a C-PACE loan, or its successors or assigns in interest; or, if city council appropriates funds for this purpose and if applicable, the city. The capital provider is the source of funding for, or the current holder of, CPACE loans.

Cost as applied to qualifying improvements shall include the cost of all (a) labor, (b) materials, machinery and equipment, (c) architectural, engineering, consulting (such as energy audits and assessments, feasibility studies and reports, and financial projections), financial and legal services, (d) plans, specifications and studies, (e) physical and building condition surveys, (f) commissioning expenses, (g) project management, (h) energy savings or performance guaranty or insurance, (i) postinstallation evaluation, measurement and verification, and building accreditation, (j) permitting fees, (k) due diligence, financing, and closing costs for the C-PACE Loan, including administrative and capital provider fees that are directly attributable to a qualifying improvement, and (1) reserves for construction period interest.

Program means the commercial property assessed clean energy financing program created by this article.

Program administrator means (i) an independent third party whose services are procured by the city, or (ii) the city manager or his or her designee.

Program guidelines means those procedures, rules, disclosures, and restrictions promulgated, imposed and enforced by the program administrator for the administration of the program.

Project means the development of qualifying improvements on an Eligible Property.

Property means an eligible property as defined in section 107-4 located within the City of Petersburg, for which a program loan is applied for or received.

(Ord. No. 19-37, § 1, 7-2-2019)

Sec. 107-3. - Qualifying improvements.
The cost of the following types of qualifying improvements to existing buildings and structures, or new construction, on Eligible Property, may be financed through C-PACE.

(1)Renewable energy production and distribution facilities, including but not limited to, solar photovoltaic, solar thermal, geothermal, wind, fuel cells, biomass systems, biogas or methane recovery systems.(2)Energy usage efficiency systems reasonably expected to reduce the energy usage of the eligible property, including but not limited to, high efficiency lighting and building systems, heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) upgrades, air duct sealing, high efficiency boilers and furnaces, high efficiency hot water heating systems, combustion and burner upgrades, fuel switching, heat recovery and steam traps, cogeneration systems, building shell or envelope improvements, reflective roof, cool roof or green roof systems, weather-stripping, fenestration and door improvements and modifications, insulation (both in walls, roofs, floors and foundations and in HVAC systems' radiant barriers), building energy management systems, process equipment upgrades, and other forms of conservation; provided, that for qualifying improvements that are part of a new building or structure, such qualifying improvements shall exceed the minimum energy efficiency requirements of then-applicable law, ordinance, regulation or code.(3)Water usage efficiency improvements, such as recovery, purification, recycling and other forms of water conservation. For new construction, these improvements qualify for CPACE financing only if they exceed the minimum water usage efficiency requirements of then-applicable law, ordinance, regulation, or code.(4)Construction, renovation or retrofitting of eligible property directly related to the accomplishment of any purpose listed in clauses 1, 2, or 3, above, whether such qualifying improvement was erected or installed in or on a building or on the ground, it being the express intention of the city to allow qualifying improvements that constitute, or are part of, the construction of a new structure or building to be financed with a C-PACE loan.(5)Any other category of improvement approved by the city manager as qualifying for financing under C-PACE, with the concurring written opinion of either the city attorney or other legal counsel engaged to serve as counsel for C-PACE that such improvement is authorized by or consistent with the commonwealth's authorizing legislation for C-PACE programs.(6)The sample list of eligible improvements published by the Mid-Atlantic PACE Alliance dated June 2018 is non-exhaustive and may be used as a guide in determining which proposed improvements qualify for C-PACE funding.
(Ord. No. 19-37, § 1, 7-2-2019)

Sec. 107-4. - Eligible properties.
Eligible properties include all assessable real estate located within the City of Petersburg, with all buildings located or to be located thereon, whether vacant or occupied, whether improved or unimproved, and regardless of whether such real estate is currently subject to taxation by the city, other than (a) any condominium project as defined in Code of Virginia § 55-79.2, or (b) any residential property containing four or fewer dwelling units. Eligible properties shall be eligible to participate in C-PACE.

(Ord. No. 19-37, § 1, 7-2-2019)

Sec. 107-5. - Program arrangements.
(a)The capital providers for C-PACE may be private lending institutions. Public funds may be the source of C-PACE funding to the extent appropriated for that purpose by city council(b)The time period during which borrowers shall repay the C-PACE loan shall not exceed the weighted average useful life of the qualifying improvements or 20 years, whichever is less. However, the maximum term of a C-PACE loan for solar improvements shall be 25 years.(c)C-PACE loan payments shall be combined with the city's real property tax billing and collection, and payable into the treasury of the city. The collector of taxes shall apply any loan payment first to the city's real estate taxes, penalties, and interest which are due and payable on the date of receipt of the payment, and second, upon having paid all real estate taxes due, to the C-PACE voluntary special assessment in accordance with the C-PACE loan documents. Borrower shall notify the capital provider and the collector of taxes if any CPACE loan payment is a prepayment, at the time the payment is made.(d)The interest rate of a C-PACE loan shall be determined by mutual agreement of the borrower and the capital provider.(e)All of the costs incidental to the financing, administration, and collection of the C-PACE loan shall be borne by the borrower. C-PACE is intended to be self-financed through fees that are designed to cover the costs to design and administer the program, including the compensation of any third-party administrator. The city manager shall collect a non-refundable program application fee from the borrower upon receipt of an application for C-PACE financing. In addition, the city shall impose a fixed fee to be collected with each loan payment, which shall be stated in the written contract between the city, borrower, and capital provider. The amounts of these fees shall be established by city council by resolution from time to time as needed.(f)The minimum amount of any single C-PACE loan shall be $20,000. The maximum amount of any single C-PACE loan shall be $5,000,000.00. The maximum aggregate dollar amount that may be financed through C-PACE is $15,000,000.00. In the event that applications for C-PACE financing appear likely to exceed the maximum aggregate dollar amount, priority shall be given to applicants on a first-come, first-served basis.(g)The program administrator is authorized and directed to prepare program guidelines for C-PACE loans consistent with the DRAFT provided to council at the time of adoption of this article. The program guidelines shall include, without limitation:(1)Disclosures about C-PACE fees, costs, and program processes;(2)Eligibility requirements for participation in the program by capital providers, contractors and other PACE stakeholders;(3)Eligibility requirements for borrowers and C-PACE improvements and projects; and(4)Suggested underwriting criteria including, without limitation, underwriting guidelines established by the Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals, and Energy or the MidAtlantic PACE Alliance Regional C-PACE Toolkit published in June 2018, such as financial ratios related to:a.Total loan (including C-PACE loan) to value benchmarks;b.C-PACE assessment to value benchmarks;c.Savings to investment ratio; andd.Debt service coverage ratio.(h)Additional requirements.(1)Every Borrower, on behalf of itself and any affiliated entities whether in existence at the time of the C-PACE application or created thereafter and any of its individual shareholders, principals, managers or other associated individuals, shall (a) waive the right to bid, either directly or indirectly, on the property at any auction held in the course of foreclosure for delinquent real estate taxes or the C-PACE voluntary special assessment, and (b) waive the right to occupy, possess, or use, either directly or indirectly, any eligible property for a period of five years after the date of the foreclosure auction.(2)Every borrower shall:a.Waive all defenses, affirmative or otherwise, to the foreclosure action related to any collection suit brought for the nonpayment of any C-PACE obligation. This waiver shall apply to any litigation action initiated under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or any administrative collection action as afforded the City of Petersburg collector of taxes or their duly appointed collection agent;b.Waive all defenses to the imposition of personal liability for corporate officers as permitted under Virginia Code §58.1-3965(F) and the collection thereof as stated in subparagraph (a) above;c.Agree to provide a confession of judgment pursuant to Virginia Code §8.01432, et seq., if requested by the city or the capital provider to accompany any note related to the financing for any qualifying project.d.These waiver provisions shall be a burden that runs with the land intended to bind successors or assigns in title while any C-PACE obligation remains outstanding.
(Ord. No. 19-37, § 1, 7-2-2019)

Sec. 107-6. - City manager authorization; loan agreements.
(a)A draft contract specifying the terms and conditions of C-PACE loan agreements is adopted as an appendix to this chapter. Each C-PACE loan agreement shall be in substantially the form established by the draft contract, with such additions, deletions or alterations as permitted by this article.(b)The city manager is authorized to enter into C-PACE loan agreements on behalf of the city. The city manager may procure program administration services if needed, to the extent that funds for this purpose are appropriated.(c)The parties to any C-PACE loan agreement shall be the borrower, the capital provider, and the city.(d)The city manager may not execute any C-PACE loan agreement unless the conditions for the priority status of the voluntary special assessment lien are met, in addition to the underwriting requirements.(e)The C-PACE loan documents shall include provisions for the amendment of the C-PACE loan agreement. No capital provider or borrower may amend any C-PACE loan agreement without consent of the city, as evidenced by the signature of the city manager, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed.
(Ord. No. 19-37, § 1, 7-2-2019)

Sec. 107-7. - Voluntary special assessment lien.
(a)A C-PACE loan shall be secured by a voluntary special assessment lien in the amount of the initial C-PACE loan amount, plus all interest, penalties, fees, costs and other amounts accrued or accruing thereon in accordance with the C-PACE loan documents against the property where the qualifying improvements are being installed, the existence, terms and conditions of which shall be evidenced by the recordation of C-PACE memorandum in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the City of Petersburg. The capital provider shall record the memorandum at closing. The capital provider shall inform the commissioner of revenue of any changes to the anticipated yearly assessment, and the collector of taxes of any changes to the amortization schedule, on or before July 1 of each year for which C-PACE loan payments are due.(b)The voluntary special assessment lien shall have the same priority status as a property tax lien against real property so long as (1) a written subordination agreement, in a form and substance acceptable to each prior lien holder in its sole and exclusive discretion, is executed by the holder of each mortgage or deed of trust lien on the property and recorded with the special assessment lien, and (2) a borrower certificate is submitted to the city prior to recording the C-PACE Memorandum.(c)The city's obligation to remit C-PACE payments to the capital provider shall be a limited obligation, only payable if and when installment payments are received from the borrower and not applied by the collector of taxes to the city's real property taxes, penalties, and interest as directed by this article. The collector of taxes shall promptly process, deposit, and credit C-PACE installment payments no later than 45 days after receipt.(d)The voluntary special assessment lien, and the C-PACE Memorandum, shall not be amended without the city's consent, except as provided in the C-PACE loan documents, including, without limitation capital provider's transfer, assignment, or sale as provided in this section. The city's consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. C-PACE loans may be transferred, assigned or sold by a capital provider at any time during the loan term without consent from borrower or the city or any other party; provided that capital provider shall (i) record a C-PACE assignment in the clerk's office, and (ii) deliver a copy of the recorded C-PACE assignment to the commissioner of revenue, the collector of taxes, and program administrator if applicable. The collector of taxes shall not be obligated to remit C-PACE payments to a new capital provider unless a recorded copy of the C-PACE Assignment has been provided to the collector of taxes at least thirty days before the next installment payment due date. Recordation of the C-PACE Assignment shall constitute an assumption by the new capital provider of the C-PACE rights and obligations contained in the C-PACE loan documents.(e)The voluntary special assessment lien shall run with the land. That portion of the assessment that has not yet become due shall not be eliminated by foreclosure of a property tax lien.(f)The voluntary special assessment shall be payable to the collector of taxes in installments over a period of years, due at the same time as real property taxes. C-PACE loans shall not constitute a pledge of the faith and credit of the city.(g)Delinquent payments shall be subject to all fees and collection methods permitted under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia for the collection of delinquent taxes.(h)The collector of taxes shall enforce the voluntary special assessment lien in the same manner that a property tax lien against real property is enforced. the collector of taxes shall be entitled to recover costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, in a suit to collect a delinquent installment of an assessment in the same manner as in a suit to collect delinquent property taxes, including utilizing any administrative remedies provided by Virginia law. The costs and expenses recovered by the collector of taxes shall be in addition to any costs, expenses, interest, or other amounts due and owing to the capital provider in accordance with the CPACE loan documents. For the purposes of enforcement of the voluntary special assessment lien herein, any eligible property which has an outstanding voluntary special assessment imposed pursuant to this article shall be enforceable after June 30 following the first anniversary of either the real estate tax or the special assessment having become due under the authority of Code of Virginia § 58.1-3965.1.
(Ord. No. 19-37, § 1, 7-2-2019)

Sec. 107-8. - Role of the city; limitation of liability.
Borrowers and capital providers participate in C-PACE at their own risk. The city makes no representation or warranty as to the validity, enforceability, priority, or any other character of any CPACE loan agreement or voluntary special assessment lien and borrowers and capital providers agree to release and hold the City of Petersburg harmless from and against any and all liabilities, claims, suits, liens, judgments , damages, losses and expenses, including without limitation, reasonable legal fees and costs arising in whole or in part from acts, omissions, breach or default of borrowers or capital providers in relation to or under the performance of any C-PACE loan agreement.

(Ord. No. 19-37, § 1, 7-2-2019)
Chapter 110 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Standing of vehicles in front of market, § 2-546; duty of vehicle driver upon striking animal, § 18-187; courts, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 70; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 74; using vehicles to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, § 74-237; driving motor vehicle on park walkway, § 78-61; packing or unpacking goods on street or sidewalk, § 98-14. 
State Law reference- Parking facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-967; limited access streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2026; regulation of traffic, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2028; regulation of transportation of certain materials, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2029; identification of disabled parking spaces by above grade signage, Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11; motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq.; licensure of drivers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300 et seq.; local vehicle license, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq.; microcomputer devices, etc., to determine speed, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-882; abandoned vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq.; removal of vehicles involved in accidents, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1212; removal or immobilization of motor vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216; regulation of traffic on certain parking lots, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1219; parking regulations in cities, towns and certain counties, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220; general powers of local governments as to motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Definitions. 
    All definitions of words and phrases contained in the state law adopted by section 110-2 shall apply to such words and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
(Code 1981, § 18-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-2. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia contained in Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. 
(b)  References to highways of the Commonwealth of Virginia contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2, which is adopted by this section; provided that, in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2. 
(Code 1981, § 18-11; Ord. No. 98-110, § 18-11, 7-7-1998; Ord. No. 99-89, § 18-11, 6-15-1999; Ord. No. 00-39, § 18-11, 6-20-2000; Ord. No. 01-44, 6-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-38, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-40, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 04-48, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 05-39, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 05-60, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 06-60, 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 07-57, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 10-54, 7-6-2010; Ord. No. 11-86, 7-19-2011) 
State Law reference- Adoption of future amendments to state statutes, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.39:2. 
Sec. 110-3. - Emergency powers of chief of police to regulate or prohibit traffic or parking. 
    During any emergency, the chief of police shall have power to regulate or prohibit traffic or parking on any street within the city. 
(Code 1981, § 18-4) 
Cross reference- Police department, § 70-31 et seq. 
Sec. 110-4. - Authority of fire department officers to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1981, § 18-5) 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 54-31 et seq. 
Sec. 110-5. - Congested traffic district designated. 
    The congested traffic district of the city shall include all streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: beginning on the south bank of the Appomattox River at Market Street; thence south on Market Street to Halifax Street; thence northeast on Halifax Street to South Avenue; thence east on South Avenue to Harrison Street; thence north on Harrison Street to Wythe Street; thence east on Wythe Street to Jefferson Street; thence north on Jefferson Street to Henry Street; thence east on Henry Street to Fourth Street; thence north on Fourth Street to Bank Street; thence east on Bank Street to Fifth Street; and thence north on Fifth Street to the Appomattox River. 
(Code 1981, § 18-12) 
Sec. 110-6. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, nor to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1981, § 18-13) 
Sec. 110-7. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1981, § 18-14) 
Sec. 110-8. - Identification of funeral processions. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display, upon the outside of each vehicle, of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the traffic division of the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 18-15) 
Sec. 110-9. - Duty of driver to remove temporarily disabled vehicle. 
    The driver of any vehicle which is temporarily disabled while on the paved surface of a street shall remove such vehicle as expeditiously as conditions and circumstances may permit. 
(Code 1981, § 18-18) 
Sec. 110-10. - Additional $200.00 fine for speed limit violation; eligible streets. 
    Residential through streets in the city which are not dead end streets and which have a posted speed limit of not more than 25 miles per hour shall be eligible for designation by the city council as an augmented fine street. 
(Ord. No. 14-109, 12-9-2014) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 46.2-878.2. 
Sec. 110-11. - Procedure for council authorization of additional fine. 
(a)  Upon receipt by the city manager of a petition signed by at least 75 percent of all residential structures having lot frontage upon a residential through street, the city manager shall cause such traffic studies and other investigation as he shall deem material to be conducted and shall thereupon present such petition together with a city staff report to the city council for consideration; or 
(b)  Upon determination by the Petersburg Bureau of Police that a hazard exists on a residential through street warranting an increase in fines, pursuant to section 110-10, on any residential street. 
(Ord. No. 14-109, 12-9-2014) 
Sec. 110-12. - City council designation procedure. 
(a)  Procedure. If, based upon the petition and staff report required under section 110-11, and upon such other information and considerations as the city council shall deem necessary, the city council finds that the additional fine provided for in section 110-10 should apply to the residential through street in question, then the council shall pass a resolution designating said residential through street as an augmented fine street, whereupon the city manager shall take all actions necessary to erect signs as prescribed by Virginia Commonwealth Transportation Board in order to put such additional fine into effect. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Augmented fine street means a street which based upon resolution of the city council is subject to the additional fine provided for in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-878.2. 
    Dead end street means a street which connects with another street at only one end. 
    Hazard means a dangerous situation that poses a threat to life, health, or property. 
    Residence district as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, means the territory contiguous to a street, not comprising a business district, where 75 percent or more of the property contiguous to such street on either side thereof, for a distance of 300 feet or more along the street is occupied by dwellings and land improved for dwelling purposes, or by dwellings, land improved for dwelling purposes and land or buildings in use for business purposes. 
    Residential through street means any street in a residence district having a posted speed limit of not more than 25 miles per hour which is not a dead end street. 
    Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the city, including streets and alleys, and for law enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets which have been specifically subject to city enforcement of city motor vehicle laws by an ordinance adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 14-109, 12-9-2014) 
Secs. 110-13-110-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPLIANCE; ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES 

Sec. 110-31. - Compliance with chapter; general penalty for violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1981, § 18-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions applicable to violations of state traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113; city prohibited from imposing penalty for traffic violation which is greater than penalty imposed by state for similar offense, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300. 
Sec. 110-32. - Enforcement of chapter and direction of traffic by police. 
    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce this chapter and all other traffic ordinances of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to traffic in this city. Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, by voice, hand or signal, in conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1981, § 18-3) 
State Law reference- Duty of police to enforce state traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-102; direction of traffic by police, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1309. 
Sec. 110-33. - Compliance with orders of police and fire department officials. 
    No person shall knowingly fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official given pursuant to authority granted in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 18-6) 
Sec. 110-34. - Signs as prerequisite to enforcement of chapter. 
    No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1981, § 18-7) 
Sec. 110-35. - Arrest procedure for violations of chapter. 
(a)  Whenever any person is detained by or in the custody of an arresting officer, including an arrest on a warrant, for a violation of any provision of this chapter punishable as a misdemeanor, the arresting officer shall, except as otherwise provided in section 110-36, take the name and address of such person and the license number of his motor vehicle and issue a summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time and place to be specified in such summons or notice. Such time shall be at least five days after such arrest unless the person arrested demands an earlier hearing. Such person shall, if he so desires, have a right to an immediate hearing, or a hearing within 24 hours at a convenient hour, before a court having jurisdiction within the city. Upon the giving by such person of his written promise to appear at such time and place, the officer shall forthwith release him from custody. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, if prior general approval has been granted by order of the general district court for the use of this section in cases involving violations of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-301 and 46.2-302, the arresting officer may take the person before the appropriate judicial officer of the city and make oath as to the offense and request issuance of a warrant. If a warrant is issued, the judicial officer shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 19.2-119 et seq. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in cases involving a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-341.24 or 46.2-341.31, the arresting officer shall take the person before a magistrate as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-341.26:2 and 46.2-341.26:3. The magistrate may issue either a summons or a warrant as he shall deem proper. 
(d)  Any person refusing to give such written promise to appear under the provisions of this section shall be taken immediately by the arresting officer before a magistrate or other issuing officer having jurisdiction who shall proceed according to the provisions of section 110-36. 
(e)  Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear, given in accordance with this section, shall be treated in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-938. 
(f)  Any officer violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office and subject to removal therefrom upon complaint filed by any person in a court of competent jurisdiction. This section shall not be construed to limit the removal of a law enforcement officer for other misconduct in office. 
(Code 1981, § 18-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936. 
Sec. 110-36. - When arresting officer shall take person before issuing authority. 
    If any person is (i) believed by the arresting officer to have committed a felony; (ii) believed by the arresting officer to be likely to disregard a summons issued under section 110-35; or (iii) refuses to give a written promise to appear under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936 or 46.2-945; the arresting officer shall promptly take him before a magistrate or other issuing authority having jurisdiction to determine whether probable cause exists that such person is likely to disregard a summons. The magistrate or other authority may issue either a summons or warrant as he shall determine proper. 
(Code 1981, § 18-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940. 
Sec. 110-37. - Traffic infractions treated as misdemeanors for arrest purposes. 
    For purposes of arrest, traffic infractions shall be treated as misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or state law, the authority and duties of arresting officers shall be the same for traffic infractions as for misdemeanors. 
(Code 1981, § 18-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-937. 
Sec. 110-38. - Traffic signal enforcement program. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby established a traffic signal enforcement program pursuant to and in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-968.1. The program shall include the installation and operation of traffic light signal violation monitoring systems in a number up to the maximum number permitted by state law. No traffic light signal violation monitoring system shall be operated for enforcement purposes at an intersection until all prerequisites for such operation have been fulfilled. 
(b)  Implementation. The city manager shall (i) have the authority to implement the provisions of this section, (ii) promulgate the rules and regulations necessary to administer the traffic signal enforcement program in compliance with all requirements of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-968.1, and this section, and (iii) be responsible for the compliance of all aspects of the traffic signal enforcement program with applicable state law. 
(c)  Private contractor. The city may enter into an agreement with a private entity for the installation and operation of traffic light signal violation monitoring systems and related services as permitted by and subject to the restrictions imposed by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-968.1(l). 
(d)  Penalties. Imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a conviction as an operator and shall not be made part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed, nor shall it be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. No monetary penalty imposed under this section shall exceed $50.00, nor shall it include court costs. 
(1)  For failure to comply with traffic light signal. The operator of a vehicle shall be liable for a monetary penalty of $50.00 if such vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic light signal violation monitoring system, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal within the city. Any person found liable under this section may contest the summons as provided by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-968.1. 
(2)  For disclosure of personal information. Any person who discloses personal information collected by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system in violation of the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-968.1(h), shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 12-50, § 1, 5-15-2012) 
Secs. 110-39-110-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-06, § 4, adopted Jan. 17, 2012, repealed Article III, §§ 110-61-110-75, which pertained to the traffic and transportation safety commission and derived from Code 1981, §§ 18-36-18-50. 

Secs. 110-61-110-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC ENGINEER 

Sec. 110-101. - Establishment of office authorized; appointment. 
    The office of city traffic engineer is hereby established. The traffic engineer shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 18-66) 
Sec. 110-102. - Vacancy in office. 
    In the event of any vacancy in the office of the traffic engineer, the director of public works shall serve as traffic engineer, in addition to his other functions, and shall exercise the powers and perform the duties provided in this chapter for the traffic engineer. 
(Code 1981, § 18-67) 
Sec. 110-103. - General duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to exercise the powers and duties provided in this chapter and in other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 18-68) 
Sec. 110-104. - General duties with respect to traffic control devices. 
    The traffic engineer shall install, place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of such ordinances or regulations of the traffic and transportation safety commission. It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to determine the proper timing of such traffic control devices. 
(Code 1981, § 18-69) 
Sec. 110-105. - Designation of crosswalks. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. 
(Code 1981, § 18-70) 
Sec. 110-106. - Establishment of safety zones. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(Code 1981, § 18-71) 
Sec. 110-107. - Marking of traffic lanes. 
    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to make lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with the traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 18-72) 
Sec. 110-108. - Designation of stop and yield intersections. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. 
(b)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way at one or more entrances to any such intersection, and shall erect a yield right-of-way sign at every place where yielding of the right-of-way is required. 
(Code 1981, § 18-73) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301. 
Sec. 110-109. - Installation and maintenance of stop signs at through streets. 
    Whenever any ordinance of the city council or regulation of the traffic and transportation safety commission designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to place and maintain a stop sign on each and every street intersecting such through street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such. 
(Code 1981, § 18-74) 
Sec. 110-110. - Location of stop and yield signs. 
    Signs designated as "stop" or "yield right-of-way" signs erected pursuant to this chapter shall be located, as near as practicable, to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway. 
(Code 1981, § 18-75) 
Sec. 110-111. - Installation and maintenance of one-way street and alley signs. 
    Whenever the traffic and transportation safety commission designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1981, § 18-77) 
Secs. 110-112-110-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE LICENSES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State vehicle registration and licensing fees, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq.; local vehicle license, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-131. - Violations of article generally; violation not discharged except upon obtaining required license. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who shall fail to procure any license and pay the proper tax prescribed by this article, or who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. A violation of this article may not be discharged by payment of a fine except upon presentation of satisfactory evidence that the required license has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-85, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-132. - Duty of police officers with respect to violations; issuance, penalty for failure to pay citations. 
    Whenever a police officer, the commissioner of the revenue, the civil compliance officer, or the license inspector finds an owner or operator to be in violation of this article, that officer shall issue to such owner or operator a citation, in writing, on a form provided by the city, for the owner or operator to appear to answer the charge within ten days at the office of the collector of city taxes. Such owner or operator shall, within such period of ten days, pay to the collector of city taxes, in person, or by mailing a check or money order, a penalty for, and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $100.00, except that when the operator cited is the owner of the vehicle, such violation shall be discharged only by the payment of the aforementioned penalty and presentation of satisfactory evidence that the required license has been obtained. The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within the time period prescribed shall render such violation subject to the penalty provided in section 110-131. The collector of city taxes shall cause to be issued a summons directing such person to appear before the judge of the general district court for citations issued pursuant to this division and not paid within ten days. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-86, 12-6-1996; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Secs. 110-133-110-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAILERS AND SEMITRAILERS 

Sec. 110-151. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the term "resident of the city" shall mean any person having a place of abode in the city, irrespective of any intention on the part of such person to return to, or to establish, a residence outside of the city at some future time, and shall also be construed as embracing any corporation or firm having an office or place of business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-96, 12-6-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 110-152. - License required; exceptions. 
(a)  Every person who shall own or have in his custody or under his control a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer that is normally garaged, stored, or parked in the city shall obtain an annual license for such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. If it cannot be determined where the personal property is normally garaged, stored, or parked, the license shall be obtained if this city is the domicile of its owner. If the owner of the motor vehicle is a full-time student attending an institution of higher education, the license shall be obtained if this city is the domicile of such student, provided the student has presented sufficient evidence that he has paid a personal property tax on the motor vehicle in this city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a resident of the city with respect to a vehicle owned by, or in the custody or under the control of, such resident, if such vehicle is used exclusively for business purposes in connection with a place of business owned and operated in the city, except when passing through the city from a point outside the city to another point outside the city. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a nonresident of the city, with respect to a motor vehicle used exclusively for his personal transportation to and from a place of business in the city. 
(d)  No person shall be required to obtain a license under this division for a vehicle that is exempt from annual registration and license plates under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-662 et seq. 
(e)  Every person, firm, association or corporation who, or which, operates or intends to operate in the city any taxicab or other motor vehicle for the transportation of passengers for a consideration, shall obtain an annual license for such motor vehicle so operated. No such license shall be required for the operation of any such motor vehicle for which a similar license has been issued by another city, county, or town of which the owner or operator of the motor vehicle is a resident, except that such license shall be required by the city for the operation of any such motor vehicle if the owner, lessee or operator thereof maintains a taxicab stand or otherwise solicits business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-97, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-153. - Levy and amount of tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an annual license tax on each vehicle required to be licenses under this division, which tax shall be as set out in the following schedule: 
(1)  Private passenger motor vehicle: 
a.  4,000 pounds and under ..... $ 23.00 
b.  4,001 pounds and over ..... 28.00 
(2)  Truck (pickup or panel): 
a.  4000 pounds gross weight and under ..... 23.00 
b.  4,001 pounds gross weight to 6,500 pounds ..... 28.00 
c.  6,501 pounds gross weight to 10,000 pounds ..... 29.00 
(3)  House trailer: 
a.  4,000 pounds and under ..... 20.50 
b.  4,001 pounds and over ..... 23.00 
(4)  Boat trailer ..... 6.50 
(5)  Utility trailer, not exceeding 1,500 pounds, personal property ..... 6.50 
(6)  Well drill ..... 15.00 
(7)  Bus (used exclusively for divine worship): 
a.  4,000 pounds and under ..... 23.00 
b.  4,001 pounds and over ..... 28.00 
(8)  Semitrailer, "TR" license: 
a.  6,500 pounds and under ..... 17.00 
b.  6,501 pounds and over ..... 22.00 
(9)  Semitrailer, "TRH" license: 
a.  6,500 pounds and under ..... 17.00 
b.  6,501 pounds and over ..... 22.00 
(10)  Motorcycle (with or without sidecar) ..... 16.00 
(11)  Taxicab or other motor vehicles used for transporting passengers for hire, including buses used for charter service from points within the city to points outside the city ..... 100.00 
(b)  The annual license tax on motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, which are not designed and used for the transportation of passengers and which are not listed in the schedule in subsection (a) of this section, shall be in the same amount as the state registration and licensing fees or taxes for such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers; provided, that no such license tax shall be in excess of $208.00 and, in no case, shall such license tax be in excess of $58.00 for a truck, trailer or tractor truck and trailer or semitrailer combination used exclusively for hauling from point to point outside the city or from a point outside the city to a point within the city. 
(c)  Any other provision of this section notwithstanding, in no event shall the annual license tax on any classification of motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers be greater than $3.00 above the rate charged for that classification by the city on January 1, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-98, 12-6-1996) 
State Law reference- State vehicle registration fees, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-685 et seq. 
Sec. 110-154. - When tax payable. 
(a)  The license tax imposed by this division shall be paid on or before June 10 of each year. If a person acquires a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer after June 10 of any year, he shall pay such tax no later than ten days after vehicle purchase. If a person is not a resident of the city on June 10 of any year, or does not operate a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on the streets of the city on such date, he shall pay such tax immediately upon becoming a resident of the city or immediately upon beginning to operate a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on the streets of the city. 
(b)  Any person residing temporarily or permanently within the city, who shall own or have in his custody or under his control a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer bearing an identification or license tag issued by a jurisdiction other than this state, and who shall operate or permit the operation of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on the streets of the city, shall pay the tax imposed by this division at such time as, under the laws and regulations of this state, a state license tax shall be required for such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-99, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-155. - Proration of tax. 
    One-half of the annual tax prescribed by section 110-153 shall be collected, whenever any license required by this division is issued during the period beginning on December 10 in any year and ending on May 10 in any license year. No such proration shall occur when a person paying the tax was liable for but failed to pay the required tax previously in the license year. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-100, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-156. - Issuance of decal generally. 
    Subject to the provisions of section 110-157, when the license tax imposed by this division is paid, a license decal shall be issued for the vehicle for which the tax was paid. Decals for private passenger motor vehicles shall be issued by the collector of city taxes. Decals for all other vehicles licensed under this division shall be issued by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-101, 12-6-1996; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 110-157. - Payment of personal property taxes prerequisite to issuance of decal. 
    No license decal for a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall be issued under this division, unless the applicant produces satisfactory evidence that all personal property taxes upon the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to be licensed have been paid, and satisfactory evidence that any delinquent motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer personal property taxes owing have been paid, which have been properly assessed or are assessable against the applicant by the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-102, 12-6-1996) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752(C). 
Sec. 110-158. - Display of decal. 
    The license decal issued under this division shall be affixed on the windshield of the vehicle for which it was issued at a location designated by the superintendent of the department of state police. If the vehicle has no windshield, the decal shall be affixed thereto in a manner prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-103, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-159. - Replacement of lost, mutilated, etc., decal. 
    If any license decal issued under the provisions of this division is lost or mutilated or becomes illegible, the person who is entitled thereto shall make immediate application for and obtain a duplicate or substitute therefor, upon furnishing information of such fact satisfactory to the officer who issued the decal and upon the payment of $1.00. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-104, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-160. - Transfer of decals. 
    License decals issued under this division may be transferred from one vehicle to another in the same manner and under the same conditions as provided by the laws and regulations governing the transfer of state vehicle license plates. A charge of $1.00 shall be made for each such transfer. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-105, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-161. - Refund of tax. 
    Any person paying a license tax under the requirements of this division shall be entitled to the refund provided for in this section, upon surrendering to the collector of city taxes the decal issued under the provisions of this division, such decal being current and valued at the time of surrender, and upon producing satisfactory evidence that such decal is no longer required under the provisions of this division. The amount to be refunded to such person shall be one-half of the amount of tax paid if the decal is surrendered between January 1 and June 10 of the license year for which it was issued, and one-third of such amount, if surrendered between June 11 and November 10 of such license year. No refund shall be made on or after November 11 of such year. For purposes of this division, the license year shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31 of the current year. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-106, 12-6-1996; Ord. No. 14-83, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 110-162. - Records to be kept. 
    The collector of city taxes and the commissioner of the revenue shall keep a record of each license decal issued by them under this division, showing the number of such decal, the person to whom issued, the make, model and engine number of the vehicle for which issued and the state license number of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-107, 12-6-1996; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 110-163. - Display of licenses pursuant to regional compact. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752(K), and the Appomattox River Regional Compact for Local Motor Vehicle License Enforcement ("compact") entered into by the Counties of Prince George and Dinwiddie, and the cities of Colonial Heights, Hopewell and Petersburg ("participating jurisdictions"): 
(1)  Any owner or operator of a motor vehicle who is required to display a local motor vehicle license for that vehicle by any participating jurisdiction must display such license at all times while such vehicle is operated or parked in the city. 
(2)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(3)  Enforcement of this section shall be conducted in the same manner as prescribed for vehicles owned or operated by a resident of the city. 
a.  When the operator is the owner of the cited vehicle, such violation shall be discharged by payment of the requisite fine and presentation of satisfactory evidence that the required license has been obtained. 
b.  When the operator is not the owner of the cited vehicle, the violation may be discharged by payment of the requisite fine. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-108, 12-6-1996; Ord. No. 97-84, § 16-108, 6-17-1997) 
Secs. 110-164-110-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ONE-HORSE WAGONS, CARTS AND SIMILAR VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 18. 

Sec. 110-181. - License required. 
    No person shall operate or use, upon the streets of the city, any one-horse wagon, coach, carriage, cart, buggy, gig or other vehicle of like kind, unless such vehicle is currently licensed under this division. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-119, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-182. - License tax. 
    There shall be charged on every one-horse wagon, coach, carriage, cart, buggy, gig or other vehicle of like kind used on the streets of the city an annual license tax of $5.00. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-120, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-183. - Issuance and display of tag. 
(a)  Upon the payment of the license tax imposed by this division, the commissioner of the revenue shall issued a numbered license tag for the vehicle for which the tax was paid. Such tag shall be attached on the outside of the righthand side of such vehicle. 
(b)  No vehicle required to be licensed under this division shall be operated in the city, unless the license tag is displayed thereon in accord with this section. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-121, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-184. - Replacement of lost tag. 
    If the owner of a vehicle licensed under this division shall furnish to the commissioner of the revenue satisfactory proof of the loss of his license tag, the commissioner shall issue to him a duplicate tag, bearing the same number as the original, upon the payment of $1.00 into the city treasury. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-122, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-185. - Transfer of tag. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer a tag issued under this division from one vehicle to another, unless the vehicle for which the tag was issued is temporarily disabled. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-123, 12-6-1996) 
Sec. 110-186. - Numbering of licensed vehicles. 
    Every vehicle for which a license tax is paid under this division shall be numbered, in large figures that may be easily read, and the numbers shall be conspicuously placed on the right side of such vehicle. It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to give notice of the provisions of this section to every person obtaining a license for such a vehicle at the time of issuing such license. Any person who shall fail to comply with any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00 for every such offense and every week of such failure shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-183a, § 16.1-124, 12-6-1996) 
Secs. 110-187-110-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 110-211. - Driving while under influence of alcohol or drugs; adoption of state law. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-278 et seq. and 18.2-266 et seq., except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. References to highways of this state or commonwealth contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length in this section, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with and provision of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section; provided that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  The provisions of the aforementioned sections shall include future amendments to the state statutes to which references are therein made. 
(Code 1981, § 18-107; Ord. No. 98-110, § 18-107, 7-7-1998; Ord. No. 99-89, § 18-107, 6-15-1999; Ord. No. 00-39, § 18-107, 6-20-2000; Ord. No. 01-44, 6-19-2001; Ord. No. 02-38, 6-18-2002; Ord. No. 03-40, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 04-48, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 05-39, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 05-60, 7-5-2005; Ord. No. 06-60, 6-20-2006; Ord. No. 07-57, 6-19-2007) 
State Law reference- Adoption of future amendments to state statutes, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.39:2. 
Sec. 110-212. - Driving dangerous vehicles or when vision obscured. 
    No vehicle shall be driven or operated when so constructed, including equipment, or loaded as to be dangerous or to retard or prevent the driver from having a view sufficient for safety. 
(Code 1981, § 18-108) 
Sec. 110-213. - Driving through funeral or other processions. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a funeral or other authorized procession, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1981, § 18-109) 
State Law reference- Right-of-way of funeral processions under police escort, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828. 
Sec. 110-214. - Driving in funeral or other processions. 
    Each driver of a vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1981, § 18-110) 
Sec. 110-215. - Obstructing intersections or crosswalks. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1981, § 18-111) 
Sec. 110-216. - Entering or leaving limited-access roadway. 
    No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Code 1981, § 18-113) 
Sec. 110-217. - Driving on streets newly paved, repaired or closed to traffic. 
    When authorized signs or markers are erected indicating that any street or part thereof is newly paved, repaired or closed to traffic, no person shall drive any vehicle over any such street until the street is officially opened to traffic. 
(Code 1981, § 18-115) 
Sec. 110-218. - Backing. 
    No vehicle shall be backed without the driver first indicating, by some sign or signal, his intention to back, and no vehicle shall be backed in any street if, by so doing, any other vehicle is impeded or any pedestrian is endangered. No vehicle shall, in any event or on any street, be backed a greater distance than 25 feet, unless it is necessary to relieve a traffic jam or on orders from a police officer. 
(Code 1981, § 18-117) 
Sec. 110-219. - Operation of go-carts on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, on the streets of the city, any self-propelled vehicle of the type commonly known as a go-cart, weighing less than 500 pounds, designed for transporting a person. 
(Code 1981, § 18-118) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 110-220. - Operation of certain trucks prohibited on portions of Sycamore Street. 
    The operation of trucks of 11/2-ton rating or over on North Sycamore Street, between Washington and Bollingbrook Streets, and on South Sycamore Street, from Wythe Street south to Crater Road, is hereby prohibited; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed as prohibiting the use of trucks on such streets for the purpose of receiving loads or making deliveries on such streets or in the area served by such streets. 
(Code 1981, § 18-119) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1304. 
Sec. 110-221. - Permit for operation of traction engines or tractors. 
    The chief of police may issue special permits, limited to such time as he may deem proper, authorizing the operation upon a street of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable tracks. A fee of $2.00 shall be charged for each such permit at the time of issuance. 
(Code 1981, § 18-120) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1046. 
Sec. 110-222. - Drinking while operating motor vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage while driving a motor vehicle upon a public street, road or highway within the city. 
(Code 1981, § 18-121) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10. 
Secs. 110-223-110-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city to operate parking facilities, § 4-8. 
Cross reference- Parking or stopping buses or taxicabs, § 118-2. 
State Law reference- Authority for local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-251. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  Within an intersection. 
(3)  On a crosswalk. 
(4)  Within 30 feet upon the approach of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal at the side of a roadway. 
(5)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic engineer has indicated a different length by signs or markings. 
(6)  Within 40 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(7)  Upon the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of such entrance, when properly signposted. 
(8)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(9)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(10)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(11)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(12)  In spaces clearly marked as reserved for disabled persons, whether public or private property, unless such vehicle clearly displays a special parking permit or special license plates issued to persons with disabilities or to disabled veterans. 
(13)  In an area designated as a fire lane. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any area prohibited under this section or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1981, § 18-132) 
State Law reference- Parking in front of driveways, near fire hydrants, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239. 
Sec. 110-252. - Authority of traffic and transportation safety commission. 
    The traffic and transportation safety commission may prohibit or regulate the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles upon any street or alley, not expressly regulated by an ordinance of the city council, by causing to be erected official signs indicating the restrictions. 
(Code 1981, § 18-133) 
Sec. 110-253. - Authority of traffic engineer to designate temporary no parking areas. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to temporarily designate no parking areas in hazardous or congested places and to temporarily remove parking in any emergency situation. Permanent removal of parking shall be subject to traffic and transportation safety commission approval. 
(Code 1981, § 18-134) 
Sec. 110-254. - Signs giving notice of parking limits and prohibitions on designated streets. 
    Whenever, in this chapter or any other ordinance of the city or any regulation of the traffic and transportation safety commission, any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the traffic engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(Code 1981, § 18-135) 
Sec. 110-255. - Parking or standing on private property. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any private lot or lot area, without the express or implied consent of the owner thereof. Whenever signs or markings have been erected on any lot or lot area contiguous or adjacent to a street, thoroughfare or alley, indicating that no vehicles are permitted to stand or park thereon, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across any curb or lot line or over any driveway from a street or alley into such lot or area for the purpose of standing or parking such vehicle, or for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in such lot or lot area. 
(Code 1981, § 18-136) 
Sec. 110-256. - Right-of-way of vehicle backing into vacant parking space over following vehicle. 
    A person stopping a vehicle on a street for the purpose of backing the vehicle into a vacant parking space shall have a prior right over a following vehicle to the use of such space for parking, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of such following vehicle to drive the vehicle into such space or partially into such space or to otherwise place his vehicle in such a position as to prevent the backing of the first vehicle into such parking space. 
(Code 1981, § 18-137) 
Sec. 110-257. - Parking in or near safety lanes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any safety lane established by the traffic and transportation safety commission or within ten feet thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 18-138) 
Sec. 110-258. - Time limits. 
(a)  Certain trucks. No person shall park any truck, trailer, camping trailer, tractor truck, or semitrailer of a total outside width, including any boat or other load thereon, of more than 76 inches, or total height, including any boat or other load thereon, of more than 78 inches, on any street within the city for a period of time longer than two hours. 
(b)  Inoperable vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, for more than 24 hours, on any street or any parking lot belonging to or operated by the city, any motor vehicle which is incapable of being operated. 
(Code 1981, §§ 18-139, 18-140) 
Sec. 110-259. - Parking unlicensed vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, on any street or parking lot belonging to or operated by the city, any motor vehicle on which currently legal license plates are not properly displayed. 
(Code 1981, § 18-141) 
Sec. 110-260. - Parking for purpose of repairing vehicle. 
    No person shall park a vehicle on any roadway for the principal purpose of repairing such vehicle, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1981, § 18-142) 
Sec. 110-261. - Stopping for the purpose of advertising. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop a vehicle at any time, upon any street, for the purpose of advertising any articles of any kind, or displaying thereupon advertisements of any article, or advertisements for the sale of the vehicle itself. 
(Code 1981, § 18-143) 
Sec. 110-262. - Washing, polishing or greasing vehicle on street or sidewalk. 
    No person shall, for compensation, wash, polish or grease a vehicle upon a street or sidewalk, nor shall the owner of a vehicle permit it to be washed, polished or greased, for compensation, upon a street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1981, § 18-144) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 110-263. - Permits for backing to curb for loading or unloading. 
    The chief of police is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this section. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1981, § 18-147) 
Sec. 110-264. - Designation and use of loading zones. 
(a)  The traffic and transportation safety commission is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(c)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials, in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1981, § 18-148) 
Sec. 110-265. - Duty of officers with respect to parking violations; issuance, payment, contest, etc., of parking citations; penalty for failure to respond to citation. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by, or pursuant to, state law, an ordinance of this city or the rules, regulations, restrictions or prohibitions made, adopted or imposed, by the traffic and transportation safety commission or the traffic engineer, the officer or other persons appointed by the city manager to enforce this article, in addition to the regular police officers of the city, finding such vehicle, shall take its registration number, and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a written citation, on a form provided by the city. Such driver may, within ten days, pay to the collector of city taxes, in person, or by mailing a check or money order, as a penalty for, and in full satisfaction of, such violation, the sum of $20.00. If the fine is not paid within the ten days to the collector of city taxes, the fine will double. The amount of such penalty for the violation of the ordinances or regulations relating to overtime parking shall be the sum of $20.00; the amount of such penalty for the violation of the ordinances or regulations relating to parking within 15 feet of fire hydrants and in fire lanes shall be $50.00; and, in special spaces reserved for disabled persons the penalty shall be the sum of $150.00. Such payment shall constitute a plea of guilty of the violation in question. Parking on or driving over a city curb to park on private or public property shall be a $50.00 fine. 
(b)  Any person who shall desire to contest a parking citation, shall present this citation at the office of the collector of city taxes, who shall certify it, on an appropriate form, to the general district court. If payment or presentment of such citation for certification to the general district court is not postmarked or received by the collector of city taxes within ten days after receipt of such citation, the violator shall be subject to payment of double the penalty as provided in this section. 
(c)  The failure of such owner to make such payment or present such citation to the collector of city taxes for certification to the general district court shall, within 30 days after receipt of such citation, render such violator subject to the penalty provided in section 110-31. 
    Overtime parking means a vehicle that remains parked in such parking space beyond the parking limit, as indicated by the parking sign, such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and the parking of a vehicle overtime in any part of a street where any such sign is located shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1981, § 18-152; Ord. No. 97-124, § 18-152, 9-16-1997; Ord. No. 16-18, 4-19-2016; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Uncontested payment of parking citations and certification of contest of parking citation, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1220, 46.2-1225, 46.2-1242. 
Sec. 110-266. - Procedure for delinquent parking citations. 
(a)  The collector of city taxes shall cause a complaint or summons to be issued for citations issued pursuant to section 110-265 and not paid or presented for certification pursuant to such section within 30 days. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, before any summons shall issue for the prosecution of a violation covered by a citation issued under section 110-265, the violator shall have been first notified, by registered or certified mail at his last known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the state department of motor vehicles, that he may pay the fine provided by law for such violation, within five days of receipt of such notice, and the officer issuing such summons shall be notified that the violator has failed to pay such fine within such time. The notice to the violator, required by the provisions of this section, shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "Law Enforcement Notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in type at least one-half inch in height. 
(Code 1981, § 18-153; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-941, 46.2-1225. 
Sec. 110-267. - Presumption in prosecutions for parking violations. 
    In any prosecution charging the violation of any law, ordinance, rule, regulation, restriction or prohibition governing the parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint, summons, parking ticket citation or warrant was parked in violation of such law, ordinance, rule, regulation, restriction or prohibition, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint, summons, parking ticket citation or warrant was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq., shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where and at the time during which such violation occurred. This presumption shall apply only when the procedure described in sections 110-265 and 110-266 has been followed. 
(Code 1981, § 18-154) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 110-268. - Removal or immobilization of motor vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violations. 
    Any motor vehicle parked on the public highways or public grounds against which there are three or more unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices may be removed to a place within the city or in an adjacent locality designated by the chief of police for the temporary storage of the vehicle, or the vehicle may be immobilized in a manner which will prevent its removal or operation except by authorized law enforcement personnel. The removal or immobilization of the vehicle shall be by or under the direction of, an officer or employee of the police department. It shall be the duty of the law enforcement personnel removing or immobilizing the motor vehicle or under whose direction such vehicle is removed or immobilized, to inform as soon as practicable the owner of the removed or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this section, there shall be placed on the vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, a notice warning that the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle might damage it. The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other person acting on his behalf, shall be allowed at least 24 hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle. Failure to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle within that time period may result in the removal of the vehicle to a storage area for safekeeping under the direction of law enforcement personnel. The owner of the removed or immobilized motor vehicle, or other person acting on his behalf, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle by payment of the outstanding parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized and by payment of all costs incidental to the immobilization, removal, and storage of the vehicle, and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. Should the owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of the owner be unknown and unascertainable, the motor vehicle may be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213. 
(Code 1981, § 18-155) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216. 
Sec. 110-269. - Removal or alteration of marks placed upon vehicle in furtherance of enforcement of parking regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to evade the enforcement of any violation of this article, to remove or alter any mark placed upon a vehicle by a police officer or other person appointed by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this article. Additionally, it shall be unlawful for any person with the intent to evade the enforcement of any violation of this article to move or relocate such marked vehicle from one location to another in the same public parking lot. 
(Code 1981, § 18-156) 
Sec. 110-270. - Passing stopped school buses; civil penalty. 
    The school division may install and operate a video-monitoring system on any school bus operated by the division for the purpose of recording violations as provided for in this section. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle approaching from any direction a clearly marked school bus which is stopped on any highway or school driveway for the purpose of taking on or discharging children, the elderly, or mentally or physically handicapped persons, who, in violation of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859, as amended, fails to stop and remain stopped until all such persons are clear of the highway or school driveway, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250.00 and any such prosecution shall be instituted and conducted in the same manner as prosecutions for traffic infractions. 
(b)  A prosecution or proceeding under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859, as amended, shall be a bar to a prosecution or proceeding under this section for the same act, and a prosecution or proceeding under this section shall be a bar to a prosecution or proceeding under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859, as amended, for the same act. 
(c)  In any prosecution for which a summons charging a violation of this section was issued within ten days of the alleged violation, proof that the motor vehicle described in the summons was operated in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such violation the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia, title 46.2, chapter 6, as amended, shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who operated the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(d)  The testimony of the school bus driver, the supervisor of school buses or a law enforcement officer that the vehicle was yellow, conspicuously marked as a school bus, and equipped with warning devices as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-844, as amended, is prima facie evidence that the vehicle is a school bus. 
(e)  Any civil penalty levied for a violation of this section shall be payable to the local school division. 
    For purposes of this section, "school division" means the division of Petersburg Public Schools. "Video-monitoring system" means a system with one or more camera sensors and computers installed and operated on a school bus that produces live digital and recorded video of motor vehicles being operated in violation of the Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859. 
(Ord. No. 15-47, 6-2-2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-844, 46.2-859. 
Secs. 110-271-110-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city with respect to parking meters, § 4-8. 
State Law reference- Authority of city with respect to parking meters, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 

Sec. 110-286. - Marking of parking spaces and installation of meters. 
    On streets where parking is limited in time, the traffic and transportation safety commission may cause parking spaces, approximately 20 feet in length, to be marked by lines on the curb or pavement or by other appropriate markings, and on the sidewalk adjacent to each such parking space may cause to be erected a parking meter, which, upon the deposit of a coin as provided for in this division, will indicate the duration of the legal parking period and the time when such period has elapsed. Such meters may also be erected for spaces marked off in any off-street parking lot owned or operated by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 18-166) 
Sec. 110-287. - Method of parking in metered spaces. 
(a)  Any vehicle parked on the street in any parking space for which a parking meter has been installed shall be parked with the hood of such vehicle alongside of or next to the parking meter alongside of such parking space and within the lines marked on the street for such parking space. 
(b)  Any vehicle parked in an off-street parking lot owned or operated by the city and in which parking is regulated by parking meters shall be parked entirely within the lines of a parking space, with the front end of the vehicle near the parking meter provided for such space. 
(Code 1981, § 18-167) 
Sec. 110-288. - Rate for parking in metered space. 
    The rate for parking in a metered parking space shall be $0.10 per hour. 
(Code 1981, § 18-168) 
Sec. 110-289. - Deposit of coin; overtime parking. 
(a)  When any vehicle is parked in any parking space for which a parking meter has been installed, either on a street or in an off-street parking lot, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on all days, except Sunday, New Year's Day, Memorial Day (May 30), July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, the person parking such vehicle shall immediately deposit a coin of the United States, in the amount of $0.10 per hour, in payment of the fee imposed for such parking privilege, and shall operate such lever or other mechanical device on such parking meter as may be necessary for the proper functioning of the parking meter. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be permitted to remain parked in any parking space referred to in subsection (a) of this section beyond the parking time limit fixed for such space. Whenever a parking meter shall display a sign or signal showing illegal parking of a vehicle in such parking space, it shall be prima facie evidence that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this section. 
(c)  During actual loading and unloading of delivery vehicles within parking meter zones, the operators of such delivery vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 18-169) 
Sec. 110-290. - Purpose of required deposit. 
    The coins required to be deposited as provided in this division are hereby levied under the power of the city to enforce police regulations and as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets of the city; to cover the costs of such meters and the installation of the meters; to cover the cost involved in the inspection, installation, operation, control and use of the parking spaces and the parking meters referred to in this division and the inspection and regulation involved in monitoring and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones created by this division. 
(Code 1981, § 18-170) 
Sec. 110-291. - Vehicle owner not to cause or permit parking in violation of division. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be parked in violation of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 18-172) 
Sec. 110-292. - Injuring, tampering with, etc., meters. 
    It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the terms of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 18-173) 
State Law reference- Stealing from or tampering with parking meter, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-152. 
Secs. 110-293-110-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PARKING ZONES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to issue parking permits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1230. 

Sec. 110-311. - Zones established; permit required. 
(a)  The following areas of the city are hereby designated as permit parking zones, within which it shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be parked on a public right-of-way or street unless such vehicle shall properly display a parking permit validly issued in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this division: 
Centre Hill Court. That area encompassing and including those streets or rights-of-way formerly or presently known as and named Centre Hill Court, West Court, East Court, North Court and Centre Hill Avenue. 
(b)  The streets designated in the descriptions in subsection (a) of this section of permit parking zones shall be considered to be portions of such zones; provided, that no permit shall be required for parking on any street or portion of a street within such zone unless and until such street or portion thereof shall have been designated as a permit area pursuant to the regulations adopted under section 110-312. 
(Code 1981, § 18-179) 
Sec. 110-312. - Adoption of regulations. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary and reasonable for the efficient and safe administration and control of parking within each such permit parking zone as from time to time may be established. Such regulations may include, but need not be limited to, the following matters: 
(1)  The format, display and method of issuance of permits to be issued pursuant to such regulations; 
(2)  The notification to be given to residents of the zone before implementation of the permit requirement and the standards for posting of signs or notices to indicate to the public the areas and times for which permits are required; 
(3)  The methods for determining additional areas in which a need for establishment of a permit parking zone exists, and for assuring that the interests of the residents of any such area are given full consideration before any such zone shall be recommended to the city council. 
(b)  Such rules and regulations and any subsequent amendments shall be submitted to the traffic and transportation safety commission for review and approval. 
(Code 1981, § 18-180) 
Secs. 110-313-110-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKING LOTS 

Sec. 110-331. - Use of city parking lots for commercial purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any part of any parking lot belonging to or operated by the city for the purpose of parking or storing thereon any motor vehicle for commercial purposes. The storing or parking of each such motor vehicle on any such lot shall be regarded as a separate offense under this section. 
(Code 1981, § 18-145) 
Secs. 110-332-110-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BICYCLES; MOPEDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-351. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 7-1) 
Sec. 110-352. - Removing, altering, etc., frame number. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame registered pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the chief of police from stamping a number on the frame of a bicycle on which no serial number can be found or on which such number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 7-2) 
Sec. 110-353. - Reports by dealers in secondhand bicycles and parts thereof. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles, or any parts of secondhand bicycles, to fail to report to the chief of police, within 48 hours, the acquisition of any secondhand bicycle or parts thereof. Such report shall include the registration number and the frame number of such bicycle, a description thereof, together with the name and address of the person from whom the secondhand bicycle was acquired. In case of the purchase of any bicycle parts, the report shall describe each part and give the name and address of the person from whom the part was acquired. 
(Code 1981, § 7-3) 
Sec. 110-354. - Riding on frame or handlebars. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, or to permit another to ride, on the frame or on the handlebars of any bicycle operated on any street, alley or highway in the city. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1981, § 7-4) 
Sec. 110-355. - Use of a protective helmet while on a bicycle. 
(a)  Any person under 15 years of age shall wear a protective helmet that meets the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation while riding or being carried on a bicycle on any highway, sidewalk, or public bicycle path. The term "highway" has the meaning set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. Any person who violates this section shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00. However, such a fine shall be suspended for first-time violators and for violators who, subsequent to the violation but prior to imposition of the fine, purchase helmets of the type required by this section. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, assumption of risk, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence, or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of operation of any bicycle, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil action. 
(Ord. No. 00-58, 9-5-2000) 
Sec. 110-356. - Riding of bicycles on sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person, except a law enforcement officer in the performance of his official duties, shall ride any bicycle on any sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 02-29, 5-21-2002) 
Secs. 110-357-110-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city as to licensing of bicycles and mopeds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720; registration of bicycle serial numbers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-908. 

Sec. 110-371. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle or moped upon any of the streets, alleys or public highways of the city, without first obtaining a certificate of registration from the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 7-16) 
Sec. 110-372. - Application; fee. 
    Application for registration of a bicycle or moped shall be filed with the chief of police on numbered forms provided for that purpose. Such application shall be accompanied by a registration fee of $1.00. All such fees collected shall be turned over to the collector of city taxes, who shall pay the fees into the city treasury. 
(Code 1981, § 7-17; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 110-373. - Plates and cards generally. 
    The city shall provide metallic registration plates and seals, together with registration cards, for bicycles and mopeds, both to be numbered in numerical order, beginning with number one, the design and identification lettering to be approved by the chief of police. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to issue such a registration plate to each person applying for registration under this division and paying the registration fee, and to issue a corresponding registration card to such person. 
(Code 1981, § 7-18) 
Sec. 110-374. - Display of plate. 
    Upon the issuance of a registration plate under this division, the owner of the bicycle or moped for which it was issued shall attach the registration plate to the frame of such bicycle or moped. Such plate shall remain attached to the bicycle or moped during the period such bicycle or moped is operated within the city. 
(Code 1981, § 7-19) 
Sec. 110-375. - Removal, destruction, etc., of plate or card. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any registration plate or registration card issued pursuant to the provisions of this division during the time in which such registration plate or card is operative. 
(Code 1981, § 7-20) 
Sec. 110-376. - Transfer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a licensed bicycle or moped dealer, to sell or transfer ownership of any bicycle or moped, without reporting to the chief of police, within 48 hours from the time thereof, full and complete information relative to such transfer, so that such bicycle or moped may be registered in the name of the transferee. The purchaser or transferee of any such bicycle or moped shall apply for a transfer of registration within five days from the time the bicycle or moped is acquired by him. There shall be no fee or charge for such transfer of registration. 
(Code 1981, § 7-21) 
Sec. 110-377. - Records to be kept. 
    The chief of police shall keep a permanent register in which shall be entered the name, address and age of the owner of each registered bicycle or moped, the date of registration and sufficient information to identify such bicycle or moped. 
(Code 1981, § 7-22) 
Secs. 110-378-110-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PEDESTRIANS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 

Sec. 110-401. - Pedestrians to obey traffic signs, signals, etc. 
    Pedestrians shall obey signs and signals erected on highways or streets for the direction and control of travel and traffic and they shall obey the orders of police officers engaged in directing travel and traffic on the highways and streets. 
(Code 1981, § 18-16) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-935. 
Sec. 110-402. - Right of pedestrians to cross intersection diagonally. 
    Pedestrians may cross an intersection diagonally when all traffic entering the intersection has been halted by lights, by other traffic control devices or by a peace officer or police officer. 
(Code 1981, § 18-17) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-923. 
Sec. 110-403. - Playing or loitering on streets. 
    No person shall play or loiter on any street within this city in such manner as to impede the progress of any vehicle or to render dangerous the vehicular use of any street. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 97-69, § 32-38, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 110-404-110-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ACCIDENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 110-431-110-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REPORTS 

Sec. 110-446. - Reports by drivers. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $250.00 or more shall, within five days after the accident, file, with the police department, a copy of the report referred to in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-372. Such driver shall also file, with the police department, a copy of any supplemental report filed pursuant to such section. A willful failure to file a report required in this section shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 18-19) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381. 
Sec. 110-447. - Reports by passengers. 
    Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making an immediate or a written report of an accident, as required by this chapter or the state law adopted by this chapter, each other occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident, if any, who is capable of so doing must make the report required to be made by the driver. A willful failure to make such report shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 18-20) 
Sec. 110-448. - Report by investigating officer. 
    Every law enforcement officer who, in the course of duty, investigates a motor vehicle accident of which report must be made, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter and elsewhere, by interviewing participants or witnesses shall, within 24 hours after completing the investigation, forward to the police department a copy of the report required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-373. 
(Code 1981, § 18-21) 
Secs. 110-449-110-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ABANDONED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicle ordinance authorized, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1201; removal of certain unattended vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213; regulation of certain towing, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1217. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-471. - Keeping of inoperative vehicles on residential, commercial or agricultural property; penalty for violations; removal of such vehicle. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure on any property zoned for residential or commercial or agricultural purposes, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as such are defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, which is inoperative. As used in this section, an inoperative motor vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is not in operating condition; or does not display valid license plates, or does not display an inspection decal that is valid, or does display an inspection decal that has been expired for more than 60 days. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(c)  The owners of property zoned for residential or commercial or agricultural purposes shall, within 15 days after receiving written notice from the city, remove therefrom any such inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that are not kept within a fully enclosed building or structure. Upon failure of the owner of such property to do so after such notice, the city, through its own agents or employees, may remove any such inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers. If the city removes any such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, the city may dispose of such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers after giving 15 days' notice to the owner of the vehicle. The cost of any such removal and disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle who shall be primarily responsible for such cost. If the city cannot collect from the owner of the vehicle, the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the cost. Such cost may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. Every cost authorized by this section with which the owner of the premises has been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs has been made to the city. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall affect other ordinance provisions of the city, including the zoning ordinance, concerning motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers; and the provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which on June 26, 1970, is regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(Code 1981, § 21-58; Ord. No. 98-171, § 21-58, 9-30-1998) 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-904. 
Secs. 110-472-110-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 110-491. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer or part of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that: 
(1)  Is inoperable and is left unattended on public property, other than an interstate highway or primary highway, for more than 48 hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(3)  Has remained for more than 48 hours on private property without the consent of the property's owner, regardless of whether it was brought onto the private property with the consent of the owner or person in control of the private property; 
(4)  Is inoperable, left unattended, or both, on an interstate highway; or 
(5)  Is inoperable, left unattended, or both, on the shoulder of a primary highway. 
    Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle such vehicles. 
    Traffic hazard means any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer found on the public streets or grounds of the city, unattended by the owner or operator and constituting a hazard to traffic, or which is parked in such a manner as to be in violation of law. 
(Code 1981, § 18-185) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200. 
Sec. 110-492. - City may take into custody; indemnity of city when vehicle removed from private property. 
(a)  The city may remove and take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle or any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is a traffic hazard. In this connection, the city may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire persons, equipment or facilities or firms or corporations that may be independent contractors for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing and selling at public auction such vehicles. 
(b)  If an abandoned motor vehicle is on private property, the vehicle shall not be removed under this section, without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant of such property. The person requesting the removal of such vehicle shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of the removal, storage or sale of the vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 18-186) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1201, 46.2-1213. 
Sec. 110-493. - Notice to owner of vehicle taken into custody. 
(a)  When the city or its authorized agent takes an abandoned motor vehicle into custody, it shall, within 15 days, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner of record of the motor vehicle and all persons having security interests in the vehicle of record, that it has been taken into custody. The notice shall (i) state the year, make, model, and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle; (ii) set forth the location of the facility where it is being held; and (iii) inform the owner and any persons having security interests of their right to reclaim it within 15 days after the date of the notice after payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody. 
(b)  The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or persons having security interests to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall constitute (i) a waiver by the owner and all persons having any security interests of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and (ii) consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. 
(c)  If records of the state department of motor vehicles contain no address for the owner or no address of any person shown by the department's records to have a security interest, or if the identity and addresses of the owner and all persons having security interests cannot be determined with reasonable certainty, notice by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice pursuant to this division as to any person who cannot be notified pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this section. Notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles. Any notice of this kind shall be within the time requirements prescribed by this section for notice by mail and shall have the same contents required for a notice by mail. 
(d)  The consequences of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle shall be as set forth in a notice given in accordance with and pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 18-187) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1202. 
Sec. 110-494. - Sale of vehicle at public auction; disposition of proceeds. 
    If an abandoned motor vehicle is not reclaimed as provided for in section 110-493, the city or its authorized agent shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-617, sell it at public auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take title to the motor vehicle free of all liens and claims of ownership of others, shall receive a sales receipt at the auction, and shall be entitled to apply to and receive from the state department of motor vehicles a certificate of title and registration card for the vehicle. The sales receipt from the sale shall be sufficient title only for purposes of transferring the vehicle to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking, or dismantling, and in that case no further titling of the vehicle shall be necessary. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle the city or its authorized agent shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to section 110-493. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or any person having secure interests in the vehicle, as their interests may appear, for 90 days, and then be deposited into the treasury of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 18-188) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1203. 
Sec. 110-495. - Vehicles abandoned in garages. 
    Notwithstanding Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200, any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof shall be considered abandoned and may be reported by the garagekeeper to the city if it has been left in a garage for more than ten days or for more than ten days beyond the period the vehicle was to remain on the premises pursuant to a contract, after notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record and all persons having security interests of record therein, to reclaim the vehicle within 15 days of the notice. Any abandoned motor vehicle left in a garage may be taken into custody by the city in accordance with section 110-492 and shall be subject to the notice and sale provisions contained in sections section 110-493 and section 110-494. If, however, the vehicle is reclaimed in accordance with section 110-493, the person reclaiming it, in addition to the other charges required to be paid, shall pay the reasonable charges of the garagekeeper, unless otherwise provided by contract or ordinance. If the vehicle is sold pursuant to section 110-494, any garagekeeper's charges shall be paid from, and to the extent of, the excess of the proceeds of sale after paying the expenses of the auction, the costs of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the vehicle in custody and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to section 110-493. Except as otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1200-46.2-1208, nothing in this section shall restrict any rights conferred on any person under Code of Virginia, §§ 43-32-43-36. For the purposes of this section, the term "garage" means any commercial parking place, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, maintenance, or sale of motor vehicles whether or not the vehicle had been brought to that location with the consent of the owner or person in control of the premises and the term "garagekeeper" means the operator of a garage. 
(Code 1981, § 18-189) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1204. 
Sec. 110-496. - Disposition of inoperable abandoned vehicles. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, any inoperable motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer which has been taken into custody pursuant to other provisions of this article may be disposed of to a demolisher, without the title and without the notification procedures, by the person or locality on whose property or in whose possession the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer is found. The demolisher, on taking custody of the inoperable abandoned motor vehicle shall notify the state department of motor vehicles on forms and in the manner prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of motor vehicles. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no other report or notice shall be required in this instance. Such demolisher, in disposing of such vehicle, shall follow the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1206. 
(Code 1981, § 18-190) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1205. 
Secs. 110-497-110-520. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RAILROADS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city council to regulate railroads, § 4-2. 
State Law reference- Railroad corporations, Code of Virginia, § 56-345.1 et seq. 

Sec. 110-521. - Standing of vehicles on tracks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stand any wagon or other vehicle on the track of any railroad, so as to hinder or endanger a moving train. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Code 1981, § 25-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1. 
Sec. 110-522. - Trespassing on railroad track. 
(a)  Any person who goes upon the track of a railroad other than to pass over such road at a public or private crossing or who willfully rides, drives or leads any animal or contrives for any animal to go on such track except to cross as aforesaid, without the consent of the railroad company or person operating such road, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. A second violation of the provisions of this section occurring within two years of the first violation shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. A third or subsequent violation of the provisions of this section occurring within two years of a second or subsequent violation shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to any section of track which has been legally abandoned pursuant to an order of a federal or state agency having jurisdiction over the track and is not being used for railroad service. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "track" shall mean the rail, ties, and ballast of the railroad. 
(Code 1981, § 25-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-159. 
Sec. 110-523. - Trespassing upon trains. 
    If any person, not being a passenger or employee, shall be found trespassing upon any railroad car or train of any railroad in the city, by riding on any car, or any part thereof, on its arrival, stay or departure at or from any station or depot of such railroad, or on the passage of any such car or train over any part of any such railroad, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 25-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-160. 
Sec. 110-524. - Trespassers jumping on or off trains. 
    If any person, not being a passenger or employee, but a trespasser, shall jump on or off any railroad car or train on its arrival, stay or departure at or from any station or depot of such railroad, or on the passage of any such car or train over any part of any such railroad, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 25-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-161. 
Chapter 114 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; posting advertising matter on utility poles, § 6-3; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; permit for electrical work, § 22-64; businesses, ch. 26; community development, ch. 38; environment, ch. 50; floods, ch. 58; health and sanitation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 82; solid waste, ch. 94; protection of utilities for snow-melting and lawn-watering devices, § 98-216; subdivisions, ch. 102; consumer utility taxes, § 106-331 et seq.; stormwater management plan, § 122-100. 
State Law reference- Regulation of lakes, waters and pools, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1110; general provisions for public utilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109 et seq.; sewage disposal systems generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122 et seq.; water supply systems generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2134 et seq.; health regulations pertaining to sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq.; health regulations pertaining to public water supplies, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq.; State Water Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 114-1-114-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SUPPLY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General powers of the city as to waterworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109; water supply systems generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2134 et seq.; health regulations pertaining to public water supplies, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07-98, adopted October 23, 2007, amended Division 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Division 1, §§ 114-31-114-48, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from §§ 114-31-114-48. 

Subdivision 1. - General Provisions 

Sec. 114-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person applying for water service. 
    Property means the location for which the applicant seeks water service. 
    Property owner means the owner of the property for which water service is sought or at which the city is supplying water service. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the water distribution division of the city's water department. 
    Tenant means a person who occupies property owned by another pursuant to a lease between the tenant and the property owner. 
    Utility billing office means the city department responsible for accepting and reviewing applications for water service, arranging for water service initiation and cessation, issuing bills for water service, resolving billing issues, and arranging for transmission of delinquent accounts to the collector of city taxes. 
    Water distribution division or distribution division mean the water distribution division of the city's water department. 
    Water service means the provision of water to residences, business, or industry by the city using city infrastructure. 
    Water service account means an account established in the utility billing office under which the city provides water service to a water service customer in accordance with such terms and conditions as the utility billing office may specify. 
    Water service customer or customer means a person who holds a water service account. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 114-32. - Violations of article generally. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-33. - Liability for damages and costs resulting from violations of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, in addition to any penalty that may be imposed, be liable for all damages and costs resulting from such violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-34. - General supervision of distribution system. 
    The director of public works shall have general supervision of the city's water distribution system. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-35. - Appointment and general powers and duties of superintendent of distribution division. 
    The city manager shall appoint a superintendent of the water distribution division, who shall have direct charge of the city's water distribution system and its facilities, including pumping stations, water tanks and meter and repair and of all such construction work as may be necessary, along with such other duties as may be assigned to him. The superintendent shall be accountable for all expenditures of the water distribution division. The superintendent shall also, at the end of each fiscal year, render to the city manager a complete inventory of all stock and equipment in the water distribution division, together with an annual report setting forth, in detail, the operation of the water distribution system for such fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-36. - Inspection of reservoir, watershed, etc., by health director. 
    The health director shall thoroughly inspect the reservoir, watershed and streams of the city's water supply whenever it shall be deemed necessary, and make a report thereof, in writing, to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-37. - Consent required for introduction of service, installation of corporation cock, etc. 
    No person, except an authorized employee of the water department in the performance of his duty, shall introduce into any lot or building water from the city pipes, or install any corporation cock or any fixture upon any of the pipes within the street lines, or turn on water to any premises, without the written consent of the superintendent, to be granted or denied pursuant to uniform city standards. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-38. - Adequate supply required for occupied buildings; notice to health department when service suspended. 
    There shall be an adequate supply of running water, supplied by the city or approved by the health department, piped into each occupied building in the city. The health department shall be notified by the water department, within 48 hours, for necessary action, when the water service to any such building has been suspended. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
State Law reference- Authority to require connection of premises to city's facilities provided for furnishing water, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2143. 
Sec. 114-39. - Conditions on which service supplied. 
    The city may supply water to any person who completes the application described in subsection (a) of section 114-144 and pays any applicable deposit and fees. Any such service shall be contingent on the applicant's agreeing to comply with all of the provisions of this article, and agreeing to pay for water at the rate then existing and at such other rates as may be subsequently put into effect. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 114-40. - Right of entry to premises served. 
    Any owner or occupant of any lot or building into which city water is introduced shall permit the superintendent or any other authorized employee of the water department or the building inspections department to enter such lot or building at reasonable hours to inspect the work therein; and in case of refusal to allow such inspection, the water shall cut off from such premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-41. - Line extensions for commercial and industrial use. 
    Applications for water line extensions for commercial and industrial use shall be referred to the city manager and will be considered by the city council upon the merits of the individual case and determined upon estimated quantities of water to be furnished. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-42. - Installation, location, size, etc., of meters. 
(a)  Water meters and meter boxes shall be installed within the city limits by the water department. All meters shall be located at a convenient place between the curb line and the property line. All service pipes, with the exception of fire service pipes, must be equipped with meters. The size of such meters shall be determined by the superintendent. 
(b)  No water meter shall be installed to serve more than one house. In case there is more than one house on one lot, each of such houses shall be served by an individual meter. In the case of an apartment complex, one meter may be permitted to serve all the apartments, but separate meters may be installed at the curb, if the owner so desires. Separate meters may be required for each side of a double tenement house, but in every case where a deed may be given separately for each tenement, individual meters shall be required, even though such tenements are owned by the same party at the time of connecting with city water. In any case where only outside fixtures serve a house, the water shall not be brought into indoor fixtures without first making the connection serving such house conform with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-43. - Damage to meter by hot water. 
    If, on removing any water meter for repairs, it is found that such meter has, in the judgment of the superintendent, been damaged by the passage of hot water through it, the cost of the necessary repairs to such meter shall be added to the water bill of the owner of the property served and shall be treated as a part of such bill. If, in any particular case, it is evident to the superintendent that such damage will frequently recur, the property owner shall be required to install a check valve or such other suitable means of protecting the meter as the superintendent may direct, within ten days after receiving written notice from the superintendent to do so. On failure to comply with such notice, the water shall be cut off from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-44. - Discontinuance of service for failure to pay bill for fixtures, material, work or repairs furnished or done by water department. 
    If any bill for fixtures, material, work or repairs furnished or done by the water department remains unpaid at the end of the month succeeding the furnishing of such fixtures or material or the completion of such work or repairs, the superintendent may cut off the city water from the premises involved; and the water shall remain cut off until all such bills are paid. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-45. - Waste of water; repair of leaks. 
(a)  No person shall unnecessarily consume any city water by a careless or extravagant use of the water or permit the water to run from any hydrant, cock or fixture without proper care to prevent waste. 
(b)  If any pipe, hydrant, cock or other fixture is found leaking, the owner of the premises shall have the necessary repairs made, within five days after receipt of notice from the superintendent to do so. 
(c)  If the necessary repairs are not made within five days, the water shall be cut off and shall not be turned on again until such repairs have been made. A fee of $20.00 shall be charged for turning on the water after it has been cut off. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 114-46. - Use of public hydrants. 
    The public hydrants shall be for the reasonable use of the public and the superintendent shall cut off the water from the public hydrants, whenever it is found that the water from such hydrants is being wasted or otherwise misused. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-47. - Damaging, tampering with, etc., water department property, fixtures, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface any property of the water department or to cut any trees or shrubbery or dump any refuse or rubbish upon any part of the property of the water department. 
(b)  No person shall tamper with any valve, hydrant, pump, motor, curb cock, meter or any other equipment or fixture of the water department wherever situated. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to authorized employees or agents of the city in the lawful performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-48. - Climbing on water tanks, standpipes, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except an authorized employee or agent of the city, to climb upon any elevated tank, standpipe or other structure of the water distribution system. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Subdivision II. - Water Conservation 

Sec. 114-49. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bucket means a bucket or other container holding five gallons or less when used singly by one person. 
    Established landscape means landscape plants existing in an area after such period of time as to accomplish an establishment and maintenance of growth. 
    Fountain means a water display where water is sprayed strictly for ornamental purposes. 
    Garden means any non-commercial garden planted primarily for household use. The term "non-commercial" as used in this definition includes the incidental direct sale of items from such a garden to the public. 
    Handheld hose means a hose attended by one person and fitted with a manual or automatic shutoff nozzle. 
    Landscape plant means any member of the kingdom Plantae, including any tree, shrub, vine, herb, flower, succulent, ground cover or grass species that grows or has been planted outdoors. 
    New landscape means any landscape made up of plants or seeds planted in or transplanted to an area within such period of time as to accomplish a reasonable establishment and maintenance of growth. 
    Paved areas means streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking lots, and other surface areas covered with brick, paving, tile or other material through which water cannot pass. 
    Recycled water means water originally potable but circulated for reuse after delivery from the public water system. 
    Swimming pool means any structure, basin, chamber or tank, including hot tubs, containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or recreational bathing and having a depth of two feet or more at any point. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-50. - Purpose; enforcement; exemptions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this subdivision is to establish water conservation reduction measures to be imposed when the Appomattox River Water Authority ("ARWA") requests or directs such restriction or when the governor of the Commonwealth or other state or federal authority, pursuant to applicable law, declares an emergency, imposes mandatory water conservation measures, and authorizes the city to enforce such measures. 
(b)  State or federal measures. Should the Governor or other state or federal authority, pursuant to applicable law, declare an emergency, impose mandatory water conservation measures, and authorize the city to enforce such measures, the city shall enforce those measures pursuant to this article to the extent that such measures impose greater restrictions on the use of water than those in this article. Otherwise, any water conservation measures imposed by this article shall remain in effect as provided in this article. 
(c)  Exemptions. This article shall not apply to any governmental activity, institution, business, residence, or industry when it has been determined by the city manager that an exemption is necessary for the following: 
(1)  The public health, safety and welfare; 
(2)  The prevention of severe economic hardship or the substantial loss of employment; or 
(3)  The health of any person. 
Recycled water and water supplied from public or private groundwater sources shall also be exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-51. - Declaration of conservation measures. 
(a)  In general. The city manager shall declare the imposition of voluntary, mandatory or emergency water conservation measures whenever the city is experiencing a water supply emergency or the need to avert a water supply emergency. Such emergency or need to avert an emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever declared by ARWA or when the Governor or other state or federal authority, pursuant to applicable law, declares an emergency, imposes mandatory water conservation measures, and authorizes the city to enforce such measures. Notices of the implementation and termination of the water conservation measures shall be publicly announced and published in a daily newspaper for at least one day. The implementation or termination of the measures shall become effective immediately upon publication of the respective notice. 
(b)  Voluntary conservation measures. When voluntary water conservation measures are in effect, the city manager shall request the general public, businesses and public agencies in the city to implement and comply with the following water use reduction measures: 
(1)  Fountains. Reduce operation to hours between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., except that operation may be unrestricted on any two days during a week at the option of the operator or owner. 
(2)  Paved areas. Reduce washing to any hours during any two days in a week. Washing paved areas for immediate health and safety is exempted. 
(3)  Swimming pools. Reduce filling and replenishing to levels required to maintain health and safety. 
(4)  Gardens and established landscape. Reduce watering to hours between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. any day. Watering by bucket is unrestricted. 
(5)  Vehicle washing. Reduce noncommercial washing of mobile equipment to any hours during any two days in a week using a handheld hose having a positive (i.e., automatic) shutoff nozzle. Commercial mobile equipment washing businesses are exempt. 
(6)  Restaurants. No restrictions. 
(7)  Pubic utilities. Reduce scheduled sewer and hydrant flushing by 50 percent. Flushing to meet immediate health and safety requirements is exempt. 
(8)  New landscape. Watering unrestricted during the first 30 days after planting and shall conform to subsection (b)(4) of this section after the 30 days. 
(c)  Mandatory conservation measures. When mandatory water conservation measures are in effect, the general public, businesses and public agencies shall comply with the following water use restrictions: 
(1)  Fountains. Operation prohibited. 
(2)  Paved areas. Washing prohibited except for immediate health and safety requirements. 
(3)  Swimming pools. Reduce filling and replenishing to levels to maintain health and safety 
(4)  Gardens, plants, and established landscapes. Water only from 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. on any day. 
(5)  Vehicle washing. Reduce non-commercial washing or mobile equipment to one day a week using a handheld hose having a positive (i.e. automatic) shutoff nozzle. Commercial mobile equipment washing businesses are exempt. 
(6)  Restaurants. Serve water to customers only upon request. 
(7)  Public utilities. Conduct sewer and hydrant flushing only to the extent required to meet immediate health and safety needs. 
(8)  New landscape. Water unrestricted during the first 30 days after planting and shall conform to subsection (b)(4) of this section after the first 30 days. 
(d)  Emergency conservation measures. When emergency water conservation measures are in effect, the general public, businesses, and public agencies shall comply with the following water use restrictions: 
(1)  Fountains. Operation prohibited. 
(2)  Paved areas. Washing prohibited except for immediate health and safety requirements. 
(3)  Swimming pools. Reduce filling and replenishing to levels to maintain health and safety. 
(4)  Gardens, plants, and all landscapes. Water only from 8:00 p.m. on Wednesdays to 8:00 a.m. on Thursdays. 
(5)  Vehicle washing. No non-commercial washing. Commercial mobile equipment washing businesses are exempt. 
(6)  Restaurants. Serve water to customers only upon request. 
(7)  Public utilities. Conduct sewer and hydrant flushing only to the extent required to meet immediate health and safety needs. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-52. - Violations; evidentiary presumptions. 
(a)  In General. 
(1)  Violation. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently use, cause the use of or permit the use of water in violation of any of the mandatory or emergency sections of this article. 
(2)  Evidentiary presumptions. For purposes of this article, when water has been used in a manner contrary to a mandatory or emergency section of this article, it shall be presumed that the person in whose name a water meter connection is registered with the department has knowingly used, caused the use of, or permitted the use of water in such a contrary manner. Proof that a particular premises had a water meter connection registered in the name of the defendant cited in a pleading filed pursuant to this article shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the defendant is the person who used, caused the use of, or permitted the use of water in a manner contrary to any mandatory or emergency section of this article. 
(b)  Violations of mandatory restrictions. On the first offense, a person violating a mandatory restriction pursuant to this article shall receive a written warning. On the second offense, the person shall be assessed a civil penalty of $50.00. On the third offense, the person shall be assessed a civil penalty of $100.00. On the fourth and any subsequent offense, the person shall be assessed a civil penalty of $200.00. Any civil penalty imposed pursuant to this paragraph shall be added to and become part of the offending person's city water bill; and such civil penalty, if unpaid, shall be collected in any manner authorized for the collection of the city's water bills. 
(c)  Violations of emergency restrictions. On the first offense, a person violating an emergency restriction pursuant to this article shall be assessed a civil penalty of $50.00. On the second offense, the person shall be assessed a civil penalty of $100.00. On the third offense, the person shall be assessed a civil penalty of $200.00. On the fourth and any subsequent offense, the person shall be assessed a civil penalty of $300.00. Any civil penalty imposed pursuant to this subsection shall be added to and become part of the offending person's city water bill; and such civil penalty, if unpaid, shall be collected in any manner authorized for the collection of the city's water bills. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Sec. 114-53. - Appeals and enforcement. 
(a)  Appeals. A person shall have the right to appeal to the city manager upon receiving written notice of any violation or upon the imposition of a civil penalty. The city manager shall notify the person in writing of the time and place for the hearing of the appeal within a reasonable time prior to such hearing, which shall occur no more than 15 business days after the city manager receives written notice of the appeal. The city manager shall notify the person in writing of the city manager's final decision no more than 15 business days after the hearing. 
(b)  Enforcement. The city manager is authorized to designate any qualified personnel under his supervision to enforce this article, including the imposition of civil penalties; and he is authorized to implement policies or rules for the administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-98, 10-23-2007) 
Secs. 114-54-114-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 114-66. - When required. 
(a)  All persons owning property, except vacant lots, along the line of any public facility for furnishing water, or having the right of access to any such facility, or having the right of access to a private facility for furnishing water connected with a public facility for furnishing water, shall connect their premises with such facility, within four months after the completion of any such facility. Whenever a new facility for furnishing water is completed and ready for use, the health director shall give notice of the requirements of this section to all persons owning property along the line of such facility or having the right of access thereto. 
(b)  This section shall apply to all improvements using water along the line of any public facility for furnishing water within 150 feet of the point of connection to the public facility, except when, in the discretion of the director of public works or his designated representative, the requirement for connection would cause undue and extreme hardship to result to the owner. 
(Code 1981, § 38-30) 
State Law reference- Authority to require connection of premises to city's facilities provided for furnishing water, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2143. 
Sec. 114-67. - Permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to connect his premises with the city water system shall first obtain a permit for such connection from the director of public works. 
(b)  When any person shall desire a permit required by this section, he or his authorized agent shall make a written application for such permit to the director of public works. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant and the location and description of the property for which the connection is desired. 
(Code 1981, § 38-31) 
Sec. 114-68. - Fees. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Laundromat means a facility containing coin-operated laundry machines that are intended for self-service operation by the customer. 
    Nursing home means a facility that provides skilled nursing care and rehabilitation services to people with illnesses, injuries or functional disabilities, either as an independent facility, or as a facility operating within a hospital or retirement community. 
(b)  Fee. Each person who desires to use the city water system shall first pay a connection fee for the privilege of connecting to the water system as specified in the following table: 
Type of Meter Connection Water 

Connection Fee Residential Use SF Residential $2,840.00 Multifamily Residential (per dwelling unit) 2,840.00 Commercial/Industrial Use 5/8 ? meter 2,840.00 1? meter 4,600.00 1.5? meter 8,040.00 2? meter 14,720.00 3? meter 29,440.00 4? meter 46,000.00 6? meter 92,000.00 8? meter 147,200.00 10? meter 264,592.00 12? meter 425,592.00 Other Use Hotels and motels (per sleeping room) 1,420.00 Hospitals (per bed) 3,408.00 Nursing homes (per bed) 2,272.00 Laundromats (per machine) 5,680.00 Connections Made Outside City Limits Fees for connections to structures located outside the geographical limits of the City of Petersburg shall be double the otherwise applicable rate shown in this table.  
(c)  Purpose of connection fee. The purpose of the water connection fees prescribed by this section is to finance the capital costs of water infrastructure, including water pumping, transmission and storage. The fees shall be fair and reasonable, and shall be established based on meter size or other waterworks capacity considerations. 
(d)  Assessment. A water connection fee shall be assessed against: 
(1)  A use or structure not connected to the water system when such use or structure connects; and 
(2)  A use or structure connected to the water system whenever such use or structure is expanded or modified so as to result in an increase in meter size or a change in the type of meter connection. 
No connection fee shall be assessed for replacement of an existing water connection if the use or structure served by the connection is not expanded or modified. 
(e)  Payment of fees. Connection fees assessed pursuant to this section and tap fees assessed pursuant to section 114-69 of this division shall be paid to the collector of city taxes at the time an application for a permit for water service connection pursuant to section 114-67 of this division is approved, except that the utility billing office may establish a payment plan for payment of tap fees for residential customers for good cause shown. No application for a permit for water service connection shall be approved until such time as the city has issued a building permit for the structure. The fees assessed under this section shall not be waived. 
(f)  Connection. The city shall connect a use or structure to the water system upon (i) payment of the fees pursuant to subsection (e); and (ii) completion of any final inspection by the public utilities division, except that the department director may authorize connection prior to completion of a final inspection for good cause shown. 
(g)  Deposit of monies. All monies collected as connection fees under this section shall be deposited into the city's general account, but shall be recorded in a dedicated account in the public utility enterprise fund. Monies shall be disbursed from that dedicated account solely to pay capital costs associated with infrastructure projects designed to develop water supply and distribution facilities that will serve the city, and related debt service on the capital costs of such projects. 
(Code 1981, § 38-32; Ord. 06-32, 3-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-93, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-69. - Work to be done by city; charge for such work. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to make any taps or otherwise connect to the distribution system of the water department, except duly authorized employees of the city. 
(b)  All connections to water mains shall be installed by the city. The charge for such work shall be determined and established, from time to time, by the director of public works. The charge shall be based on the average cost of making such connections and shall be in addition to the fees prescribed in section 114-68. 
(Code 1981, § 38-33) 
Sec. 114-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-93, § 5, adopted October 28, 2008, repealed § 114-70, which pertained to payment of fees and charges and derived from § 38-34 of the 1981 Code. 
Sec. 114-71. - Minimum size of tap. 
    No tap of less than three-quarters of an inch inside diameter shall be permitted for connection to any water service pipe and no replacement shall be made of less than three-quarters of an inch pipe. 
(Code 1981, § 38-35) 
Sec. 114-72. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this division are severable, and if any section, subsection, sentence, part or application of this division be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate any other section, subsection, sentence, part or application but shall be confined in its operation to the section, subsection, sentence, part or application at issue involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. 
(Ord. No. 08-93, § 2, 10-28-2008) 
Secs. 114-73-114-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIRE PROTECTION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 54. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 114-91. - Permit for connection and fees. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall make, or cause to be made, a connection with the water distribution system of the city, which connection is intended exclusively for fire protection purposes, unless he first obtains a written permit so to do from the superintendent. A written application for such permit shall be filed with the superintendent. Such application shall be signed by the owner of the property to be served or by his duly authorized agent. 
(b)  Outside-city fire connections. For each public fire hydrant, private or corporate fire hydrant or private or corporate fire connection located outside of the city limits, the permittee shall first pay a connection fee in the amount of $1,000.00 per fire connection or hydrant. The connection fees shall only be assessed to fire connections or hydrants which receive water directly or indirectly from the city's water distribution system. 
(Code 1981, § 38-47) 
Sec. 114-92. - Drawings of pipes, branches and outlets. 
    Each application filed under section 114-91 shall be accompanied by neat scaled drawings, showing in plan and section the location of main fire services pipes, branches and outlets, which drawings shall be kept on file in the office of the superintendent. 
(Code 1981, § 38-48) 
Sec. 114-93. - Water department to make connection and install service pipes; costs to be paid by owner. 
    Connections made pursuant to a permit provided for in section 114-91 shall be made, and service pipes shall be laid, by the water department, and the owner of the property served shall pay an amount equal to the cost of material, plus ten percent, and labor used, plus 20 percent, as determined by the superintendent, plus the cost of the use of tools and equipment. Such cost shall also include the cost of relaying the paving in its original condition. 
(Code 1981, § 38-49) 
Sec. 114-94. - Size and material. 
    Services intended exclusively for fire protection shall be not less than six inches in diameter and shall be of a material satisfactory to the superintendent. 
(Code 1981, § 38-50) 
Sec. 114-95. - Pipes to be in full view; inspections and tests; turning on water at outlet. 
(a)  All fire service pipes shall be in full view from the point where such pipes enter a building to their ends, and duly authorized employees of the water department shall be permitted to inspect such fire services whenever the superintendent may deem it advisable. 
(b)  The water shall not be turned on at any outlet of fire services, except in case of fire or unless it is desired to inspect or test the fire service. In every case, when it is desired to make a test or inspection that will require the turning on of the city water, written notice shall be given the superintendent in ample time to permit him to send an employee of the water department to witness such test. 
(Code 1981, § 38-51) 
Sec. 114-96. - Meters. 
    A meter of a type approved by the director of public works may be installed at any time on any fire service installed under this article, within the discretion of the superintendent. Such a meter may be required if the director of public works or the superintendent has reason to believe that water is being used for purposes other than fire protection. 
(Code 1981, § 38-52) 
Sec. 114-97. - Additions and alterations. 
    In no case shall any additions or alterations be made to fire service pipes, for the connection of which a permit has been obtained as provided in section 114-91, their branches and outlets, without the written consent of the superintendent. Such additions and alterations shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 38-53) 
Secs. 114-98-114-115. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Fire Hydrants[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 54. 

Sec. 114-116. - Permit to use water-Required. 
    No person shall use water from any fire hydrant connected to the city water distribution system, until he has obtained a permit therefor from the superintendent. This section shall not apply to authorized city employees in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1981, § 38-65) 
Sec. 114-117. - Same-Application and charges. 
(a)  Application. Any person desiring a permit required by section 114-116 shall make written application therefor to the superintendent, stating where the fire hydrant in question is located and for what purpose he desires to use the water. 
(b)  Outside-city fees. A charge of $100.00 per day, plus the cost of water and labor for any work done by the city, shall be billed for the use of a city hydrant outside the city limits. 
(Code 1981, § 38-66) 
Sec. 114-118. - Issuance. 
    Upon the filing of an application under section 114-117, the superintendent, may issue a written permit for such use when it conforms to uniform city standards. 
(Code 1981, § 38-67) 
Sec. 114-119. - Use of approved hydrant wrench. 
    Under no circumstances shall any person, city employee or otherwise, operate a fire hydrant connected to the city water distribution system, without a suitable hydrant wrench of a type or style approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1981, § 38-68) 
Secs. 114-120-114-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SERVICE CHARGES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Water fees and charges to be fair and reasonable, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2143. 

Sec. 114-136. - Service fee and rates inside city limits. 
(a)  A nonrefundable application fee of $25.00 shall be included on the bill issued during the customer's first billing cycle. Such fee shall also be paid for any transfer of accounts from one customer to another or from one location to another. 
(b)  The monthly rates for water furnished by the city to customers within the city limits shall be based on hundred cubic feet of usage, plus capacity fee, outlined below: 
(1)  For the first 300 cubic feet, per 100 cubic feet ..... $0.597 
(2)  From 301 cubic feet through 12,500 cubic feet, per 100 cubic feet ..... 2.527 
(3)  All over 12,500 cubic feet, per 100 cubic feet ..... 1.621 
(c)  The monthly capacity fee for water furnished within the city limits shall be based upon the following meter sizes: 
Meter Size 
(inches) Monthly Water 
Capacity Fee 
5/8 " $    8.84 1 22.12 11/2 38.67 2 70.68 3 141.34 4 220.86 6 441.76 8 883.52 10 1,369.44 12 1,767.02  
(Code 1981, § 38-81; Ord. No. 97-59, § 38-81, 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 01-32, 5-15-2001; Ord. No. 04-58, 7-6-2004; Ord. No. 07-23, 3-20-2007; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 12-21, § 1, 3-6-2012; Ord. No. 12-41, § 1, 5-15-2012; Ord. No. 13-39, § 1, 5-21-2013; Ord. No. 14-52, § 1, 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 15-30, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. 17-15, § 1, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. 17-25, § 1, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 114-137. - Water rates for multifamily dwelling units. 
    Where more than one-family dwelling unit is served through one master water meter, the water rate determined by that master meter shall be the larger of the following: 
(1)  The minimum charge for each dwelling unit based upon the meter size that would be required to serve that unit, multiplied by the total number of units; or 
(2)  A rate charged for each dwelling unit based upon the average individual unit consumption, multiplied by the total number of dwelling units. 
(Code 1981, § 38-81.1) 
Sec. 114-138. - Outside city limits. 
(a)  The charges for city water supplied to customers outside the corporate limits of the city shall be provided for by special contract, or the monthly rates for water furnished shall be as follows: 
(1)  Twice inside-city rates; 
(2)  Where more than one property or dwelling unit is served through one master meter, the utility bill calculated from that master meter shall be determined based on the average individual property or dwelling unit consumption, multiplied by the total number of served properties or dwelling units. 
(b)  An annual charge shall be applied for all public fire hydrants, private or corporate fire connections, or private or corporation fire hydrants located outside of the city limits, which receive water directly or indirectly from the city's water distribution system. The annual charge shall be $200.00 per hydrant or fire connection, and shall be billed on or about January 1 of each year, and shall be paid in advance. 
(Code 1981, § 38-82) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to supply water outside city limits, § 4-3. 
Sec. 114-139. - Where not otherwise provided. 
(a)  In any case not provided for in this article, including the filling of swimming pools and hauling water, the water rates shall be as fixed by the city council. 
(b)  The charge for city water supplied to customers through the use of a public hydrant shall be $50.00 for each use of the public hydrant, plus the cost of the water furnished, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 38-83) 
Sec. 114-140. - Charge for turning water off and on at water service customer's request. 
(a)  The utility billing office may terminate and reinitiate water service provided pursuant to an active water service account at the request of the water service customer or customers holding the account. A fee of $15.00 shall be charged for this service, which fee shall be added to the next regular water bill. The water service customer shall be responsible for informing all those affected by the termination or reinitiation of water service of such termination or reinitiation. 
(b)  The utility billing office shall not charge for terminating water service in connection with closure of a water service account at the request of the account customer, provided the account is in good standing at the time of the request. 
(Code 1981, § 38-84; Ord. No. 04-37, 5-18-2004; Ord. No. 08-107, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 114-141. - Removal of meter for unauthorized use of stopcock; charge for restoration of service. 
(a)  Only authorized employees of the water department shall use the stopcock at the meter. If water is turned on at such stopcock without the consent of the water department, the meter shall be removed and water service shall not be restored until a service charge of $75.00 and all amounts due for water service and fees have been paid, and the applicant seeking restoration of the water service has complied with all the applicable requirements of section 114-144 of this article. 
(b)  Except for good cause shown, the utility billing office shall not approve any applications for water service requested for the property at which the unauthorized usage occurred until the fees and charges assessed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section have been paid. For the purposes of this subsection, good cause may include evidence that the applicant for service is not responsible for unauthorized water usage. 
(Code 1981, § 38-85; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 114-142. - Personal liability of user. 
(a)  The amount of any charge pursuant to this article, for water usage made in accordance with the requirements of this article, shall constitute a personal liability of the person using the water and, in addition to other remedies, the city may enforce such personal liability by appropriate proceedings. 
(b)  The amount of any fees or charges assessed (i) pursuant to section 114-141 of this article or (ii) pursuant to any other provision of this article for unauthorized water service, shall constitute a personal liability of the owner of the property that received the unauthorized water service, except that no lien securing such liability shall attach to any residential real estate at which the unauthorized usage occurred unless (i) the user of the water services is the owner of the residential real estate, or (ii) the owner of the residential real estate negotiated or executed the agreement by which such water services were to be provided to that residential real estate. 
(Code 1981, § 38-86; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 114-143. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-107, § 2, adopted Dec. 9, 2008, repealed § 114-143, which pertained to responsibility of owner in certain cases and derived from § 38-87 of the 1981 Code. 
Sec. 114-144. - Water service accounts; application and deposit by tenant or owner of property; cancellation. 
    Water service accounts. Water service accounts shall be established and cancelled pursuant to the following provisions: 
(a)  Application for water service account. Applications for water service accounts shall be made as follows: 
1.  Single-family property served by one meter. The tenant or owner of any single-family property for which water service is desired shall (i) complete an application in such form as the utility billing office may require, (ii) pay the application fee specified in subsection (a) of section 114-136, (iii) pay any deposit specified in subsection (b) of this section, and satisfy any such other conditions as the utility billing office may establish. 
2.  Multifamily property served by one meter. The owner or his duly authorized agent, of any property served by one meter but occupied by more than one household, shall be the sole eligible applicant for water service to such property and shall be responsible for the actions identified in (i) through (iv) of subsection (a)1. 
3.  Property subject to management agreements. An applicant for service at a property that is being administered through a management agreement shall provide a copy of the management agreement and such other evidence of his authority to contract for water service as the utility billing office may require. 
4.  Property proposed for sublease. An applicant who seeks to sublet property shall provide evidence of the validity of the sublease, including agreement to the sublease by the lessee, approval of the sublease by the lessor, and such other evidence of validity as the utility billing office may require. 
(b)  Deposits. Applicants shall pay the applicable deposits established by this section in cash to the collector of city taxes. 
1.  The minimum deposit to be made shall be as follows, per unit: 
Meter Size Fee 5/8 -inch meter $75.00 3/4-inch meter 75.00 1-inch meter 75.00 11/2-inch meter 105.00 2-inch meter 205.00 3-inch meter 380.00 4-inch meter 955.00 6-inch meter 1,910.00 Hydrant meter 1,800.00  
2.  The utility billing office may increase the amount of a deposit based upon an applicant's credit history or prior service history with the city, but only upon notification to the applicant, and in no event shall the deposit amount increase by more than 50 percent. 
3.  Deposits may, upon application, be transferred from one property to another, provided all bills for water service to the date of transfer have first been paid. 
4.  Any person who has made a deposit under this section may apply to the utility billing office for refund thereof. The utility billing office shall ask the director of finance to make a check refund, if all water charges to the date of final billing and cut-off or transfer have been paid. 
5.  Any person who has made a deposit under this section may, upon his request to the utility billing office, receive a refund in the amount of that deposit, after such time that ten consecutive payments for utility services have been made on or before the respective due dates. Any person meeting this requirement on any immediate past account shall be exempt from the payment of a deposit. 
(c)  Cancellation of water service account. 
1.  A water service customer may cancel his account by requesting account closure from the utility billing office in such form as that office may require. If there is more than one water service customer included on a water service account, cancellation shall not be effective unless requested by all customers on the account, and all customers shall remain responsible for paying any charges until cancellation is effected. 
2.  The utility billing office may require evidence that the water service customer is no longer responsible for the property. Failure to submit any such evidence requested by the utility billing office may result in the account remaining open and the continued accrual of water service charges. 
3.  The water service customer shall remain responsible for all such charges until such time as the account is closed in accordance with utility billing office policy. 
4.  Upon any cancellation of service and closing of an account, the water service customer who contracted for water service at the property shall be responsible for informing the owner of the property of the cancellation and closing. 
(d)  Notice. Any notice of action by the utility billing office that is required by this article shall be deemed satisfied where the utility billing office provides such notice to the customer or customers holding the affected water service account. 
(Code 1981, § 38-88; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-145. - Frequency of meter reading. 
    All water meters shall be read bimonthly; provided, however, that where water bills average $200.00 per month or greater, the meter may be read monthly at the owner's request. 
(Code 1981, § 38-89; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 114-146. - Charges when meter is out of order; meter testing charges. 
(a)  If any meter is out of order or fails to register accurately, the water service customer served by such a meter shall be charged at the average rate of consumption for similar billing periods as shown by the meter, when in order. 
(b)  If any water service customer is not satisfied with the meter reading and shall desire that the meter be tested, the meter shall be tested upon the utility billing office's receipt of a request for such testing. 
(1)  If the water meter is found to register more water than the amount passing through it, no charge shall be made for testing, the meter shall be replaced, and an adjustment shall be made in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  If the meter registers the correct amount or less water than the amount passing through it, the actual cost of testing the meter shall be charged to the water service customer who requested the testing. 
(c)  The charge for meter testing shall be determined and established from time to time by the director of public works. The charge shall be based upon the average cost of testing meters of different sizes. 
(Code 1981, § 38-90; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 114-147. - Computation; billing procedure. 
(a)  Bills for water supplied by the city shall be computed on a monthly rate, as provided in this article, and shall be billed bimonthly, unless billed monthly, quarterly, or semiannually, as specified by the director of public utilities and the director of finance. 
(b)  Statements showing the aggregate amount due for water used, the utility service tax imposed by chapter 106, article IX of this Code and the sewer service charge provided for in article III of this chapter shall be made out by the clerk of the water department and mailed to the address of the premises being served. If the owner of such premises shall request the water department to do so, such statement shall be retained in the office of the collector of city taxes or mailed to such address as the owner may designate. 
(c)  The clerk of the water department shall certify to the director of finance the total amount due, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, for each month, and the collector of city taxes shall become accountable for such amount. 
(d)  All water passing through any meter shall be charged to the address of the premises served and the bill therefor made out to such premises; provided, however, that in making such charges and bills therefor, the name of the owner of the property may be used to the extent the name of the owner is disclosed by the records of the water department. 
(e)  If any customer experiences an underground leak or a leak under the premises resulting in the loss of metered water, an adjustment shall be made upon proof that the leak has been repaired. The water charges will be assessed on the basis of the average consumption of the customer for similar billing periods, plus an additional charge of $1.00 above the Appomattox River Water Authority cost for each 1,000 cubic feet of water metered in excess of the average consumption. 
(Code 1981, § 38-91; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-148. - When and where payable. 
    Water bills for all premises shall be paid within 20 days of the billing, or by the indicated date for payment of the bill. Such bill shall be paid at the office of the collector of city taxes or at local banks authorized by the collector of city taxes to receive such payments. 
(Code 1981, § 38-92; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-149. - Lien for water charges. 
    Until such are paid, all water charges imposed or incurred for water, or the connection to or use of the water system, as established by this article, shall be a lien on the real estate so served. Where residential rental real estate is involved, no lien shall attach (i) unless the user of the water is also the owner of the real estate, or (ii) unless the owner of the real estate negotiated or executed the agreement by which such water services were provided to the property. 
(Ord. No. 99-92, § 38-92.1, 6-15-1999) 
Sec. 114-150. - When water bills are to be paid; list of delinquent premises; failure to pay penalty and interest. 
(a)  On the day following the due date for water bills, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the utility billing office shall prepare a list of such properties as are delinquent, and a penalty of ten percent, or $1.00, whichever is greater, shall be added to the bill, and the new bill reflecting this amount shall be sent as a delinquent notice to the water service customer. 
(b)  If the collector of city taxes has not received payment within ten days after a delinquent notice is sent, the water shall be cut off and an additional $50.00 shall be assessed against the water service customer. Any penalties or interest assessed for cutting off the meter or pulling the meter must be paid in addition to the delinquent payments prior to turn-on of service. 
(c)  If the fees and charges established by subsection (a) of this section are not paid within 30 days after notice of such charges, an additional 12 percent annual interest rate shall be assessed against such charges, and shall be paid by the water service customer in addition to such charges. 
(Code 1981, § 38-93; Ord. No. 04-37, 5-18-2004; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-151. - Charging off of uncollected bills. 
    On or before September 1 of each year, the collector of city taxes shall submit to the city manager a list of uncollected bills rendered pursuant to this article, together with penalties thereon, which have become delinquent during any fiscal period ended five years or more prior to June 30 of the fiscal period preceding the fiscal period in which such list is submitted to the city manager. Upon the approval by the city manager of such list of uncollected bills and the filing of the list in the office of the director of finance, such bills shall be charged off on the books of the collector of city taxes and he shall cease to be accountable for the uncollected bills, with the exception of such bills as may be thereafter paid. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as affecting the right of the city to collect any bill shown on such list or to pursue any remedy that it may have for the enforcement of the collection of such bill. 
(Code 1981, § 38-94; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
DIVISION 5. - CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Commonwealth of Virginia Waterworks Regulations, Art. 3.00. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 114-152. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the words and phrases set out in this section shall have the following meanings: 
    Authorized agent: Authorized person set forth by the city council, i.e. director of public works, or his appointed representative. 
    Backflow: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source other than its intended source. 
    Backsiphonage: A reversal in the direction of water from the distribution supply. 
    Contamination: Any objectionable or hazardous physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water. 
    Cross-connection: Any physical connection between a potable water supply and any waste pipe, soil pipe, sewer drain, or any unapproved source or system. "Cross-connection" includes any potable water supply outlet which is submerged or can be submerged in waste water and any other source of contamination. 
    Director: Director of Public Works (or Assistant Director of {Public Works-Utility Lines Division) for the City of Petersburg, Virginia. 
    Health hazard: Any conditions, devices, or practices in the water supply system and its operation which create, or in the judgment of the director, may create a danger to the health and well being of the water consumer. 
    Plumbing fixture: Installed receptacles, devices, or appliances supplied with water or that receive or discharge liquids or liquid-borne wastes. 
    Plumbing system: The water supply and distribution pipes, plumbing fixtures and traps; soil, waste and vent pipes; building drains and building sewers, including their respective connections, devices, and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises; and water treating or water-using equipment. 
    Pollution: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in the water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Protective devices: Equipment or devices which are directly connected to the water supply system providing protection from backflow and backsiphonage conditions. 
    PSIG: Pounds per square inch gage - readings of pressure greater or less than local atmospheric pressure. 
    Reduced pressure zone backflow preventer: Principal backflow preventer providing the highest level of protection against backflow on a direct connection to the potable water supply. Water flows through two independent check valves in the valve body with an intermediate zone between the check valves having an opening to atmosphere that is normally held closed until a backflow condition occurs. 
    Water-Potable: Water free from impurities in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects. Its bacteriological and chemical quality shall conform to the requirements of the Virginia Waterworks Regulations of the state department of health, office of drinking water, and the requirements of the city's department of utilities. 
    Water-Nonpotable: Water that is not safe for human consumption or that is of questionable potability. 
    Water system: All structures, appurtenances and equipment owned and operated by the city and used to collect, store, transport, purify, and treat water for drinking or domestic use and the distribution of water to the public. 
    Waterworks: A system that serves piped water for drinking or domestic use to (i) the public, (ii) at least 15 connections, or (iii) an average of 25 individuals for at least 60 days out of the year. The term "waterworks" shall include all structures, equipment, and appurtenances used in the storage, collection, purification, treatment and distribution of pure water except the piping and fixtures inside the building where such water is delivered (see Code of Virginia, art. 2, ch. 1 of tit. 32.1, as amended). 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-153. - Authority-Description of program. 
    The cross-connection and backflow prevention program in the City of Petersburg is required by the Commonwealth of Virginia Waterworks Regulations, Article 3.00, entitled "Cross-Connection and Backflow Prevention Control in Waterworks." Section 12VACS-590-580 states: "The purpose of this article of the regulations is to require as a condition for the issuance and continued use of the operation permit for the waterworks that each owner of a waterworks establish and enforce a program of cross-connection control and backflow prevention for each waterworks. The cross connection control and backflow prevention program shall be approved by the commissioner prior to issuance of the operation permit." 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-154. - Personnel-Organization. 
(a)  The basic responsibility for the city's cross-connection and backflow prevention program is with the City of Petersburg, Department of Public Works; Utility Lines Division. 
(b)  The one individual assigned to this activity shall be a full-time member of the utility lines division, or a contract individual with backflow and cross-connection experience. This position will be of an inspector/technician level with responsibilities to implement and promote the cross-connection control program. This individual will report to the director through the class V operator in responsible charge of the water system. The appointed individual shall provide overall coordination of the program and shall be responsible for and perform the inspection program and surveillance and maintenance of program records. This individual manages and promotes the program and performs inspections. He must be thoroughly trained in the detection and effects of cross-connection and in the use and function of backflow prevention devices. 
(c)  All new connections to the city's water system will be inspected for cross-connections by a city plumbing inspector prior to service. 
(d)  Review of utility plans for evaluation and approval of backflow prevention devices shall be performed in conjunction with the City of Petersburg Engineering Department. Requirements for protective devices will be made based upon the degree of hazard and the type of facility. 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-155. - Water system-Cross-connections. 
(a)  The city's potable water system shall be designed, installed, and maintained in such a manner as to prevent contamination from nonpotable liquids, solids, or gases from being introduced into the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. 
(b)  Cross-connections between the city's potable water system and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable safety are prohibited except when and where, as approved by the director, suitable protective devices such as the reduced pressure zone backflow preventer or equal are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper operation on a continuing basis. 
(c)  Backflow and backsiphonage. Every building, premises or structure in the city shall be constructed, equipped and maintained in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution of the city's water supply by cross-connection or backflow of liquids. 
(d)  The city's potable water system shall be protected against backflow and backsiphonage by installing and maintaining as near the point of connection as practical a suitable backflow prevention device at any premises deemed to have a potential backflow issue. 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-156. - Responsibility of director. 
(a)  The director, or his designated agent, shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises in the city that is determined to pose a potential hazard to the city's water supply, unless the supply is protected near the source with an appropriate backflow prevention device. 
(b)  The director, or his designated agent, shall have the right of entry into any building, during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspections of the plumbing systems installed in such building or premises for cross-connection or backflow problems caused by improper installation, repair or maintenance, faulty equipment, or other causes. Upon request, the owner or occupants of property served by the city water system shall furnish to the inspection agency pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. 
(c)  The director's responsibility shall be limited to the protection of the public water supply. If, in his judgment, the supply is adequately protected at or near the point of connection, inspections of the plumbing system on the property are not required. Cross-connections or backflows on the owners' premises are the sole responsibility of the owner. In the event of backflow into the waterworks, the purveyor shall promptly take or cause correction to confine and eliminate the pollution or contamination. The purveyor shall immediately notify the field office of the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Health, Office of Drinking Water when backflow condition occurs. 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-157. - Compliance with applicable rules and regulations. 
    Any cross-connection or backflow prevention device or system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner as to be in compliance with the Cross-Connection Control Manual, U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water Programs, Water Supply Division; the BOCA Basic Plumbing Code; the Uniform State Building Code; Article 3.00 of the Virginia Waterworks Regulations entitled "Cross-Connection and Backflow Prevention Control in Waterworks"; and the City of Petersburg Cross-Connection and Backflow Prevention Control Program ordinance, copies of which are on file in the department of public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-158. - Violations and penalty. 
(a)  The director shall notify the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the building or premises in which thee is found a violation of this article. The director shall set a reasonable time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. Upon failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by the end of the specified time interval, the director may, if in his judgment an imminent health hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated or deny service to such premises. 
(b)  If it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, if a cross-connection exists, or if the pressure in the waterworks drops to a minimum of ten PSIG, the Director shall take positive action to ensure that the waterworks is adequately protected at all times. 
(c)  The owner, or authorized agent of the owner, responsible for the maintenance of the plumbing systems in the building who knowingly permits a violation to remain uncorrected after the expiration of time set by the director shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation. Each day of failure to comply with the requirements of this division 5 shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-159. - Reviewing of utility plans. 
(a)  Any backflow prevention device required by the utilities department shall be installed at a location and in a manner approved by the department of utilities. 
(b)  Such devices shall be of an approved type and shall have been tested by a recognized testing laboratory or evaluation agency and be of satisfactory materials and be subject to approval by the department of utilities. 
(c)  Plans for fire service connections and extension lawn or irrigation systems served by the waterworks and other facilities requiring approved backflow prevention devices shall be submitted to the department of utilities prior to construction. The department of utilities shall review the plans and advise whether they are approved or disapproved. If disapproved, the department shall advise alternatives which will be approved. The revised plans shall be re-submitted for additional review. Only after final approval by the department of utilities will construction be permitted. 
(d)  Facilities which are required to have service connection approved backflow prevention device protection are listed under Section 12VAC5-590-610 of the Commonwealth of Virginia, Waterworks Regulations dated December 1, 2003, however, this list shall not be construed as a complete list. 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-160. - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspections will be scheduled in priority according to the known degree of hazard associated with the customer being served. Services designated as severe in degree of hazard must be surveyed first. Others should come in order. 
(b)  Inspections and operational tests of backflow prevention devices which are required and installed shall be made annually. Devices should be repaired, overhauled, or replaced as required by the department of utilities. Overhaul intervals should be by the manufacturer's recommendation or five years, whichever comes first. Operational tests must be performed by certified personnel after any repairs or replacements. 
(c)  Testing procedures shall be in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and performed by certified personnel. 
(d)  New connections or reconnections to the system shall be surveyed for potential cross-connections prior to service in accordance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-161. - Inspection records. 
(a)  Inspection records shall be kept for at least ten years. They will be made available when requested by the field office, department of health, office of drinking water. The following minimum information is required: 
(1)  Date, place, location, investigator, building representative, title, phone number, water source, hazards found, corrections made, corrections to be made, and recommendations made. 
(b)  Test records and data for backflow prevention devices shall be kept on file for a period of ten years and made available to the field office of the department of health, office of drinking water, on demand. Minimum information to be included in test data is as follows: 
(1)  Name of place, service address, mailing address, contact, title, phone number, kind of device, serial number, date installed, location, and location-in-service sketch. 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Sec. 114-162. - References. 
(a)  Cross-Connections and Backflow Prevention, Second Edition, by Gustave T. Angele, Sr. American Water Works Association, 6666 West Quincy Avenue, Denver, Colorado 80235. 
(b)  Cross-Connection Control Manual, Water Supply Division, Office of Water Programs, U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, Superintendent of Documents, U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. 
(c)  Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control, AWWA M14, American Water Works Association, 6666 West Quincy Avenue, Denver, Colorado 80235. 
(d)  AWWA Standard for Backflow Prevention Devices - Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valves Types, AWWA C506-69, American Water Works Association, 6666 West Quincy Avenue, Denver, Colorado 80235. 
(Ord. No. 05-59, 7-5-2005) 
Secs. 114-163-114-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Sewage disposal systems generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122 et seq.; septic tanks and sewage disposal when sewers not available, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157; health regulations pertaining to sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 114-171. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approval authority means the Commonwealth of Virginia or its authorized agent or representative. 
    Authority means the South Central Wastewater Authority, a corporation existing under and by virtue of the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or other applicable wastewater authority serving the City of Petersburg. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). The laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 136. 
    Building drain means all that portion of piping of a building sewer drainage system which receives the discharge from waste or other drainage pipes beginning five feet outside the building wall and conveys it to the lot property line where the building sewer lateral begins. 
    Building sewer lateral means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    City means the City of Petersburg, Virginia, or any authorized person acting on its behalf. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the measure, expressed in mg/l, of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater, expressing the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    COD (soluble) means the COD of the filtrate from wastewater that is filtered through a gooch crucible as required by the suspended solids test in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 136. 
    COD-BOD ratio means the ratio of the value of COD to BOD as these values are defined in this section. 
    Control authority means the city council or its duly authorized agent or representative. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer lateral at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point means the point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Department means the city's department of public works. 
    Director means the director of the department of public works of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Domestic sewage means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers, in which the average daily concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 and BOD is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorus is not more than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 18 mg/l; and total flow is not more than 30,000 gallons per day. 
    Domestic user means any residential user which discharges domestic pollutants to the authority's wastewater treatment facility. 
    Garbage means solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Incompatible waste means a waste which is not susceptible to adequate treatment by the wastewater treatment plant as determined by the director of public works. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise to release or dispose, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions, resulting in the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act. 
    Industrial user means any source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act which discharges nondomestic pollutants to the wastewater treatment facility, or any industrial, commercial, or other nonresidential discharger to the city's sanitary sewer system. 
    Industrial waste means all waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial manufacturing, trade, business or food processing operation or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic wastes. 
    Infiltration means water entering a sewer system, including service connections from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is distinct from, inflow. 
    Inflow means water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catchbasins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street washwaters, or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinct from, infiltration. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: (i) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operation or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and (ii) thereby either (a) precipitates a violation of any requirement of the POTW's VPDES permit or an increase in magnitude or duration of a violation, or (b) prevents the use or disposal of sewage sludge in a manner compliant with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act; or any more stringent applicable State or local regulations. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million, and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor of 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1) b. or c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this subdivision has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    Parts per million means a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts-per-million value multiplied by the factor of 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Pass through means any discharge that exits the wastewater treatment facility into state water in quantities or concentrations which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources will cause a violation of the wastewater facility's VPDES permit. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, joint stock company, association, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution. It shall be determined by one of the procedures outlined in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 136. 
    Phosphorus (total) means the sum of the various types of phosphate, expressed as elemental phosphorus, found in wastewater. The various forms include orthophosphate, condensed phosphate (pyro-, meta-, and poly-phosphate) and organically bound phosphates. The concentration of total phosphate is determined by the test procedures in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 136. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater such as pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor. 
    POTW (publicly owned treatment works) means a system of conveyances and treatment for sewage and industrial waste. Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment coordinator means the person holding responsibility for supervising the pretreatment requirements under division 4.1 of this article, as designated by (i) the South Central Wastewater Authority or (ii) other applicable wastewater authority serving the City of Petersburg. 
    Pretreatment regulation means the rules and regulations implementing the industrial pretreatment program, promulgated pursuant to section 114-286 of division 4.1 of this article. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Public sewer means either a sanitary or storm sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage, and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septic tank waste means any sewage or other wastes from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Sewage means human excrement and gray water, including water from household showers and dishwashing operations. 
    Sewerage means the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation, pumping and treatment of sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Significant noncompliance means the status of an industrial user if its violations of (i) this article, (ii) any provision of regulations promulgated pursuant to section 114-286 of division 4.1 of this article, (iii) a wastewater discharge permit or order issued pursuant to those regulations, or (iv) any other pretreatment standard or requirement meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of permitted wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by all magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily average maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, total suspended solids (TSS), fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a daily maximum or longer-term average pretreatment effluent limit that the pretreatment coordinator determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference, pass through, or endangerment of health of the wastewater treatment facility personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent or substantial endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment or has resulted in the director's exercise of his authority pursuant to section 114-289 of this chapter to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater control mechanism or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the pretreatment coordinator determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug load or slug discharge means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during the normal operation. 
    Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition at the time of analysis of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation, or as defined in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 136. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and unpolluted drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater runoff means the portion of the rainfall that is drained into the storm sewers or natural watercourses. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 136. 
    Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) means the combined ammonia and organic nitrogen in a given wastewater, as measured by the test procedures in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 136. It does not include nitrite and nitrate nitrogen. 
    Toxic substances means any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which, when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient quantities, interferes with any sewage treatment process, materially increases the cost of treatment, constitutes a hazard to any beneficial use, including recreation, ascribed to the receiving waters of the effluent from the sewage treatment plant or facility, causes a hazard to any portion of the sewerage system, constitutes a hazard to living organisms, or interferes with sludge disposal. 
    Trade secrets include, but are not limited to, any formula, plan, pattern, process, tool, mechanism, compound, procedure, production data, or compilation of information, which is not patented, which is known only to certain individuals within a commercial concern, who are using it to fabricate or produce a compound, an article of trade or a service having commercial value, and which gives its users an opportunity to obtain a business advantage over competitors who do not know or use it. 
    Trap means a device designated to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances from the sanitary sewer system. 
    User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
    User charge means the charge made to those persons who discharge normal wastewater into the city's sewerage system. This charge shall include a proportionate share of the capital costs of any capital improvements to the system. 
    User surcharge means the charge made, in excess of the user charge, for all wastewater over and above the loading defined as normal wastewater. 
    VPDES means Virginia Pollution Discharge Elimination System. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    Wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by the director, pursuant to the provisions of this article, to permit the discharge of any liquid or matter by an industrial user into the city's wastewater system. The permit, when so issued, shall reflect the applicable effluent standards and the terms and conditions for such discharge. 
    Wastewater facilities means all facilities for collection, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer whose wastes are treated at the wastewater treatment plant, and is the appropriate sum of the user charge and user surcharge. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any facilities, devices and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
    Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1981, § 27-1; Ord. No. 08-100, § 1, 11-18-2008) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 114-172. - Right of entry to enforce article. 
(a)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to enter all properties at reasonable times for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The director or his representative shall have authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industrial processes having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner or occupant of the premises and such owner or occupant shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees; and the city shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage to his property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner or occupant and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions as required in section 114-274. 
(c)  The director and other duly authorized employees of the city shall be permitted to enter private properties through which the city holds easements, for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance, of any portion of the sewage works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly established easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1981, § 27-10) 
Sec. 114-173. - Hearing board for arbitration of difference on matters concerning interpretation and enforcement of article. 
(a)  A hearing board shall be appointed as needed for arbitration of differences between the director and sewer users on matters concerning interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this article by the director. The cost of the arbitration will be divided equally between the city and the sewer user. 
(b)  The hearing board referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be composed of three members chosen as follows: one member selected by the director, one member selected by the sewer user and the remaining member chosen by the two appointees. 
(Code 1981, § 27-11) 
Sec. 114-174. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Notice. If any person is found to be violating any provisions of this article except sections 114-179 and 114-182, the city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice, stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit of 90 days for satisfactory compliance, if no environmental degradation occurs as a result of the violation. The control authority reserves the right to reduce the time required to obtain satisfactory compliance, depending on the amount of environmental degradation occurring as a result of the violation. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this article relating to prohibited discharges shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor for each act of violation and for each day of violation. Additionally, the city reserves the right to terminate the sewer and water connection for any violation of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Continuing discharges. In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to also act under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharge. 
(d)  Liability of violator to city. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary service when due. 
(Code 1981, §§ 27-12-27-14) 
Sec. 114-175. - Director of public utilities. 
    The city manager shall appoint a director of public utilities who shall have charge of the city sewers, pumping stations and wastewater treatment plant. 
(Code 1981, § 27-2) 
Sec. 114-176. - Supervision of sewers generally. 
    The director shall exercise general supervision over the sewers of the city and all matters connected therewith, under the direction of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 27-3) 
Sec. 114-177. - Sewer line extensions for commercial and industrial use. 
    Applications for sewer line extensions for commercial and industrial use shall be referred to the city manager and shall be considered by the city council upon the merits of the individual case and determined upon estimated quantities of water to be furnished. 
(Code 1981, § 27-4) 
Sec. 114-178. - Maintenance or replacement of sewer laterals within street rights-of-way. 
    The city shall repair or replace all sanitary sewer laterals within the right-of-way limits of all public streets. If a lateral in need of repair or replacement was installed by the city or as a part of a subdivision, and a clean-out was installed, the entire cost of such replacement or repair shall be borne by the city. If a lateral was installed for a property owner, under an old ordinance, by a private plumbing contractor, the property owner shall pay the fee for a replacement lateral, whereupon the city shall replace or repair the lateral, install a clean-out and become responsible for future maintenance of the lateral. Where records of the city do not show city installation of the lateral, it shall be presumed that the lateral was installed for a property owner by a private plumbing contractor. 
(Code 1981, § 27-5) 
Sec. 114-179. - Unlawful disposal of sewage and other objectionable waste generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner, on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 27-6) 
Sec. 114-180. - Discharge of sewage to natural outlets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 27-7) 
Sec. 114-181. - Obstructing sewers. 
    No person shall obstruct or cause the obstruction of any sewer, or discharge into any sewer any substance which is liable to obstruct the flow of sewage or which will in any manner impair the efficiency of the sewer. 
(Code 1981, § 27-8) 
Sec. 114-182. - Damaging, tampering with, etc., sewage works property. 
    No unauthorized person shall intentionally break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. This section shall apply only when the destruction or damage may be remedied or repaired for $200.00 or less. 
(Code 1981, § 27-9) 
Secs. 114-183-114-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER; BUILDING SEWERS AND DRAINS 

Sec. 114-201. - Mandatory connections. 
(a)  All persons owning property, except vacant lots, along the line of any public sewer, or having right of access to any public sewer, or having right of access to a private sewer connected with a public sewer, shall connect their premises with such sewer within four months after the completion of any sewer. It shall be the duty of the director to give immediate notice of the requirements of this section to all persons not having such connections, and whenever a new sewer is hereafter completed and ready for use, the director shall give notice to all persons owning property along the line of such sewer or having the right of access thereto. This subsection shall apply to all properties along the line of any public sewer facility, for furnishing sewer facilities within 150 feet of the nearest property line to the public sewer main, except when, in the discretion of the city manager or his designated representative, the requirement for connection would cause undue and extreme hardship to the owner. 
(b)  If the owner of any premises fails to make a sewer connection as set forth in this section, after the completion of any sewer, he shall be deemed to be guilty of maintaining a nuisance detrimental to the public health. The city manager may, at his discretion, cause such sewer connection to be made and necessary toilet and water connections constructed, under the direction of the director, at the cost of the owner of such premises, such cost to be a lien upon the land connected with such premises, and which shall be collected in the same manner that city taxes levied upon real estate are collected. Such expenses shall be docketed in the office of the city treasurer in a book kept for that purpose, and indexed in the name of the owner of the property. Before causing such work to be done, the city manager shall cause notice thereof to be served upon the owner of such premises or his agent, ten days in advance. If the work is not begun by the owner or his agent on or before the expiration of such ten days, the city manager may, at his discretion, proceed to have the work done. 
(Code 1981, § 27-26) 
Sec. 114-202. - Procedure for building application. 
    Upon application for a building permit, the building official shall obtain from the director information regarding the availability of public sewer facilities. If such facilities are available, connection will be made in compliance with this article. If public sewer facilities are not available, the provisions of division 5 of this article shall be followed. 
(Code 1981, § 27-27) 
Sec. 114-203. - Connection and building sewer permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the director. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: one for residential, and one for commercial or industrial service. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application to the director on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, supplemental permits, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the director. 
(Code 1981, § 27-28) 
Sec. 114-204. - Connection fees. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Laundromat means a facility containing coin-operated laundry machines that are intended for self-service operation by the customer. 
    Nursing home means a facility that provides skilled nursing care and rehabilitation services to people with illnesses, injuries or functional disabilities, either as an independent facility, or as a facility operating within a hospital or retirement community. 
(b)  Fee. Each person who desires to use the city sewage system shall first pay a connection fee for the privilege of connecting to the sewer system as specified in the following table: 
Type of Meter Connection Sewer 

Connection Fee Residential Use SF residential $5,140.00 Multifamily residential (per dwelling unit) 5,140.00 Commercial/Industrial Use 5/8 ? meter 5,140.00 1? meter 10,350.00 1.5? meter 18,100.00 2? meter 33,120.00 3? meter 66,240.00 4? meter 103,500.00 6? meter 207,000.00 8? meter 331,200.00 10? meter 595,332.00 12? meter 957,582.00 Other use Hotels and motels (per sleeping room) 2,570.00 Hospitals (per bed) 6,168.00 Nursing homes (per bed) 4,112.00 Laundromats (per machine) $10,280.00 Connections Made Outside City Limits Fees for connections to structures located outside the geographical limits of the City of Petersburg shall be double the otherwise applicable rate shown in this table.  
(c)  Purpose of connection fee. The purpose of the sewer connection fees prescribed by this section is to finance the capital costs of sewer infrastructure, including sewage pumping and transmission. The fees shall be fair and reasonable, and shall be established based on meter size or other waterworks capacity considerations. 
(d)  Assessment. A sewer connection fee shall be assessed against: 
(1)  A use or structure not connected to the sewer system when such use or structure connects; and 
(2)  A use or structure connected to the sewer system whenever such use or structure is expanded or modified so as to result in an increase in meter size or a change in the type of meter connection. 
No fee shall be assessed for replacement of an existing sewer connection if the use or structure served by the connection is not expanded or modified, except as provided for in section 114-178. 
(e)  Payment of fees. Connection fees assessed pursuant to this section and tap fees assessed pursuant to section 114-205 of this division shall be paid to the collector of city taxes at the time an application for a permit for sewer service connection pursuant to section 114-203 of this division is approved, except that the utility billing office may establish a payment plan for payment of tap fees for residential customers for good cause shown. No application for connection shall be approved until such time as the city has issued a building permit for the structure. The fees assessed under this section shall not be waived. 
(f)  Connection. The city shall connect a use or structure to the sewer system upon (i) payment of the fees pursuant to subsection (e); and (ii) completion of any final inspection by the public utilities division, except that the department director may authorize connection prior to completion of a final inspection for good cause shown. 
(g)  Deposit of monies. All monies collected as connection fees under this section shall be deposited into the city's general account, but shall be recorded in a dedicated account in the public utility enterprise fund. Monies shall be disbursed from that dedicated account solely to pay capital costs associated with infrastructure projects designed to develop sewer facilities that will serve the city, and related debt service on the capital costs of such projects. 
(Code 1981, § 27-29; Ord. No. 06-32, 3-21-2006; Ord. No. 08-93, § 3, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-205. - Connection to be installed; installation charges. 
    Connections to sewer mains may be installed by the city. The charge for such connections shall be determined and established, from time to time, by the director. The charge shall be based upon the average cost of making such connections. 
(Code 1981, § 27-30) 
Sec. 114-206. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-93, § 5, adopted Oct. 28, 2008, repealed § 114-206, which pertained to payment of connection fees and installation charges and derived from § 27-31 of the 1981 Code. 
Sec. 114-207. - General construction and installation standards. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer lateral, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(b)  The connection of the building sewer lateral into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(Code 1981, § 27-32) 
Sec. 114-208. - General responsibilities of owner with reference to building sewer. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer lateral shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer lateral. 
(Code 1981, § 27-33) 
Sec. 114-209. - Separate building sewer for each building. 
    A separate and independent building sewer lateral shall be provided for every building; provided, however, that upon written application to the director, showing sufficient reason, in the director's opinion, for such action, the director may grant, in writing, an exception from this requirement. 
(Code 1981, § 27-34) 
Sec. 114-210. - Use of old building sewers for new buildings. 
    Old building sewer laterals may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found upon examination and test by the director to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 27-35) 
Sec. 114-211. - Building sewer elevation; lifting devices for certain drains. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer lateral shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer lateral. 
(Code 1981, § 27-36) 
Sec. 114-212. - Guarding of building sewer excavations; restoration of public property disturbed by installation. 
    All excavations for building sewer lateral installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 27-37) 
Sec. 114-213. - Inspection of building drain; supervision of connection. 
    The person to whom the building sewer lateral permit was issued shall notify the building official when the building drain is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the building official or his representative. 
(Code 1981, § 27-38) 
Sec. 114-214. - Connection records to be kept. 
    The director shall preserve a record of the locations and costs of constructing connection pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1981, § 27-39) 
Sec. 114-215. - Connections of downspouts, etc., to building sewers or drains. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer lateral or building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1981, § 27-40) 
Sec. 114-216. - Disconnection of downspouts, etc., from building sewers and drains. 
    Any person whose property or building presently has connections to the public sewer shall remove all roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaways drains, or other sources of surface water or groundwater; provided, however, that a written exception may be granted by the director of public utilities if the owner can show in writing that undue or extreme hardship will result from compliance to this section. The director shall develop criteria and procedures which will be used to evaluate the hardship which will result from compliance with this section. If a written exception is granted, the person may be assessed additional charges for sewer service to compensate the city for collecting and treating the extra wastewater, and may be required to provide flow equalization facilities to reduce the peak flows being discharged to the public sewer. 
(Code 1981, § 27-41) 
Sec. 114-217. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this division are severable, and if any section, subsection, sentence, part or application of this division be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate any other section, subsection, sentence, part or application but shall be confined in its operation to the section, subsection, sentence, part or application at issue in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. 
(Ord. No. 08-93, § 4, 10-28-2008) 
Secs. 114-218-114-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SERVICE CHARGES 

Sec. 114-236. - Imposed; amount generally. 
(a)  Inside-city fees. The monthly commodity charge for sanitary sewer service furnished by the city to customers within the city limits shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first 300 cubic feet, per 100 cubic feet ..... $1.335 
(2)  From 301 cubic feet thru 12,500 cubic feet, per 100 cubic feet ..... 5.742 
(3)  All over 12,500 cubic feet, per 100 cubic feet ..... 3.668 
    The monthly capacity fee for sanitary sewer service furnished within the city limits shall be based upon the following meter sizes: 
Meter Size 
(inches) Monthly Sewer 
Capacity Fee ?" $    20.05 1 50.11 11/2 87.74 2 160.31 3 325.35 4 501.01 6 1,002.01 8 2,004.03 10 3,106.24 12 4,008.21  
(b)  Outside-city fees. The charges for city sewage treatment supplied to customers outside the corporate limits of the city shall be provided for by special contract, or the monthly rates shall be twice the monthly sewer commodity charges and capacity fees for inside-city customers, according to the schedule of rates provided in subsection (a) above. 
    Where more than one property or dwelling unit is served through a sewer lateral, the sewer bill shall be calculated from the consumption reading of the water meter and determined based on the average individual property or dwelling unit consumption, multiplied by the total number of served properties or dwelling units. 
(c)  Stormwater sewer charge. If a person whose property or building has stormwater connections is granted, in writing, an exception from removing such stormwater connections as provided in section 114-216, the person shall be charged a yearly stormwater sewer charge for the treatment of that stormwater. The amount of such charge shall be calculated by multiplying the amount of annual stormwater discharged into the city sewers by the percent determined by dividing the person's yearly sewer bill by that person's yearly water consumption. 
(d)  Effective date. The fees established by Ordinance No. 17-25 become effective on July 1, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 05-38, 6-7-2005; Ord. No. 06-55, 6-6-2006; Ord. No. 07-24, 3-20-2007; Ord. No. 12-21, § 2, 3-6-2012; Ord. No. 12-41, § 2, 5-15-2012; Ord. No. 13-39, § 2, 5-21-2013; Ord. No. 14-52, § 2, 6-3-2014; Ord. No. 15-30, 4-21-2015; Ord. No. 17-15, § 2, 4-4-2017; Ord. No. 17-25, § 2, 6-6-2017) 
Sec. 114-237. - Reduction in certain circumstances. 
(a)  If the entire volume of water used on any premises shall not be discharged into the city sanitary sewer system, a reduction of the charge imposed under section 114-237 shall be allowed; provided, the user of water on such premises shall install, maintain and repair, and provide for annual calibration thereof to ensure the accuracy of the meter if required by the director or his designee, at his expense, a meter, satisfactory to the director, to record the water or sewage which will or will not ultimately reach the city sewers, or a metering method, satisfactory to the director, which will be verified periodically to ensure the accuracy of the method. The charge imposed by section 114-236 shall be based on the amount of water discharged to the city sewers as shown by the meter reading. 
(b)  If any person experiences an underground leak or a leak under the premises resulting in the loss of metered water, a reduction shall be made upon proof that the leak has been repaired. The sewer charge assessed under section 114-236 shall be assessed to the water charges determined by subsection 114-147(e); provided, however, that the water lost through the leak is returned to the city sewers. If the water lost through the leak did not return to the city sewer, the sewer charges imposed by section 114-236 shall apply only to the average consumption of water of the person for similar billing periods. 
(Code 1981, § 27-53; Ord. No. 12-56, 6-19-2012) 
Sec. 114-238. - Charge when private water supply used. 
    Any person using a private source of water shall install, maintain and repair, at his own expense, facilities satisfactory to the director for measuring the volume of sewage discharged into the city sewers, and the charge imposed by section 114-236 shall be applied to the amount that such person would have been charged for a volume of water equivalent to the volume of such sewage discharged by such person into the city sewers. 
(Code 1981, § 27-54) 
Sec. 114-239. - Billing and enforcement generally. 
    The provisions of article II of this chapter, with respect to billing and enforcement of bills, shall be applicable to billing and enforcement for the charges imposed by this division. The provisions specified in section 114-150 for the imposition of penalties and interest for delinquent payment of charges imposed by article II of this chapter shall be applicable to all sewer charges imposed by this division. 
(Code 1981, § 27-55) 
Sec. 114-240. - Personal liability of user. 
    The amount of any sewer service charge imposed under this division shall constitute a personal liability of any person using the sewer or water system or the sewer and water system of the city, and, in addition to other remedies, the city may enforce such personal liability by appropriate proceedings. 
(Code 1981, § 27-56) 
Sec. 114-241. - Lien for sewer charges. 
    Until such are paid, all sewer charges imposed or incurred for sewer service, or the connection to or use of the sewer system, as established by this article, shall be a lien on the real estate so served. Where residential rental real estate is involved, no lien shall attach (i) unless the user of the sewer is also the owner of the real estate, or (ii) unless the owner of the real estate negotiated or executed the agreement by which such sewer services were provided to the property. 
(Ord. No. 99-92, § 27-56.1, 6-15-1999) 
Sec. 114-242. - Duty as to prompt payment. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or tenant of any premises having a connection directly or indirectly to the city sanitary or combination storm sewer to see that the sewer service charge imposed under this article is promptly paid within the time such sewer service charge shall become due, whether a bill therefor shall actually have been received or not. 
(Code 1981, § 27-57) 
Sec. 114-243. - Charge for private haulers for wastewater. 
(a)  Inside-city fees. Any person permitted to deliver sewage generated from a location inside the city limits to the sewage treatment works, by means of some type of tank truck, shall be charged for sewage treatment, the amount of which shall be based upon a fee schedule and rules and regulations as determined by the director of public utilities. 
(b)  Outside-city fees. Any person permitted to deliver sewage generated from a location outside the city limits to the sewage treatment works, by means of some type of tank truck, shall be charged for sewage treatment, the amount of which shall be based upon a fee schedule and rules and regulations as determined by the director of public utilities. 
(c)  Payment. Bills for sewage treatment shall be paid within 15 days of the billing or by the date indicated for payment of the bill. Such bills shall be paid at the office of the collector of city taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 27-58; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-244. - Extra strength or quantity surcharges. 
(a)  Standard strength wastewater shall be defined as that wastewater having maximum BOD 5 , COD and suspended solids concentrations as follows: 
BOD 5       250 mg/l 
COD       625 mg/l 
Suspended solids       250 mg/l 
Total phosphorus       2 mg/l 
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen       18 mg/l 
(b)  Industrial wastewater surcharges may be assessed to any industrial users discharging wastewater, including constituents, at a concentration exceeding any of the limits specified in this article. Categorical pretreatment standards, plus national pretreatment standards codified in the United States Environmental Protection Agency's General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403.5, shall not be superseded. 
(c)  If the concentration of COD exceeds BOD 5 by more than 2.5 times, the surcharge should be levied upon COD divided by 2.5 in place of BOD 5 , at the rate specified for BOD 5 . 
(d)  High concentrations of specific pollutants in industrial wastewater may warrant an industrial surcharge, when a surcharge is based upon proven actual costs of the treatment of such wastewater. 
(e)  Extra strength surcharges shall apply at the same rates to customers inside and outside the city limits. 
(f)  When the discharge of wastewater into the public sanitary sewer is of a strength exceeding standard wastewater strength, a surcharge shall be applied in addition to the rates assessed by this article, as follows: 
(1)  BOD 5 -the annual unit cost per 100 pounds, by weight, contributing to a concentration in excess of 250 mg/l; 
(2)  Suspended solids-the annual unit cost per 100 pounds, by weight, contributing to a concentration in excess of 250 mg/l. 
Pounds shall be computed by 8.34, the weight of one gallon of water, times the volume of wastewater in million gallons, times the parts per million in excess of standard strength. 
(g)  The industrial wastewater surcharges may be assessed on a monthly, bimonthly, or quarterly basis, and may be assessed on the basis of a seven-day/24-hour composite wastewater sample, or on the basis of at least one 24-hour composite sample per month. 
(h)  If any person or entity discharges peak wastewater flows, exclusive of stormwater discharges permitted under section 114-216, in excess of the ratios provided in subsection (i) of this section, a ten percent penalty shall be applied to the charges imposed by section 114-236 for each occurrence; provided, that the total amount of penalties assessed shall not exceed 100 percent of the charges imposed by section 114-236 during any month. 
(i)  Standard peak flow ratios shall be defined for a wastewater discharger as follows: 
Monthly Average Operation 
Daily Flow 
(Gallons per day) Allowable Ratio of 
Instantaneous Peak Flow 
To Monthly Average Operation 
Daily Flow      0- 10,000 10.0  10,001-100,000  3.0 100,001-500,000  2.0 more than-500,000  1.5  
(Code 1981, § 27-59) 
Secs. 114-245-114-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4.1. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 114-283. - Purpose of program. 
    This division sets forth uniform requirements for users of the sanitary sewer system for the city and the wastewater treatment system of the authority to which the city's sewer system discharges. Pursuant to the city's authority under Code of Virginia (1950) (as amended) § 15.2-2111, this division implements and provides for the implementation of requirements imposed on the city by the pretreatment requirements established by the Commonwealth of Virginia, 9 VAC 25-31-730 to 900, and the federal pretreatment requirements at 40 CFR Part 403. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-284. - Administration of program. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the department and the pretreatment coordinator shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division and any regulations promulgated hereunder. The department and the pretreatment coordinator shall implement this division in conjunction with the programs of the authority, and shall assist the authority in issuing pretreatment permits to industrial users within the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-285. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No industrial user, domestic user, or other person shall discharge to the city's sanitary sewer system any wastewaters or other wastes which: 
(1)  Damage or may damage or interfere with the operation or maintenance of the city sanitary sewer system, other sewer systems into which the city system may discharge, or the authority's wastewater treatment facilities; 
(2)  Pass through the wastewater treatment facilities of the authority untreated or inadequately treated; 
(3)  Interfere with the authority's use or disposal of sewage sludge; 
(4)  Present a danger or an inordinate risk to the city's personnel or property; or 
(5)  Violate or exceed any limitations on such wastewaters or other wastes established by the Commonwealth of Virginia or federal pretreatment requirements. 
(b)  The pretreatment regulations promulgated pursuant to section 114-286 of this division shall implement the provisions of this section, and shall specify prohibitions and restrictions on the discharge of wastewaters and other wastes. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-286. - Pretreatment regulations. 
    The director is authorized to promulgate and amend as necessary the city's pretreatment regulations. The regulations shall establish: (i) specific wastewater and other waste discharge prohibitions, restrictions, and limitations; (ii) sampling, monitoring, testing, and other analytical requirements; (iii) requirements to construct, or otherwise provide, access and sampling structures and equipment; (iv) administrative enforcement procedures; (v) access and inspection requirements; (vi) requirements for septic tank waste; and (vii) a permit program applicable to all or specified classes of industrial users. 
    The regulations shall provide for city compliance with the state and federal requirements identified in section 114-283 of this division. Prior to promulgation or amendment of the regulations, the city manager or his designee shall provide: (i) public notice of the city's intent to promulgate or amend; (ii) a period of no less than 15 days for public comment; and (iii) a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-287. - Appeals of pretreatment permits. 
    The pretreatment regulations shall establish an administrative procedure for the appeal of pretreatment permit final action. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint, within 30 days after exhaustion of their right to administrative appeal, with the Circuit Court for the City of Petersburg. Any such complaint shall name the city and the authority as defendants. The circuit court's standard of review shall be as specified in Code of Virginia § 2.2-4027. If the court holds in favor of the aggrieved party, the court shall remand the permit decision. The right of judicial review to contest the applicability of any requirement to an aggrieved party shall not create or imply the existence of any right of judicial review of the substance of the requirements mandated by state or federal law referenced in this division. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-288. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Administrative enforcement. The pretreatment regulations shall include provisions to address violations and possible violations of this division, the regulations, or any permit or order issued pursuant to this division. Such administrative enforcement provisions shall include but not be limited to notices of violations and show cause hearings. 
(b)  Consent orders. The department, subject to review and approval by the city manager and the city attorney, may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar agreements with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the compliance orders issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable. Consent orders may include a civil charge for past noncompliance and stipulated civil charges for future noncompliance, in amounts that do not exceed the amounts specified in section 114-292 for civil penalties. 
(c)  Compliance orders. When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, the regulations promulgated pursuant to section 114-286, or any permit or order issued hereunder, the department, subject to review and approval by the city manager and the city attorney, may issue a compliance order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, water and sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated by the user in a manner and time approved by the department. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-289. - Emergency suspensions. 
(a)  The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which (i) reasonably presents or causes an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, or (ii) threatens to interfere with the operation of the city sanitary sewer system or the facilities of the authority. 
(b)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate such discharge. If a user refuses or otherwise fails to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as he deems necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection and the city's supply of potable water to the user, to prevent or minimize (i) damage to the city sanitary sewer system, the facilities of the authority, or the receiving stream, or (ii) endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the director's satisfaction that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 114-290 of this division are initiated against the user. 
(c)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent or substantial endangerment shall, prior to the date of any administrative or termination hearing under this division, submit to the director and the pretreatment coordinator a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. However, the department shall provide an opportunity for an informal hearing as soon as practicable after any such emergency suspension. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-290. - Termination of discharge. 
(a)  The director may terminate (i) the authorization to discharge to the sanitary sewer system, and (ii) any pretreatment permit of any user who: 
(1)  Violates its wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Fails to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Fails to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violates the discharge prohibitions in section 114-285 of this division. 
(b)  The director shall notify such user of the proposed termination of its discharge and shall offer such user an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(c)  The city's notification of any proposed termination of discharge shall neither bar, nor constitute a necessary prerequisite to, any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-291. - Injunctive relief. 
(a)  When the director or the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, the pretreatment regulations promulgated pursuant to section 114-286 of this division, or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, the director may petition the circuit court for the city through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this division or the regulations on activities of the user. 
(b)  The director, through the city attorney, also may seek such other action as is appropriate for legal or equitable relief, including a requirement that the user conduct environmental remediation. 
(c)  A petition for injunctive relief shall neither bar, nor constitute a necessary prerequisite to, any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-292. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, the pretreatment regulations promulgated pursuant to section 114-286 of this division, or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this division shall be liable to the city for civil penalties. Those penalties shall, pursuant to the authority granted to the city in Section 1-4 of the Charter of the City of Petersburg, be equal in amount to those authorized pursuant to Code of Virginia (1950) (as amended) § 62.1-44.32. Civil penalties shall be recovered by civil suit by the city attorney on behalf of the city in the circuit court for the city. 
(b)  The city may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and other factors as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not preclude or be a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user, and may be instituted in addition to criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-293. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division, the pretreatment regulations promulgated pursuant to section 114-286 of this division, or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  A user (i) who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this division, the pretreatment regulations promulgated pursuant to section 114-286 of this division, or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or (ii) who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Criminal prosecution instituted under this section shall not preclude, and may be instituted in addition to, a cause of action for personal injury or property damage pursuant to Virginia law. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-294. - Search warrants. 
    The director may request that a judge of the circuit court for the city issue a search warrant if the pretreatment coordinator or the department (i) has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and (ii) demonstrates either (a) probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, the pretreatment regulations promulgated pursuant to section 114-286 of this division, or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or (b) that there is a need to inspect and sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the department or the authority designed to verify compliance, or to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 114-295. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies established in this division are not exclusive. The city and the authority may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of actions responsive to pretreatment violations will be in accordance with the authority's enforcement response plan and city code and regulations. However, the director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant, and nothing herein shall restrict the city's enforcement discretion. 
(Ord. No. 08-100, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Secs. 114-296-114-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 114-301. - When required or prohibited. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 114-201, the building sewer lateral shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. When such a sewer is so available, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1981, § 27-101) 
Sec. 114-302. - Permit generally. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the health director. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the health department, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the health department. 
(Code 1981, § 27-102) 
Sec. 114-303. - When permit effective; inspections. 
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the health director. The health director or his representative shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the health director when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two working days of the receipt of such notice by the health director. 
(Code 1981, § 27-103) 
Sec. 114-304. - Specifications. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities, where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. 
(Code 1981, § 27-104) 
Sec. 114-305. - Septic tank or cesspool not to discharge to natural outlet. 
    No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Code 1981, § 27-105) 
Sec. 114-306. - Operation and maintenance. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 27-106) 
Sec. 114-307. - Procedure when public sewer becomes available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with section 114-201, within four months, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned in accordance with state health department regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 27-107) 
Sec. 114-308. - Division not to interfere with requirements of state health department. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state health department. 
(Code 1981, § 27-108) 
Secs. 114-309-114-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 114-400. - Findings and purpose of utility. 
(1)  Findings. The city finds and determines that uncontrolled drainage and development of land has a significant adverse impact upon the health, safety, and welfare of the Petersburg community. Further, the city finds as follows: 
(a)  Stormwater runoff is capable of carrying pollutants into receiving bodies, thereby degrading water quality; 
(b)  Impervious surfaces increase the volume and rate of stormwater runoff and allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater recharge; 
(c)  Improperly managed stormwater runoff may increase the incidence and intensity of flooding, which endangers property and human welfare; 
(d)  Improperly channeling water increases the velocity of stormwater runoff and increases erosion and sedimentation; 
(e)  Construction requiring the alteration of natural topography and removal of vegetation tends to increase erosion; 
(f)  The increase in nutrients, such as phosphorous and nitrogen, resulting from stormwater runoff accelerates eutrophication of receiving water bodies and adversely affecting flora and fauna; 
(g)  Siltation of water bodies resulting from increased erosion decreases the capacity of water bodies to hold and transport water, interferes with navigation, and harms flora and fauna; 
(h)  Substantial economic losses may result from adverse impacts upon the waters of the Petersburg ecosystem; 
(i)  The city has an existing stormwater control program, through which it administers various stormwater management functions and maintains a system of storm and surface water management facilities including, but not limited to, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, waterways, drainage easements, retention and detention basins, infiltration facilities, and other components; 
(j)  The existing stormwater system in the city requires regular maintenance and improvements; 
(k)  Due to the age of existing infrastructure, rehabilitation and replacement of some portions of the existing stormwater system and implementation of new stormwater systems are required; 
(l)  All developed property in the city either uses or benefits from the city's administration of its stormwater control program; 
(m)  The extent of use of the stormwater program by each property depends upon factors, such as land use and the amount of impervious surface on the property, which influence runoff; 
(n)  The costs of administration of the city's stormwater program should be allocated, to the extent practicable, to all property owners based in part on the impact of runoff from the impervious areas of their property on the stormwater system; and 
(o)  Management of the city's stormwater program to protect the public health, safety, and welfare requires adequate revenues, and it is in the interest of the public to finance stormwater management adequately with a reasonable and equitable user fee system so each user of the program pays to the extent to which the user contributes to the need for the stormwater program. 
(2)  Purpose of article. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain, and enhance the immediate and long-term health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. In order to effectuate this purpose, this article has the following objectives: 
(a)  To develop a stormwater control program, to be responsible for the construction, operation, and maintenance of stormwater devices; for stormwater system planning; for review of development plans for compliance with stormwater management codes; 
(b)  To adopt stormwater utility fees sufficient to administer the city's stormwater control program and plan, construct, operate, and maintain stormwater management systems throughout the city; 
(c)  To encourage productive and enjoyable harmony between humanity and nature; 
(d)  To protect, restore, and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of community waters; 
(e)  To prevent individuals, business organizations, and governments from causing harm to the community, by activities which adversely affect water resources; 
(f)  To encourage the construction of drainage systems which aesthetically and functionally approximate natural systems; 
(g)  To encourage the protection of natural systems, and the use of those systems in ways not impairing their beneficial functioning; 
(h)  To minimize the transport of pollutants to community waters; 
(i)  To maintain or restore groundwater levels; 
(j)  To minimize erosion and sedimentation; and 
(k)  To help prevent damage from flooding, while recognizing that natural fluctuations in water levels are beneficial. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-401. - Definitions for the stormwater program. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base rate means the total cost to the city of implementing the city's stormwater program. 
    Bonds means revenue bonds, notes, loans or any other debt obligations issued or incurred to finance the program. 
    Customer means any person who owns, leases, or otherwise is responsible for payment of the fee charged to a property. A person owning, leasing, or otherwise responsible for a property not containing impervious surface is not a customer. 
    Debt service means, with respect to any particular fiscal year and any particular series of bonds, an amount equal to the sum of all interest payable on such bonds during such fiscal year plus any principal installments of such bonds during such fiscal year. 
    Developed property or property means real property which has been altered from its original state by the addition of any improvements, such as a building, structure, or other form of impervious surface. Disturbed lands shall be considered developed property when there is more than 500 square feet of impervious surface area. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this article upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon evidence of construction, completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued. 
    Dwelling unit means a single unit or apartment providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Equivalent residential unit or ERU means the average square footage of impervious area as determined pursuant to this article. 
    ERU rate means a portion of the utility fee charged per ERU, as established in Exhibit A of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Fee, stormwater utility fee, or utility fee means the monetary charge established under this article, levied on owners or users of parcels or pieces of real property deriving a service from the city's stormwater program, and being sufficient to fund and administer the program. The city shall base the fee upon an equitable unit cost approach and structure the funding to generate capital to administer the stormwater program. The stormwater utility fee is in addition to any other fee the municipality has the right to charge under any other rule or regulation of the municipality. 
    Impervious surface means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, buildings, streets, parking areas, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
    Impervious surface area means the number of square feet of horizontal surface covered by impervious surfaces. Measurements to determine impervious surface area should be made between exterior or outermost portions of the impervious surface. 
    Non-residential utility customer means all stormwater utility customers not classified as residential utility customers. 
    Operation and maintenance means the current expenses, paid or accrued, of operation, maintenance, and current repair of the city's stormwater system, as calculated in accordance with sound public works, engineering and accounting practices, and includes, but is not limited to, insurance premiums, administrative expenses, labor, executive compensation, materials and supplies costs for current operations, and charges for the accumulation of appropriate reserves for current expenses not annually incurred, but which may reasonably be expected to incur in accordance with sound accounting practice. 
    Person means a natural or artificial person (such as a corporation) recognized by law to have the rights and duties of a human being. Person means the state or any agency or institution thereof, the United States or any agency or institution thereof, or any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, individual, partnership, association, or other entity and includes any officer or governing or managing body of the state, the United States, any agency, any municipality, political subdivision, or public or private corporation. 
    Property owner includes any person who has the right to possess, use, and convey title of real property. Property owner may include a tenant, if chargeable under tenant's lease for the maintenance of the subject real property, and any agent of the owner or tenant, including the developer. 
    Residential utility customer means a stormwater utility customer who lives in a dwelling unit. Residential utility customer does not include the place where a corporation or other enterprise conducts or is authorized to conduct business. 
    Revenue means all rates, fees, or other charges or other income received by the utility, in connection with the administration of the stormwater program, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by the city, all as calculated in accordance with sound accounting practice. 
    Stormwater means the flow of water which results from a precipitation event and includes, but is not limited to, stormwater runoff, surface runoff, and drainage. 
    Stormwater control program, or stormwater program, or program means the comprehensive strategies for dealing with stormwater quantity and quality issues. Stormwater control includes, but is not limited to, the planning, design, construction, regulation, improvement, repair, maintenance, and operation of facilities and programs relating to water, comprehensive plan elements relating to flood plains, flood control, grading, erosion, tree conservation, and sediment control. 
    Stormwater control fund, enterprise fund, or fund means the fees, and other revenue collected by the city exclusively to fund the planning, construction, operation, and maintenance of the city's stormwater control program. 
    Stormwater control system means a system which is designed, constructed, or implemented to control discharges caused by precipitation events and incorporates methods to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use, or reuse water to prevent or reduce flooding, overdrainage, environmental degradation, and water pollution, or otherwise affect the quantity and quality of discharges from the system. 
    Stormwater utility or utility means the funding of a program by assessing to the beneficiaries the cost of the program based on their relative contribution to its need. The stormwater utility operates as a typical utility, which bills services regularly, similar to water and wastewater services. 
    Stormwater utility customer means a person to whom the fee is assigned and billed. 
    User means the owner of record of property or other party subject to the fee imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-402. - Creation of utility. 
(1)  Establishment of utility. Pursuant to the Code of Virginia, Tit. 15.2, Ch. 21, Section 15.2-2114, Regulation of Stormwater, as amended, the city hereby establishes a stormwater utility. The public works director and city engineer of the city shall be jointly responsible for the city's stormwater control program and system and for all activities and facilities necessary to provide control of stormwater quantity and quality in the city. 
(2)  The city shall have the power to: 
(a)  Charge a fee to customers within the city; 
(b)  Prepare necessary regulations recommended to implement the article, forward the regulations to the city council for consideration and adoption, and adopt any procedures required to implement the regulations or carry out other responsibilities for the effective administration of the program; 
(c)  Administer the acquisition, design, construction, maintenance, and operation of the city's stormwater management system, including capital improvements designated in the stormwater control program; 
(d)  Administer, interpret, and enforce this article and all regulations and procedures adopted relating to the level of service, design, construction, maintenance, operation, and alteration of the system, including but not limited to the quantity, quality, and/or velocity of the stormwater conveyed; 
(e)  Require inspection and certification to the operation and maintenance of private systems as necessary to determine compliance of such systems with this article and any other applicable regulations adopted under this Code; 
(f)  Advise the city council, city administration, and other city departments on matters relating to the program; 
(g)  Review, approve or deny plans, and perform construction permit inspections for extensions to the city's system; 
(h)  Establish and enforce regulations to protect and maintain water quality within the system in compliance with established federal, state, and local water quality standards as adopted or amended; 
(i)  Ensure an adequate and stable base rate to achieve a stable financial position for the program by analyzing and amending: 
1.  The cost of services and benefits provided; 
2.  The system and structure of the stormwater management fees and other fees, charges, fines, and revenues of the program; and 
3.  Any other factors relevant to maintaining a stable financial position. 
(j)  Seek any grant capable of funding capital improvements for stormwater management. 
(k)  Issue bonds against the enterprise fund established herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-403. - Structure of equivalent residential unit. 
(1)  Establishment of the equivalent residential unit. For purposes of calculating the fee, the city shall establish an equivalent residential unit (ERU). 
(2)  Determination of ERU. 
(a)  ERU area established. The equivalent residential unit (ERU) area shall be established by resolution. 
(b)  Residential. The city shall determine the ERU for all residential property based upon the number of dwelling units on that property where applicable. 
(c)  Non-residential. The city shall determine the ERU for all non-residential property based upon the relative impervious area on a customer's property compared to the equivalent ERU of residential property. 
(3)  Determination of ERU rate. The ERU rate shall be based upon revenue needs of the stormwater control program and the total number of ERUs in the city. The rate and rate structure shall be defined by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-404. - Implementation of fee. 
(1)  Establishment of fee. The city hereby establishes a stormwater utility fee. All annual adjustments to the fee shall be approved by city council and shall be filed with the office of the clerk of city council. The clerk of city council shall mark the receipt date of the approval and shall immediately place a copy in the mail to the city manager. The approval shall become effective 30 days after the clerk of city council receives it unless the city governing body suspends the approval by resolution, and any such suspension will become effective the date the resolution becomes effective. 
(2)  Charges for special circumstances. The city, if appropriate, shall include in the fee special charges structured to recover the cost of providing to certain persons, entities, and properties stormwater control services not commonly required by all customers. Such stormwater control services may include, but are not limited to, plan review and inspection, site inspections, water quality monitoring and mitigation activities, and actions to abate private property conditions not complying with adopted city standards or interfering with proper stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-405. - Collection of fees. 
(1)  The utility fee is to be paid by the owner or occupant of each lot or parcel subject to the utility fee. All properties, except as stated in section 114-408, shall be rendered bills or statements forstormwater services. Such bills or statements shall be included on the combined water, sewer and solid waste utility bill levied pursuant to this Code. 
(2)  All payment of fees for stormwater services shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises unless the premises are occupied by a person other than the owner and such person is the recipient or beneficiary of the service and is responsible for the payment of water and sewage charges; in which event, such person shall be responsible for the payment of stormwater service charges. Fees shall be paid on the same schedule as are the water and sewage charges. Such fees are due and payable in the office of the collector of city taxes in the manner prescribed for water and sewage charges as established by this Code and, if not so paid, shall carry the same penalties and interest as prescribed therein. If the moneys received in payment of the water and sewage charges, the stormwater charges, and the solid waste collection and disposal fees are not sufficient to pay the outstanding balance in full, including any penalties or interest, the stormwater utility fee and any penalties or interest attributed thereto shall be considered to be paid second out of the moneys collected, after the solid waste collection and disposal fees. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 114-406. - Revenue sources for utility. 
(1)  Sources of funding. The stormwater utility funding sources may include the following: 
(a)  Stormwater utility fees; 
(b)  Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or arising from the violation of the stormwater utility ordinance or other applicable sections of this Code; 
(c)  Stormwater permit and inspection fees; 
(d)  Other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local, and private grants or revolving funds; 
(e)  Bonds issued using future stormwater utility revenue as collateral; and 
(f)  Any other reasonable means. 
(2)  Insufficiency of fee revenue. If the fees collected are insufficient to finance the base rate, the city, if the city's governing body approves, may pay the cost of the program from other city funds. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-407. - Establishment of enterprise fund. 
    The city shall establish an enterprise fund exclusively for the deposit and withdrawal of all revenue collected pursuant to this article. The city shall use the enterprise fund for the independent and separate accounting of all revenues, expenditures, assets and liabilities, and earnings and obligations of the utility and which may be used only to pay or recover costs for the following purposes: 
(a)  The acquisition, as permitted by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1800, of real and personal property, and interest therein, necessary to construct, operate and maintain stormwater control facilities; 
(b)  The cost of administration of such programs; 
(c)  Planning, design, engineering, construction, and debt retirement for new facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities, including the enlargement or improvement of dams, levees, floodwalls, and pump stations, whether publicly or privately owned, that serve to control stormwater; 
(d)  Facility operation and maintenance, including the maintenance of dams, levees, floodwalls, and pump stations, whether publicly or privately owned, that serve to control the stormwater; 
(e)  Monitoring of stormwater control devices and ambient water quality monitoring; and 
(f)  Other activities consistent with the state or federal regulations or permits governing stormwater management, including, but not limited to, public education, watershed planning, inspection and enforcement activities, and pollution prevention planning and implementation. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-408. - Exemption from fee. 
    Except as provided in this section, the city shall not exempt any customer from the fee. The city shall implement the following exemption guidelines: 
(a)  A federal, state, or local government, or public entity, that holds a permit to discharge stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system; except that the waiver of the stormwater fee shall apply only to property covered by any such permit; and 
(b)  Public roads and street rights-of-way that are owned and maintained by state or local agencies including property rights-of-way acquired through the acquisitions process. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-409. - Adjustment of fee. 
(1)  Procedure for adjustment. A customer shall submit to the city any request for stormwater utility fee adjustment. The city, when responding to fee adjustment requests, shall apply the following minimum procedures: 
(a)  Submission of petition. Any customer may submit to the city a petition for fee adjustment. The customer shall include in the petition his or her contact name and address, the property address, the subdivision name, a property sketch, the total amount of impervious area, the total lot or parcel size. 
(b)  Grounds for appeal. If a customer submits a petition, the customer shall submit the petition in writing and set forth, in detail, the grounds upon which the customer seeks relief. Grounds for appeal of the fee may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Incorrect property classification for purposes of determining the fee; 
2.  Errors in the property's impervious surface area square footage; and 
3.  Mathematical errors in calculating the property's applicable fee. 
(c)  Factors for decision. When evaluating a petition for adjustment, the city shall consider all relevant information. 
(d)  Timing and notice of decision. The city, on or before 90 days after receipt by the city of a customer's completed petition, shall review and render a decision on the petition. The city, in writing, shall provide notice to the petitioner of acceptance or denial of a petition. 
(e)  Retroactivity of adjustment decision. The city shall retroactively apply to the customer's first billing cycle any grants of adjustment resulting from a customer's petition. Retroactive adjustment will not exceed one year, and the city shall apply reimbursement to the customer's future fee collections. 
(f)  Appeal of denial. If the city denies a customer's petition, the customer, on or before the thirtieth calendar day after the city renders a final decision on the petition, may appeal to city manager, or the city manager's designee, for review of the denial. On or before the thirtieth calendar day after receipt of a customer's appeal, the city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall render a written final decision on the appeal detailing the basis for the decision. When reviewing appeals of adjustment petition denials, the city manager, or the city manager's designee, shall apply the standards and review criteria contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-410. - Credits. 
(1)  Availability of credits. The city shall allow credits for customer's onsite and offsite stormwater facilities that achieve a permanent reduction in stormwater flow or pollutant loadings. The city will prepare policies to provide clear procedures, in addition to the minimum procedures set forth herein, to review requests for a fee credits. 
(2)  Basis for credits. If the city credits a customer's fee, the city shall consider the customer's onsite and offsite stormwater management practices to achieve a permanent reduction in stormwater flow or pollutant loadings including discharge to a non-city drainage system and/or properly designed, constructed, and maintained on-site retention and treatment facilities. The city shall also base the credit decision on the approximate percentage of any significant variation in the volume, rate, or quality of stormwater emanating from the property as compared to city stormwater regulations. Only facilities that exceed current city stormwater regulations will be considered for fee credits. 
(3)  Procedure for credits. A customer shall submit to the city a request for stormwater utility fee credit. The city, when responding to fee credit requests, shall apply the following minimum procedures and may, as needed, develop different or additional procedures: 
(a)  Submission of petition. Any customer may submit to the city a petition for fee credits. The customer shall include in the petition his or her contact name and address, the property address, the subdivision name, a property sketch, the total amount of impervious area, the total lot or parcel size, the location and size of any onsite or offsite stormwater treatment facilities, a legal description of the real property affected, a professional engineer certification of the design and performance of the facilities, and a summary description of the asserted basis for the credit requested. 
(b)  Grounds for relief. If a customer submits a petition, the customer shall submit the petition in writing and set forth, in detail, the grounds upon which the customer seeks relief. Grounds for appeal of the fee may include, but are not limited to presence of onsite or offsite stormwater treatment facilities that exceed the requirements of applicable sections of this Code for stormwater management. 
(c)  Supplemental information for decision. The city may require the petitioning customer, at the customer's expense, to provide supplemental information to the city including, but not limited to, survey data approved by a Virginia registered professional land surveyor and engineering calculations or reports signed and sealed by a Virginia registered professional engineer and water sampling data and results for nutrient or pollutant loading. The city may deny a customer's petition based on the failure to provide such information. 
(d)  Factors for decision. When evaluating a petition for credits, the city shall consider all relevant information and may consider: 
1.  Any onsite or offsite stormwater treatment facilities which are permitted by the state or the city and provide stormwater volume retention/detention or water quality treatment. 
2.  Any facilities or documentation eligible for consideration in the city's proposed credit policy manual. 
(e)  Timing and notice of decision. The city, on or before 90 days after receipt by the city of a customer's completed petition, shall review and render a decision on the petition. The city, in writing, shall provide notice to the petitioner in writing of acceptance or denial of a petition. 
(f)  Retroactivity of credit decision. The city shall retroactively apply to the customer's first billing cycle any grants of credit resulting from a customer's petition. Retroactive credit will not exceed one year, and the city shall apply reimbursement to the customer's future fee collections. 
(g)  Appeal of denial. If the city denies a customer's petition, the customer, on or before the thirtieth calendar day after the city renders a final decision on the petition, a customer may appeal to the public works director and the city engineer for review of the denial. The public works director and the city engineer, on or before the thirtieth calendar day after receipt of a customer's appeal, in writing, and detailing the basis for the public works director's and the city engineer's decision, shall render a final decision on the appeal. When reviewing appeals of credit petition denials, the public works director and the city engineer shall apply the standards and review criteria contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-411. - Limitations of responsibility. 
(1)  The city shall be responsible only for the portions of the stormwater system that are in city maintained street rights-of-way, permanent stormwater easements conveyed to and accepted by the city, or as otherwise explicitly stated in a written agreement with the city. Repairs and improvements to the drainage system shall be in accordance with established standards, policies and schedules. 
(2)  The city's acquisition of permanent storm drainage easements and/or the construction or repair by the city of stormwater control measures and drainage facilities does not constitute a warranty against stormwater hazards, including, but not limited to, flooding, erosion or standing water. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 114-412. - Borrowing against enterprise fund. 
    The city may issue general obligation or revenue bonds in order to finance the cost of the infrastructure and equipment related to the stormwater control system. Infrastructure and equipment shall include structural and natural stormwater controls of all types, including retention basins, sewers, conduits, pipelines, pumping stations, and other structures and real or personal property used to support the system. 
(Ord. No. 13-23, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Chapter 118 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Municipal permits for taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2015; local licensing of drivers of taxicabs and similar for-hire passenger vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310; license plates for vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-711; municipal regulation of taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2016 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 118-1. - Designation and use of bus stops and taxicab stands. 
(a)  The traffic and transportation safety commission is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops and taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such manner as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop, taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bus, in a bus stop, or any vehicle, other than a taxicab, in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed. 
(Code 1981, § 18-149) 
Sec. 118-2. - Parking or stopping buses or taxicabs. 
    The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively. This section shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1981, § 18-150) 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 110-251 et seq. 
Sec. 118-3. - Liability insurance for vehicles designed to carry 18 persons or more. 
    No vehicle designed to carry and transport a minimum of 18 persons and operated for the purpose of providing public transportation services shall be operated on the streets of the city, unless the owner and driver are protected by liability insurance in the following amounts: 
Bodily injury $100,000.00 per person Bodily injury $500,000.00 each occurrence Property damage $100,000.00 each occurrence  
(Code 1981, § 37-1) 
Sec. 118-4. - Penalty for violation of section 118-2 or 118-3. 
    Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle used as a vehicle for the transportation of persons for a consideration on any highway, street, road, lane or alley in the city who violates any of the provisions of section 118-2 or 118-3 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $100.00 for the first offense and not more than $500.00 for each subsequent offense. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2020. 
Secs. 118-5-118-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate motor vehicles for the transportation of passengers for consideration, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2015, 46.2-310, 46.2-2016 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Association means any group of two or more certificate holders operating taxicabs, not under common ownership but under unified control and a common trade name, and having a common uniform color scheme. Such term shall also include a group of owners operating under a common trade name and having a common uniform color scheme. 
    Certificate means the certificate of public convenience and necessity granted under this article to persons in the business of operating taxicabs. 
    Certificate holder means any individual, association, partnership, company, corporation or other organization that has been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity as provided in this article. 
    City council, council and city manager mean any agents or representatives duly appointed by the city council or by the city manager. 
    Driver means the person actually driving a taxicab for hire. 
    License means the taxicab driver's license provided for in this article. 
    Taxicab means any motor vehicle having a seating capacity of not more than six passengers, and not operating on a regular route or between fixed terminals, used in the transportation of passengers for hire or for compensation. 
    Taxicab business means the business of transporting passengers, for compensation, by taxicabs. 
    Taxicab service means the operation of any motor vehicle upon any street or highway, on call or on demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for transportation, for hire, between such points along streets or highways as may be directed by the passenger so being transported. 
    Vehicle owner means any person having title to any taxicab. 
(Code 1981, § 37-76) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 118-32. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the operation of taxicabs for hire in the city, in order to preserve the health and welfare of the citizens and to protect their property. 
(Code 1981, § 37-77) 
Sec. 118-33. - Application of article. 
    Any person who transports persons for hire in a taxicab, or engages in the taxicab business, shall be governed by the conditions and regulations prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 37-78) 
Sec. 118-34. - Enforcement of article. 
    This article shall be enforced by the city manager or other agents of the city, under the direction of the city manager. All decisions made and actions taken under this article by the city manager or such agents shall be pursuant to uniform city standards. 
(Code 1981, § 37-79) 
Sec. 118-35. - Compliance with article. 
    No person shall use the term "public vehicle," "taxi," "taxicab," "cab," "for-hire car," or any term of similar meaning in advertising, nor shall any person place on any motor vehicle any such language or any lights similar to those commonly used to identify taxicabs, nor shall any person, by any means, hold himself out as the operator or driver of a taxicab, unless he has complied with the provisions of this article, insofar as this article shall be applicable. 
(Code 1981, § 32-80) 
Sec. 118-36. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $100.00 for the first offense and not more than $500.00 for each subsequent offense. 
(Code 1981, § 32-81) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2020. 
Sec. 118-37. - False statements in applications, reports, etc., required by article. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make or cause to be made, either directly or indirectly, any material false statement in any application filed pursuant to this article. In the event of a violation of this subsection, the application in question may be rejected by the city manager. Upon such rejection, the applicant, or his agent, may not resubmit an application for a period of 30 days. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make or cause to be made, either directly or indirectly, any material false statement in any information or report required by this article to be submitted by certificate holders, vehicle owners, or their agents, or by taxicab drivers. 
(Code 1981, § 37-82) 
Sec. 118-38. - Information to be filed with city manager. 
    Every certificate holder shall maintain on file, with the city manager, his name, his company's name, business address, garage address, all business telephone numbers listed in his and his company's name, the names of all drivers and their license numbers and addresses, and the names and addresses of all vehicle owners, and shall, within 48 hours after any change in connection therewith, report such change to the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 37-83) 
Sec. 118-39. - Insurance. 
(a)  Every owner of any taxicab operating in the city shall file with the city manager, and keep in effect at all times, a policy of insurance with some reputable insurance company duly licensed to do business in the state. The minimum amount of coverage provided by such policy shall be: 
(1)  For bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident ..... $25,000.00 
(2)  For bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident ..... 50,000.00 
(3)  For injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident ..... 20,000.00 
(b)  Each insurance policy offered as fulfillment of the requirements of this section shall contain a clause to the effect that the insurance carrier may cancel the policy upon ten days' written notice to the city manager as well as such other notice as may be required by law to be given to the owner. 
(Code 1981, § 37-84) 
Sec. 118-40. - Solicitation of patronage on public property. 
    Taxicab drivers or taxicab company agents shall not solicit patronage for any taxicab, by word, signal or other such measures, on or in any public street, public building or public property in the city, other than at taxicab stands. 
(Code 1981, § 37-95) 
Sec. 118-41. - Accident reports. 
    Every accident in which any taxicab is involved shall be reported, by the certificate holder, vehicle owner or driver involved, within five days, to the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 37-114) 
Sec. 118-42. - Disposition and report of articles found in taxicab. 
    Any article found in a taxicab shall be immediately returned to the passenger owning it, if he is known; otherwise, it shall be deposited with the certificate holder at the conclusion of the driver's tour of duty. Appropriate notation shall be made on the driver's manifest. A written report, on a form to be furnished by the city, of the finding of such article shall be made by the taxicab driver, within 24 hours, to the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 27-115) 
Secs. 118-43-118-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 

Sec. 118-61. - Required; prerequisite to issuance of business license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the taxicab business in the city, unless a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued by the city manager pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(b)  No license for the business of operating a taxicab or fleet of taxicabs upon the streets of the city shall be issued pursuant to chapter 26 of this Code to any person, until there has been issued to him the certificate required by this section. 
(Code 1981, § 37-127) 
Sec. 118-62. - Continuation of existing certificates. 
    Every certificate in effect on July 5, 1972, shall continue in full force and effect under this division, if at least 75 percent of the number of taxicabs for which certificates have been granted are operated within 365 days of such date. In the event that less than 75 percent of the certificated number of taxicabs are so operated, the certificate shall be surrendered and the city manager shall issue a new certificate for a lesser number, which shall not be less than the number derived by dividing the maximum number operated during such 365-day period by seventy-five one-hundredths, with the result rounded to the nearest higher whole number. This section shall not exempt any holders of certificates so continued from any other provisions of this article. In those cases where a certificate holder has only one certificate for one taxicab, such taxicab must be operated at least 75 percent of the time or the certificate for such taxicab will be surrendered to the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 37-128) 
Sec. 118-63. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a certificate under this division shall be made, under oath, by the prospective certificate holder or his authorized agent, to the city manager, upon forms provided by the city. 
(b)  The certificate application shall provide the following: 
(1)  The full name and the home and business address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be attached to the application. 
(2)  The trade name and the telephone numbers under which the applicant does, or proposes to do, business. 
(3)  The number and ownership of vehicles to be operated and the seating capacity, design and color scheme of each vehicle. 
(4)  The character and location of the depots and terminals to be used. 
(5)  A description of the communications system to be used. 
(6)  A description of the service to be rendered and the proposed operating hours. 
(7)  Each conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere for the violation of any criminal law, whether such violation is of an ordinance, state law or federal law, of the applicant, or if the applicant is a corporation, of each of the officers of the corporation. 
(8)  The specific experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire. 
(9)  All facts or circumstances upon which the applicant bases his belief that public convenience and necessity requires the granting of his application. 
(c)  In the case of individual owners operating as part of an association, a notarized statement giving the individual owners permission to operate as part of that association must accompany the application submitted pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Each application submitted pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a color scheme, insignia and cruising light design which shall conform to regulations issued by the city manager and which shall be unique and readily distinguishable from previously approved color schemes and insignia. 
(Code 1981, § 37-129) 
Sec. 118-64. - Limitation on number to be issued. 
    The number of certificates of public convenience and necessity issued will not exceed one for each 600 residents of the city, according to the last preceding census. 
(Code 1981, § 37-130) 
Sec. 118-65. - Determination of public convenience and necessity. 
    Each year, the city manager shall review such applications as have been filed in accordance with section 118-63. If the number of taxicabs for which such certificates have been issued does not equal the quota, as set forth in section 118-64, the city manager shall determine whether the public convenience and necessity requires the operation of additional taxicabs within the city. In making this decision, the city manager shall provide each certificate holder with an opportunity to express an opinion. The city manager shall notify each certificate holder of the quota as set forth in section 118-64, the total number of certificates currently issued and that consideration is being given to issuing additional certificates to fill such quota. The certificate holders may submit their opinions in writing, within 30 days of the date of notification. The city manager may, at his discretion, hold a public hearing for this purpose. 
(Code 1981, § 37-131) 
Sec. 118-66. - Issuance or refusal; requiring holders to provide additional service. 
(a)  After consideration of the factors prescribed in this division, the city manager may issue a certificate for the number of vehicles necessary to fulfill the prescribed quota, or for a lesser number, or he may refuse to issue a certificate. The city manager shall notify unsuccessful applicants by certified mail, directed to the address shown on the application, within 30 days after the refusal. Other interested parties shall be given notice in writing forwarded by regular United States mail. Applicants, or their agents, may not reapply for a certificate for 365 days from the date of refusal. No certificate shall be issued to the applicant until all applicable requirements of this article have been met. 
(b)  In the event the city manager shall find, upon investigation, that the public convenience and necessity require the operation of additional taxicabs within the city, he may either require the persons then engaged in the business of operating taxicabs in the city and holding certificates, or any one or more of them, to provide such additional service, within a reasonable time not to exceed 60 days; or, if he is satisfied as to the suitability of an applicant, he may grant such additional certificates as are deemed necessary. 
(Code 1981, § 37-132) 
Sec. 118-67. - Contents. 
    A certificate issued under this division shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the certificate holder. 
(2)  The number of vehicles the operation of which is authorized by the certificate. 
(3)  The date of issuance. 
(4)  The fact that the certificate is being issued subject to the provisions of this article and all other laws and ordinances governing the operation of taxicabs in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 37-133) 
Sec. 118-68. - Issuance, contents, display, etc., of certificate card. 
(a)  For each taxicab covered by a certificate, a certificate card shall be issued in a form prescribed by the city manager. Such card is the property of the city, is not transferable and must be returned to the city immediately upon final removal of the taxicab from service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab, unless the certificate card is conspicuously displayed in the frame or holder provided for in section 118-147 in a manner prescribed by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 37-134) 
Sec. 118-69. - Term. 
    Every certificate issued under this division shall be effective for a period of one year beginning January 1 of each year, unless issued after January 1 of any year, in which case it will be effective until the end of such year, or unless suspended or revoked before the end of the year. 
(Code 1981, § 37-135) 
Sec. 118-70. - Transfer; continued operation in case of death, sickness, etc. 
(a)  Certificates issued under this division may be transferred, upon approval by the city manager, subject to the following conditions and procedures: A certificate holder desiring to transfer his certificate must first notify the city manager, by letter, of his intention to transfer the certificate. The transfer shall be approved or disapproved within 30 days from the date of notification. 
(b)  In cases of death, sickness or unusual circumstances, the city manager may authorize the continued operation of an existing certificate for a reasonable time. 
(Code 1981, § 37-136) 
Sec. 118-71. - Substitution of vehicles. 
    Upon application by the owner to the city manager, a vehicle may be substituted for another vehicle for which a certificate and certificate card have been issued under this division. When such substitution is permitted, the owner shall surrender the taxicab certificate card for the vehicle being replaced and the city manager or his appointed representative shall issue a new certificate card for the replacement vehicle, after it meets the requirements of sections 118-39 and 118-153 as to insurance and inspection. 
(Code 1981, § 37-137) 
Sec. 118-72. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Certificates of public convenience and necessity may be suspended, for a period of from one to 30 days, or revoked by the city manager for any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to operate the authorized taxicabs in such a manner as to serve the public adequately. 
(2)  Failure to maintain taxicabs in good order and repair. 
(3)  Failure to maintain insurance as required by this article. 
(4)  Repeated and persistent violations, by the certificate holder or his drivers, of this Code or the motor vehicle laws of the state. 
(5)  Failure to report any accident as required by this article. 
(6)  Failure to pay any fees lawfully assessed upon the ownership or operation of any vehicle covered by the certificate. 
(7)  Failure to supply information required under this article. 
(b)  If, upon a written complaint and after an investigation, it is found by the city manager that a certificate holder is not fulfilling the requirements of the certificate relative to the continued use of the vehicle or vehicles in question, such certificate shall be revoked by the city manager. 
(c)  When a certificate is suspended or revoked, the city manager shall transmit written notice of such action to the certificate holder, by certified mail directed to the address shown on the certificate, within 30 days after such suspension or revocation. 
(d)  If the city manager revokes a certificate and notifies the holder as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the holder of the revoked certificate, or his agent, may not reapply for a certificate for a period of time to be determined by the city manager, such period not to exceed 365 days from the date of revocation. 
(Code 1981, § 37-138) 
Sec. 118-73. - Appeals from actions of city manager under division. 
    If the city manager refuses to issue, suspends or revokes any certificate, or orders any certificate holder to provide additional service pursuant to subsection 118-66(b), the applicant or certificate holder, as the case may be, may, within 30 days from the date of such action, file with the circuit court of the city a petition, in writing, to review the findings of the city manager and his action. A copy of such petition, in which shall be stated the time and place at which such petition will be presented to the court, shall be served on the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 37-139) 
Secs. 118-74-118-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVERS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 118-91. - Drivers to be clean and neat. 
    Every driver of a taxicab, while on duty, shall be clean and neat in dress and in person. 
(Code 1981, § 37-99) 
Sec. 118-92. - Smoking or other use of tobacco by drivers. 
    No driver of a taxicab shall have in his possession a lighted cigarette, cigar or pipe while any passenger is being carried in his taxicab. No driver shall engage in chewing tobacco or using snuff while any passenger is being carried in his taxicab. 
(Code 1981, § 37-100) 
Sec. 118-93. - Use of drugs by drivers. 
    At no time shall the driver of a taxicab use narcotics or other habit-forming drugs while he is operating a taxicab. 
(Code 1981, § 37-101) 
Sec. 118-94. - Possession of weapons by drivers. 
    It shall be unlawful for a driver to operate or drive a taxicab at any time while having in his possession or within the vehicle any weapon, which shall include, but not be limited to, firearms in which ammunition may be used or discharged by explosion, pneumatic pressure or mechanical contrivance. 
(Code 1981, § 37-102) 
Sec. 118-95. - Loud talk or calls to and from drivers. 
    Loud talk or calls to and from drivers of taxicabs is prohibited. 
(Code 1981, § 37-103) 
Sec. 118-96. - Driver's manifest. 
(a)  Every taxicab driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded the time the taxicab began operation and stopped operation on the streets, the taxicab number and driver's name and all trips made each day, showing the time and place of origin and destination of each trip and the number of passengers and amount of fare. This information shall be recorded at the end of each trip. In addition, the driver shall record on each manifest, at the beginning and end of each tour of duty, the total miles, trips, extra passengers and the speedometer readings. All such completed manifests shall be returned to the certificate holder by the driver at the conclusion of the driver's tour of duty. 
(b)  If a taxicab driver changes taxicabs during his tour of duty, he shall maintain a separate manifest for that portion of the tour of duty in which another vehicle is used. 
(c)  The forms for manifests required by this section shall be furnished to the driver by the certificate holder and shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. It shall be unlawful for any driver to maintain an incomplete manifest. 
(d)  Every certificate holder shall retain and preserve all drivers' manifests in a safe place for at least 90 days and the manifests shall be made available, upon demand, for inspection by the city manager at reasonable times. 
(Code 1981, § 37-104) 
Secs. 118-97-118-115. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 118-116. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab, from an origin within the city to a destination within the city, or to any destination other than the jurisdiction in which he is a properly licensed taxicab driver, unless he has a current taxicab driver's license issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1981, § 37-151) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to license taxicab drivers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310. 
Sec. 118-117. - Application. 
    Application for the license required by this subdivision shall be made, in person, to the chief of police. The application shall provide general information, under oath, on forms supplied by the city, that the city manager may prescribe, regarding the following concerning the applicant: 
(1)  Pertinent personal data. 
(2)  Physical condition. 
(3)  Traffic record for five years previous to the application. Only nolle prosequis, pleas of nolo contendere, convictions and forfeitures of collateral need be reported. Parking citations need not be reported. 
(4)  Criminal record. Only nolle prosequis, pleas of nolo contendere, convictions or forfeitures of collateral need be reported. 
(5)  Experience in driving motor vehicles and taxicabs, if any. 
(Code 1981, § 37-152) 
Sec. 118-118. - Applicant's fingerprints and photographs. 
    The city shall make a record of the fingerprints of each applicant for a taxicab driver's license. Each such applicant shall furnish three recent photographs of himself, of a size and manner prescribed by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 37-153) 
Sec. 118-119. - Qualifications of applicant. 
    A taxicab driver's license shall not be issued to any person: 
(1)  Who is covered by diplomatic immunity. 
(2)  Who has less than six months driving experience. 
(3)  Who has not been issued a driver's license by the state. 
(4)  Who is less than 18 years of age. 
(Code 1981, § 37-154) 
Sec. 118-120. - Fees. 
    Each applicant for or holder of a taxicab driver's license shall pay the following fees, when applicable, to the collector of city taxes, for the use of the general fund, and no part thereof shall be returned: 
(1)  For each original application for a taxicab driver's license the fee shall be $10.00; 
(2)  For each renewal application for a taxicab driver's license the fee shall be $10.00; 
(3)  For each fingerprinting by the city, the fee shall be $10.00; 
(4)  For each original, renewed or duplicate taxicab driver's license, the fee shall be $20.00. 
(Code 1981, § 37-155; Ord. No. 17-30, 7-11-2017) 
Sec. 118-121. - Investigation of applicant; temporary license. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have an investigation made of each applicant for a license under this division and of the facts stated in the application for such license and other relevant data. The resulting file shall be available to the applicant or his agent upon request. 
(b)  Pending the investigation provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the chief of police may, in his discretion, issue a taxicab driver's license, for a period not to exceed 30 days, to an applicant who is otherwise qualified. 
(Code 1981, § 37-156) 
Sec. 118-122. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  If the chief of police finds that the applicant is duly qualified, of good moral character and of sound health, he shall issue a taxicab driver's license to the applicant. 
(b)  The chief of police may refuse to issue a taxicab driver's license to an applicant for any of the following: 
(1)  Repeated and persistent violations of the motor vehicle laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Conviction of, or plea of guilty to, the violation of any law involving the commission of a felony; any sex offense; solicitating for prostitution; alcohol or narcotics; drunkenness; gambling laws or moral turpitude. 
(3)  If applicant is on parole or probation for a criminal or traffic offense. 
(c)  If the chief of police refuses to issue a taxicab driver's license, he shall transmit written notice thereof to the applicant, by certified mail directed to the address shown on the application, at the time of the decision. 
(Code 1981, § 37-157) 
Sec. 118-123. - Form. 
    The form of a taxicab driver's license shall be prescribed by the chief of police, with the proviso that the license shall bear a recent photograph of the license holder. 
(Code 1981, § 37-158) 
Sec. 118-124. - Not to be left in unattended cab. 
    No driver shall leave his taxicab driver's license in an unattended taxicab at any time. 
(Code 1981, § 37-159) 
Sec. 118-125. - Term; renewal. 
    A nontemporary taxicab driver's license shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. The holder of such a license shall make application for its renewal at least 30 days, but not more than 60 days, prior to the expiration of the license. 
(Code 1981, § 37-160) 
Sec. 118-126. - Not transferable; surrender when holder ceases to drive cab. 
    A taxicab driver's license is the property of the city and shall not be transferable to any other driver. Such license shall be surrendered to the chief of police by the holder, when he ceases to drive a taxicab in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 37-161) 
Sec. 118-127. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police may suspend, for a period of one to 30 days, or revoke the taxicab driver's license of any person for any of the following: 
(1)  Repeated and persistent violations of the motor vehicle laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Conviction of reckless driving. 
(3)  Failure to report any accident in which the operator is involved, however slight. 
(4)  Driving of any taxicab known to the driver not to be in good order and repair. 
(5)  Two or more violations of this article in any one calendar year. 
(6)  Knowingly making a false statement of material and relevant facts on an application for a taxicab driver's license. 
(7)  Conviction or plea of nolo contendere to the violation of any law involving alcohol. 
(8)  Conviction or plea of nolo contendere to the violation of any law involving gambling. 
(9)  Conviction or plea of nolo contendere to the violation of any law involving moral turpitude. 
(b)  The taxicab driver's license of any person shall automatically become revoked and shall be immediately surrendered by him, upon his conviction of, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere to, the violation of any law involving: 
(1)  Commission of a felony. 
(2)  Any sex offense. 
(3)  Soliciting for prostitution. 
(4)  Narcotics. 
(5)  Revocation of state licenses or permits to drive. 
(c)  If a taxicab driver's license is suspended or revoked, the chief of police shall transmit written notice thereof to the license holder, by certified mail directed to the address shown on the license or the application therefor, at the time of the decision. 
(d)  A person whose taxicab driver's license has been revoked by the chief of police shall not reapply for such a license for 365 days from the date of revocation. 
(e)  An appropriately filed appeal of the chief of police's decision suspending or revoking a taxicab driver's license shall stay the effective date of the suspension or revocation only in cases of suspension or revocation pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. The automatic revocation of such a license provided for in subsection (b) of this section shall not be considered an act of the chief of police and, therefore, is not subject to appeal. 
(Code 1981, § 37-162) 
Secs. 118-128-118-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VEHICLES 

Sec. 118-146. - General vehicle requirements. 
(a)  Every taxicab certificated under this article shall be either a vehicle specifically designed for use as a taxicab or a vehicle of the closed or sedan type. 
(b)  Every taxicab governed by this article shall be of good substantial appearance and so constructed and maintained as to provide for the safety of the public, continuous and satisfactory operation and operation with minimum noise and vibration. Every taxicab shall be structurally sound as to all its parts, shall not have broken or cracked fenders or glass and shall be painted to give reasonable protection to all painted surfaces from structural deterioration. All marks of identification on taxicabs shall be permanent and clearly legible at all times. 
(Code 1981, § 37-85) 
Sec. 118-147. - Equipment generally. 
    In addition to equipment required of motor vehicles by the Code of Virginia, which requirements are adopted by section 110-2 of this Code, every taxicab certificated under this article shall be equipped with the following: 
(1)  A frame or holder for the proper display of the certificate card and the taxicab driver's license provided for in this article, which shall face the passengers and be so located as to be at all times in plain view of such passengers. Such frame or holder shall be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(2)  A heater sufficient to heat the interior of the taxicab adequately in cold weather. 
(3)  A power plant adequate to enable it to operate effectively and efficiently. 
(4)  At least two doors for the entrance and exit of passengers, in addition to the doors which give access to the driver's compartment. Passenger doors must be constructed so that they will remain securely fastened during normal operation but may be readily opened by a passenger in case of emergency. Each door shall be constructed with a double or safety lock. 
(5)  Approved safety nonshatterable glass in the windshield and all windows. The center partition, if any, between the driver's compartment and the passenger compartment, shall be of this type glass or plastic. 
(6)  A standard speedometer properly installed, maintained in good working order and exposed to view. No taxicab shall be operated in taxicab service while such speedometer is out of repair or disconnected. 
(Code 1981, § 37-86) 
Sec. 118-148. - Upholstery; cushions; floor mats. 
    With the exception of a "kick" strip not exceeding seven inches in height at the bottom of doors, no taxicab certificated under this article shall have any seat upholstery covering, unless the same is made of leather or similar nonabsorbent, material. The rear cushion in such a taxicab shall be removable. No floor mat shall be permitted in such taxicab, unless it is made of rubber, leather, metal chain or a similar nonabsorbent, washable material and is easily removable. Variations of the requirements of this section will be permitted, where strict compliance is impossible because of scarcity of materials. 
(Code 1981, § 37-87; Ord. No. 00-38, § 37-87, 6-20-2000) 
Sec. 118-149. - Color scheme, insignia and cruising light design. 
    Every taxicab covered by a certificate shall have a uniform color scheme, insignia and cruising light design approved by the city manager. Changes in the color scheme and insignia shall have prior approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 37-88) 
Sec. 118-150. - Prohibited lights and signal devices. 
    No taxicab governed by this article shall be equipped with any lights or signal devices other than those allowed by the Code of Virginia or approved by the city manager under the applicable ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1981, § 37-89) 
Sec. 118-151. - Certain shades or curtains prohibited. 
    No taxicab certificated under this article shall be equipped with shades or curtains which can be manipulated in such a way as to shield the occupants or the driver from observation or obstruct the rear view window. 
(Code 1981, § 37-90) 
Sec. 118-152. - Maintenance. 
    Every taxicab governed by this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be swept and dusted at least once each day. At least once every seven days, the interior shall be cleansed thoroughly with a suitable antiseptic solution. 
(Code 1981, § 37-91) 
Sec. 118-153. - Inspection; correction of defects. 
(a)  The city manager may, at any reasonable time, require the owner or driver of a taxicab to have such vehicle inspected at an official inspection station of the state. No taxicab shall be operated until any defects found by such inspection have been corrected. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the authority, at any reasonable time, to inspect any taxicab, and the certificate holder shall be given a reasonable time to make such repairs or adjustments as are required. 
(Code 1981, § 37-92) 
Sec. 118-154. - Operation. 
    Every taxicab shall be operated in accordance with the laws of this state and the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city, with due regard to the safety, comfort and convenience of passengers and the general public. 
(Code 1981, § 37-93) 
Sec. 118-155. - Occupancy of taxicab stand. 
    No taxicab shall be placed upon or be permitted to occupy a taxicab stand, except for the purpose of being held forth for hire. 
(Code 1981, § 37-94) 
Sec. 118-156. - Use for unlawful purposes. 
    No owner or driver of a taxicab shall permit such vehicle to be used for unlawful purposes or knowingly transport persons in such vehicle to places for such purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 37-96) 
Sec. 118-157. - To be attended by driver. 
    Every taxicab, while in operation for the solicitation or transportation of passengers, shall be attended by the driver at all times, except when such driver is actually engaged in loading, unloading or answering telephones in connection with the business. 
(Code 1981, § 37-97) 
Secs. 118-158-118-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PASSENGERS 

Sec. 118-176. - Maximum number of passengers generally. 
    A driver shall not permit more persons, including the driver but excluding children in arms, to be carried in a taxicab in the city at any one time than the seating capacity of the taxicab, as rated by its manufacturer. 
(Code 1981, § 37-105) 
Sec. 118-177. - Maximum number of passengers on front seat. 
    At no time shall more than two persons, in addition to the driver, ride on the front seat of any taxicab, a child in arms excepted. 
(Code 1981, § 37-106) 
Sec. 118-178. - Nonpaying passengers not to be transported with paying passenger; exceptions. 
    No nonpaying passenger shall be transported in a taxicab with a paying passenger, except bona fide officers or employees of the taxicab owner or a police officer engaged in the performance of his duty and unable to obtain other adequate means of transportation. 
(Code 1981, § 37-107) 
Sec. 118-179. - Passenger's consent required for acceptance of other passengers. 
    Whenever any taxicab is occupied by a passenger, the driver shall not permit any other person to occupy or ride in such taxicab, unless, having been requested by the driver, the passenger gives his affirmative permission. 
(Code 1981, § 37-108) 
Sec. 118-180. - Refusal of passengers. 
    Taxicab drivers shall not refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously engaged or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(Code 1981, § 37-109) 
Sec. 118-181. - Deception of passengers; use of shortest route to destination. 
    A driver shall not deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger who may ride in his taxicab, or who may desire to ride in such taxicab, as to his destination or the rate of fare to be charged, and shall not convey any passenger, or cause him to be conveyed, to a place other than directed by him. In no event shall any taxicab driver take a longer route to the destination than necessary, unless so requested by the passenger. 
(Code 1981, § 37-110) 
Sec. 118-182. - Compliance with requests of passengers. 
    All taxicab drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of their passengers as to the speed of travel and the route to be taken. 
(Code 1981, § 37-111) 
Sec. 118-183. - Passengers not to be permitted to enter or leave from left side of vehicle; exceptions. 
    Drivers shall not permit passengers to enter or to leave any taxicab from the left side, except at the left curb of one-way streets or while parked perpendicular to the curb in places where such parking is permitted. 
(Code 1981, § 37-112) 
Sec. 118-184. - Loading or unloading not to impede or interfere with traffic. 
    Taxicab drivers shall not stop to load or unload passengers or their belongings in the intersection of any streets or on any crosswalk. No taxicab shall be loaded or unloaded in any such manner that will, in any way, impede or interfere with the orderly flow of traffic on the streets. 
(Code 1981, § 37-113) 
Secs. 118-185-118-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FARES 

Sec. 118-201. - Zones established. 
    For the purpose of determining the proper fare to be charged for taxicab service, there shall be nine zones within the city limits, which shall be described as follows: 
Zone 1. Zone 1 shall include all that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of the north corporate limits and Interstate Route 95; thence southwardly and westwardly along Interstate Routes 95 and 85 to its intersection with Baylor's Lane; thence northwardly along Baylor's Lane to its intersection with Halifax Street; thence eastwardly along Halifax Street to its intersection with Young Avenue; thence westwardly along Young Avenue to its intersection with South West Street; thence northwardly along West Street to its intersection with the north corporate limits; thence eastwardly along the north corporate limits to the point of beginning. 
Zone 2. Zone 2 shall include all that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of the north corporate limits and Interstate Route 95; thence eastwardly and southwardly along the corporate limits and an extension of same to its intersection with the Norfolk and Western Railway; thence southwardly along the Norfolk and Western Railway to its intersection with County Drive; thence westwardly along County Drive and U.S. Route 460 to its intersection with Graham Road and Crater Road; thence westwardly along Graham Road to its intersection with Interstate Route 85; thence northwardly along Interstate Routes 85 and 95 to the point of beginning. 
Zone 3. Zone 3 shall include all that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of the north corporate limits and North West Street (projected); thence southwardly along West Street to its intersection with Young Avenue; thence eastwardly along Young Avenue to its intersection with Halifax Street; thence westwardly along Halifax Street to its intersection with Baylor's Lane; thence southwardly to its intersection with Defense Road; thence westwardly along Defense Road to its intersection with Boydton Plank Road; thence westwardly along Boydton Plank Road to the west corporate limits to its intersection with the north corporate limits; thence eastwardly along the north corporate limits to the point of beginning. 
Zone 4. Zone 4 shall include all that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of the north corporate limits and the east corporate limits; thence southwardly along the east corporate limits to its intersection with Hickory Hill Road; thence westwardly along Hickory Hill Road to its intersection with County Drive; thence westwardly along County Drive to its intersection with the Norfolk and Western Railway; thence northwardly along the Norfolk and Western Railway to a creek; thence northwardly along such creek to the north corporate limits; thence eastwardly along the north corporate limits to the point of beginning. 
Zone 5. Zone 5 shall include all that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of Interstate Route 85 and Graham Road; thence eastwardly along Graham Road to its intersection with Crater Road; thence southwardly along Crater Road to its intersection with South Boulevard; thence westwardly along South Boulevard to its intersection with Baylor's Lane; thence northwardly along Baylor's Lane to its intersection with Interstate Route 85; thence eastwardly along Interstate Route 85 to the point of beginning. 
Zone 6. Zone 6 shall include all that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of Hickory Hill Road and the east corporate limits; thence southwardly and westwardly along the east corporate limits and the south corporate limits to its intersection with Interstate Route 95; thence northwardly along Interstate Route 95 to its intersection with County Drive; thence eastwardly along County Drive and Hickory Hill Road to the point of beginning. 
Zone 7. Zone 7 shall include all that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of Defense Road and Banister Road; thence southwardly along Banister Road to its intersection with the old corporate limits; thence eastwardly and southwardly along the old corporate limits to the Norfolk and Western Railway; thence westwardly along the Norfolk and Western Railway and the corporate limits to the west corporate limits; thence northwardly along the west corporate limits to its intersection with Boydton Plank Road; thence eastwardly along Boydton Plank Road and Defense Road to the point of beginning. 
Zone 8. Zone 8 shall include all that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of County Drive and Interstate Route 95; thence southwardly along Interstate Route 95 to its intersection with the Norfolk and Western Railway; thence westwardly along the Norfolk and Western Railway to its intersection with the old corporate limits; thence northwardly and westwardly along the old corporate limits to Banister Road; thence northwardly along Banister Road to its intersection with Defense Road; thence eastwardly along Defense Road and South Boulevard to its intersection with Crater Road; thence northwardly along Crater Road to its intersection with Graham Road and U.S. Route 460; thence eastwardly along U.S. Route 460 to the point of beginning. 
Zone 9. Zone 9 shall include all that part of the city lying within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of the Norfolk and Western Railway and Interstate Route 95; thence southwardly along Interstate Route 95 to its intersection with the south corporate limits; thence westwardly along the south corporate limits to its intersection with the west corporate limits; thence northwardly along the west corporate limits to its intersection with the Norfolk and Western Railway; thence eastwardly along the Norfolk and Western Railway to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 37-174) 
Sec. 118-202. - Rates generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to charge other than the following rates of fare, as determined by the city council, for taxicab service: 
(1)  Rates inside corporate limits: 
One-zone trip ..... $5.25 
Two-zone trip ..... 5.75 
Three-zone trip ..... 6.25 
Four-zone trip ..... 6.75 
Five-zone trip ..... 7.25 
(2)  Rates outside corporate limits: 
Hopewell ..... 12.75 
Ettrick ..... 5.75 
Southpark ..... 7.00 
Fort Lee ..... 7.25 
Central State ..... 7.25 
If more than one person is transported, $0.50 for each additional passenger shall be added to the rates set out in (1) and (2) above. 
(b)  The city council may, from time to time, after public notice and upon hearing, and upon determination that taxicab rates previously prescribed are not just and reasonable, prescribe just and reasonable changes in rates or regulations as to rates of fare. The rates so prescribed may be maximum rates or rates certain. It shall be unlawful for any person to charge in excess of the maximum rates, if they be prescribed, or other than the rates certain, if they be prescribed. 
(Code 1981, § 37-175; Ord. No. 00-38, § 37-175, 6-20-2000; Ord. No. 00-51, § 37-175, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 05-103, 11-1-2005) 
Sec. 118-203. - Rates to be entered on taxicab certificate card. 
    The rates of fare for taxicab service, as determined by the city council, shall be entered on the taxicab certificate card provided for in section 118-68, at the time the card is issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 37-176) 
Sec. 118-204. - Passenger's receipt. 
    It shall be the duty of the driver of a taxicab to give any passenger so requesting a receipt, in writing, signed by the driver and showing his taxicab driver's license number, the taxicab number, items for which a charge is made, the amount paid and the time and date. 
(Code 1981, § 37-177) 
Sec. 118-205. - Failure of passenger to pay. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who engages a taxicab for hire, under any agreement, expressed or implied, to refuse or fail to pay, or attempt to avoid payment, for the use of the taxicab, the lawful charge or fare due the driver, based on rates established by the city council. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 37-178) 
Secs. 118-206-118-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-231. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Bus means any motor vehicle operated along defined routes for the transportation of passengers for compensation. 
    Interurban bus means a bus used in the business of transporting passengers over the streets of the city from points within the city to points without the city. 
    Intraurban bus means a bus used to transport passengers from one point to another within the city. 
(Code 1981, § 37-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 118-232. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 37-17) 
Secs. 118-233-118-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INTRAURBAN BUSES 

Sec. 118-251. - Application of and compliance with division. 
(a)  The operation of all intraurban buses in the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this division. 
(b)  All of the provisions of this division imposing obligations or requirements on any person operating hereunder shall be deemed to be mandatory, and no intraurban bus shall be operated on the streets of the city, save and except in accordance with the terms and conditions of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 37-25) 
Sec. 118-252. - Operating permit. 
    No person shall operate an intraurban bus within the city, unless he shall first obtain from the city manager a permit to do so. Such permit shall be subject to revocation upon six months' notice, in writing, given by the city manager to the operator, for any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to operate the authorized buses in such a manner as to serve the public adequately. 
(2)  Failure to maintain buses in good order and repair. 
(3)  Failure to maintain insurance as required by this chapter. 
(4)  Repeated and persistent violations, by the permit holder or his drivers, of this Code or the motor vehicle laws of the state. 
(5)  Failure to report any accident as required by this Code. 
(6)  Failure to pay any fees lawfully assessed upon the ownership or operation of any vehicle covered by the permit. 
(7)  Failure to supply information required under this article. 
(Code 1981, §§ 37-26, 37-138(a)) 
Sec. 118-253. - Discontinuance of service by permit holder. 
    Any person having a permit to operate intraurban buses shall continue operations thereunder until the expiration of a period of six months from the date of a notice, in writing, given by such person to the city manager of his intention to discontinue such service. 
(Code 1981, § 37-27) 
Sec. 118-254. - Interior lights. 
    No bus operating under this division shall be operated between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, except in case of emergency, unless sufficient light is provided to adequately light the whole of the interior of such bus. 
(Code 1981, § 37-28) 
Sec. 118-255. - Routes generally. 
    The city manager shall have authority to establish, change or extend intraurban bus routes in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 37-29) 
Sec. 118-256. - Temporary change of routes. 
    The director of traffic and transportation may, in all cases of fires, accidents, parades, obstructions, break ins or repairs to streets or any other emergency which requires such action, temporarily modify bus routes established by the city manager and require the use of such other streets as, in his opinion, the public convenience and safety may require, until the emergency calling for such action has terminated. 
(Code 1981, § 37-30) 
Sec. 118-257. - Deviation from routes. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any bus operated under this division to operate such bus on any route or street other than the route or streets designated in the manner provided by this division. No deviation from any authorized route shall be practiced or permitted, except that, in case any authorized route is obstructed on any block, drivers may, unless the city manager shall otherwise direct, make a detour by the nearest streets around the block on which the obstruction exists, returning to the prescribed route as soon as the obstruction has been passed. 
(Code 1981, § 37-31(a)) 
Sec. 118-258. - Fares-Prescribed. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, the fare charged passengers on buses operated on duly established routes shall be $1.50. Fare tickets, in booklets of ten, may be purchased for $12.00. Children who are pupils of any public or parochial school in the city during the regular school session and the summer school session, shall be issued 20 tickets, upon payment of $12.00, which tickets may be used by such children between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., on school days only. 
(b)  The fare for elderly and persons with disabilities shall be one-half the normal fare prescribed by this section, and shall be applicable during all hours of operation. As used in this section, the term "elderly and persons with disabilities" means those individuals who, by reason of illness, injury, age, congenital malfunction or other permanent or temporary incapacity or disability, including those who are non-ambulatory wheelchair-bound and those with semi-ambulatory capabilities, are unable, without special facilities or special planning or design, to utilize mass transportation facilities and services as effectively as persons who are not so affected. 
(c)  The fare for persons eligible to be transported by the special elderly and persons with disabilities van service shall be $1.00. 
(Code 1981, § 37-32; Ord. No. 01-37, 6-19-2001; Ord. No. 07-01, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 12-51, § 1, 6-5-2012) 
Sec. 118-259. - Same-Charging or receiving other than prescribed fare. 
    No person operating under this division shall permit to be charged nor shall the driver of any bus owned by such person charge, demand, collect or receive a greater or different compensation for the transportation of passengers or for any service in connection therewith than the rates and charges specified in section 118-258. 
(Code 1981, § 37-33) 
Sec. 118-260. - Same-Passengers to have exact change; posting of fares; etc. 
    Buses governed by this division shall be operated on an exact change basis. The exact fare shall be posted on each bus and drivers shall not be allowed to make change or to deposit fares. 
(Code 1981, § 37-34) 
Sec. 118-261. - Operation for excursions or special services. 
    Nothing in this division shall prevent any person operating under this division from operating buses for excursion parties or special services under charter or other contract at such charges as may be agreed upon; provided, that there shall be no interference thereby with the operation of the established schedules. 
(Code 1981, § 37-35) 
Sec. 118-262. - Smoking prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating any bus under this division or for any passenger in such bus to smoke or have in his possession a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe, while such bus is in operation, and it shall be unlawful for such operator to permit any passenger so to do. 
(Code 1981, § 37-36) 
Sec. 118-263. - Disposition of property left in bus. 
    The person in charge of any bus operated under this division shall carefully preserve any money or other property left in such bus by any passenger and the money or other property shall be promptly deposited with the person owning or operating such bus, to be kept by him at some convenient point within the city, where the money or other property may be called for by the owner. When such money or property is identified and ownership established, the money or property shall be promptly delivered to such owner. Any property, whether money or otherwise, which is not called for within three months, shall be disposed of according to law. 
(Code 1981, § 37-37) 
Secs. 118-264-118-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INTERURBAN BUSES 

Sec. 118-281. - Application of division. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to the operation of interurban buses; provided, however, that this division shall not apply to persons owning, controlling or operating any bus in the business of transporting persons for compensation over the streets of the city from points within the city to points without the city within a radius of not more than ten miles. 
(Code 1981, § 37-49) 
Sec. 118-282. - Owner not to permit violations of division. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person in control of the operation of interurban buses to permit the driver of any such bus to violate any provision of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 37-50) 
Sec. 118-283. - Waiting room and terminal. 
    It shall be the duty of each interurban bus operator to provide a waiting room and terminal where buses may be loaded and unloaded on private property and off the streets of the city. Such waiting room shall be kept clean, properly lighted and ventilated and shall be equipped with necessary restroom facilities. 
(Code 1981, § 37-51) 
Sec. 118-284. - Intracity transportation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of an interurban bus to take on any passenger in the city and discharge him within the city limits. 
(Code 1981, § 37-53) 
Sec. 118-285. - Taking on or discharging passengers on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any interurban bus to take on or discharge passengers on the streets of the city, within a radius of one mile from the terminal station of the bus line. The city manager is hereby authorized to designate one stop each way, other than at the terminal station, at which interurban buses may be stopped for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers using such buses in traveling from the city to points in the County of Chesterfield, or in traveling from points in the County of Chesterfield to points in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 37-54) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 98. 
Sec. 118-286. - Taking on or discharging passengers at hotels, motels or lodginghouses. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of an interurban bus to stop such bus at any hotel, motel or lodginghouse in the city for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1981, § 37-55) 
Secs. 118-287-118-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES VEHICLES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Statewide emergency medical services system and services, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.1 et seq.; powers of city council as to emergency medical services, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.14. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-311. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attendant means any person riding in attendance with a patient. 
    Call; run means the act of progressing with an emergency medical services vehicle to the scene of need and transporting a patient to his destination. 
    Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this article and authorizing the operation of an emergency medical services vehicle or emergency medical services vehicles. 
    Emergency medical services vehicle means any motor vehicle that is specially designed, constructed or modified and equipped and is intended to be used for, and is maintained and operated to, provide immediate medical care to, or to transport, persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
    Owner means the owner of one or more emergency medical services vehicles, or his designee. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- "Emergency medical services vehicle" defined, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.1. 
Sec. 118-312. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 4-2) 
Sec. 118-313. - Insurance. 
(a)  Every owner operating emergency medical services vehicle under a certificate shall submit to the city council evidence of public liability and property damage insurance, in force with an insurance company licensed to conduct business in this state, in at least the following amounts: 
Bodily injury ..... $100,000.00 per person Bodily injury ..... $300,000.00 per accident Property damage ..... $50,000.00 per accident  
(b)  Such owner shall also show that the city is named as an insured on such policies. 
(Code 1981, § 4-3) 
State Law reference- Authority of city council to set minimum limits of liability insurance coverage for emergency medical services vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.14. 
Sec. 118-314. - Terminal. 
    Every emergency medical services vehicle operated under a certificate on the streets of the city shall have a headquarters terminal wherefrom emergency medical services vehicles are dispatched and whereto such emergency medical services vehicles shall return by the most direct route. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4) 
Sec. 118-315. - Identification. 
    Each emergency medical services vehicle operated within the city shall bear the name of the owner and a unit number. 
(Code 1981, § 4-5) 
Sec. 118-316. - Construction, equipment and maintenance. 
    All emergency medical services vehicles operated within the city shall be constructed, equipped and maintained in accord with all applicable requirements of Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2, and with the specifications, rules and regulations adopted by the state board of health pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.4. 
(Code 1981, § 4-6) 
Sec. 118-317. - Communications equipment; dispatcher. 
(a)  Each emergency medical services vehicle shall be equipped with a two-way radio licensed by the Federal Communications Commission and in operative condition at all times. 
(b)  Each emergency medical services vehicle owner shall maintain a dispatcher 24 hours every day, at his base of operation, for the purpose of communication with the public and with the emergency medical services vehicles. 
(c)  Each emergency medical services vehicle owner must provide direct communications with the city police dispatcher from his base of operation. 
(Code 1981, § 4-7) 
Sec. 118-318. - Inspection; correction of defects. 
(a)  Each owner must inspect each emergency medical services vehicle every morning, to ascertain cleanliness, mechanical and operational worthiness for transporting patients. Each emergency medical services vehicle shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by an authorized representative of the city. 
(b)  Any emergency medical services vehicle found by the owner or an authorized representative of the city, upon inspection, to be unsafe for emergency medical services vehicle operations shall have such repairs and alterations made as may be required and the owner shall not operate or cause to be operated any such emergency medical services vehicle, until all such repairs and alterations have been completed. 
(c)  Monthly records of inspections of emergency medical services vehicles and their equipment shall be kept current and made available to any governmental agency requesting such records. 
(Code 1981, § 4-8) 
Sec. 118-319. - Certified attendant. 
    No person shall operate an emergency medical services vehicle on an emergency run or call, unless an emergency medical care attendant, currently certified by the state health commissioner pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.5, is on duty in such emergency medical services vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 4-9) 
Sec. 118-320. - Notice to police department of request for emergency run; procedures. 
    Upon receipt of a request for an emergency run, an emergency medical services vehicle dispatcher shall notify the police department dispatcher of the nature of the emergency and the location thereof as soon as possible and practical. Upon arrival at the scene of the emergency, the emergency medical services vehicle attendant shall immediately determine the condition of the patient and administer any necessary first-aid treatment. Thereupon, the patient shall immediately be transported to medical attention, under emergency run conditions, only if the patient's condition is such as to warrant immediate medical attention of a physician in order to conserve human life or relieve undue suffering. 
(Code 1981, § 4-10) 
Sec. 118-321. - Maximum charges. 
(a)  No person owning, operating or controlling an ambulance covered by a certificate issued under this article shall charge other than the following rates for ambulance service: 
(1)  Maximum charge of $825.00 per person within the city limits to be charged as follows: 
a.  Basic life support (BLS) ..... $500.00 
b.  Advance life support 1 (ALS-1) ..... 600.00 
c.  Advance life support 2 (ALS-2) ..... 825.00 
(2)  A charge of $12.50 per loaded mile while patient is in the vehicle. 
(b)  Any ambulance company owner or operator charging in excess of the rates prescribed in this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 4-11; Ord. No. 96-13, § 4-11, 9-19-1995; Ord. No. 00-34, § 4-11, 6-20-2000; Ord. No. 01-72, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 04-98, 11-9-2004; Ord. No. 08-14, 2-5-2008; Ord. No. 17-38, 9-5-2017) 
Sec. 118-322. - Obtaining or receiving service without intending to pay. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain or receive emergency medical services vehicle service without intending, at the time of obtaining or receiving such service, to pay, if financially able, the necessary charges. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 4-12) 
Sec. 118-323. - Record of calls; dispatcher's daily log. 
(a)  There shall be maintained, for a period of not less than three years, a record of all calls made by an emergency medical services vehicle operated under this article. Such record shall show all of the following: 
(1)  The patient's name, age, race, sex and address. 
(2)  The time the request for service was received. 
(3)  The time the emergency medical services vehicle was dispatched. 
(4)  The time the emergency medical services vehicle arrived at the scene. 
(5)  The name of the hospital or other place of medical attention to which the patient was transported and the time the emergency medical services vehicle arrived at such hospital or place. 
(6)  Whether or not the call was an emergency. 
(7)  The condition of the patient and whether or not first-aid treatment was administered. 
(8)  Whether or not an emergency run was made. 
(9)  The names of the driver, the attendant and the dispatcher. 
(b)  The dispatcher of any emergency medical services vehicle shall maintain a daily log for the purpose of identifying persons transported in any one day. 
(Code 1981, § 4-13) 
Sec. 118-324. - Inventory of personal possessions of unconscious or deceased persons. 
    In the event that the transport of a deceased or unconscious person is made by an emergency medical services vehicle, the emergency medical services vehicle driver or attendant shall prepare a written inventory of such person's personal possessions transported, witnessed by the agency receiving the deceased or unconscious person. Such inventory shall be kept on file by the owner of the emergency medical services vehicle for a period of two years. At reasonable times, such inventory may be inspected by the next of kin of the person so transported and by any governmental agency having authority to make such inspection. A copy of such inventory shall be given to the witnessing agency. 
(Code 1981, § 4-14) 
Sec. 118-325. - Prohibited acts by drivers and attendants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person employed or acting as an emergency medical services vehicle driver or attendant to commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts: 
(1)  To fail to comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of the patient as to first-aid treatment and destination. 
(2)  To smoke while inside or outside an emergency medical services vehicle, whether moving or standing, during the transportation of a patient. 
(3)  To transport any deceased person, except upon explicit instructions of the deceased's family, the medical examiner, or the police, after permitted by the police, to any place other than a local state recognized hospital. 
(4)  To move any deceased person except by permission of the city police or the medical examiner. 
(5)  To move any patient where there is suspicion of foul play, without notifying the city police of such suspicion. 
(6)  To recommend to anyone a particular funeral home to handle a deceased person. 
(7)  To administer, prescribe, employ or sell any drug, herb, medicine, plaster or belt or attempt the treatment of a disease. 
(8)  To make vaginal examinations for the purpose of determining pregnancy or to attempt to mechanically break the bag of waters or remove adherent placental tissue. 
(9)  In the event of miscarriage, to transport any patient without first obtaining all placenta membranes and transporting the placenta membranes with the patient if found. 
(10)  To disregard any instruction from a licensed physician of this state as concerns the welfare of patient. 
(11)  To disregard any instruction of any police officer during the administering of first-aid, transporting, standing or en route to destination. 
(12)  To permit anyone to sit in the attendant seat, other than the attendant or a doctor or registered nurse, while transporting a patient. 
(13)  To make an emergency run, without having notified the city police as soon as possible or practical. 
(Code 1981, § 4-15) 
Secs. 118-326-118-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 

Sec. 118-341. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated an emergency medical services vehicle within the city, without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the city council authorizing such operation. 
(Code 1981, § 4-27) 
State Law reference- Authority of city council to require permit or franchise for operation of emergency medical services vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.14. 
Sec. 118-342. - Application. 
    All persons applying to the city council for a certificate under this article shall file with the city council a sworn application therefor, in triplicate, on forms provided by the city council, stating as follows: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and, in the event the owner is a corporation, a certified copy of its articles of incorporation. 
(2)  The number of emergency medical services vehicles actually owned and the number of emergency medical services vehicles actually operated by such owner on the date of such application, if any. 
(3)  The net worth of the owner or applicant over and above all debts, judgments, demands and claims whatsoever. 
(4)  Whether there are any unsatisfied judgments of record against the applicant, and if so, the title of all actions and the amount of all judgments unsatisfied. 
(5)  The make, type, year of manufacture, serial number and equipment therein for each emergency medical services vehicle owned or operated by the applicant. 
(6)  The court record, if any, of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the court record, if any, of the officers, directors and supervising employees thereof, including the general manager or director, shall be included. 
(7)  Whether there are any liens, mortgages or other encumbrances on such emergency medical services vehicles and, if so, the amount and character thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 4-28(1)-(7)) 
Sec. 118-343. - Hearing; determination of public convenience and necessity. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a certificate under this article, the city council shall fix a time and place for hearing the applicant. No certificate shall be granted, unless the city council shall find, after hearing, that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed emergency medical services vehicle service. In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of an emergency medical services vehicle or emergency medical services vehicles for which application for a certificate is made, the city council will consider and investigate: 
(1)  The statements made in the application. 
(2)  The adequacy of existing emergency medical services vehicle service. 
(3)  The financial responsibility, experience and character of the applicant. 
(4)  The public need for additional service. 
(5)  The ability of existing holders of a certificate to provide any necessary additional service. 
(6)  Any other factors pertinent to such determination. 
(Code 1981, § 4-29) 
Sec. 118-344. - Issuance. 
    Upon finding that the public convenience and necessity require the emergency medical services vehicle service proposed in an application filed under this article, the city council shall grant to the applicant a certificate upon the terms and conditions prescribed by this article; provided: 
(1)  The applicant has complied with all the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The emergency medical services vehicle or emergency medical services vehicles proposed to be operated under such certificate are found, after inspection by the police department, to meet the requirements of this article; 
(3)  There are no unsatisfied judgments of record against the applicant; and 
(4)  The court record, if any, of the applicant is such as would conform to the public interest upon granting of a certificate. 
(Code 1981, § 4-30) 
Sec. 118-345. - Appeal from refusal. 
    In the event the city council shall refuse, after a hearing, to issue a certificate to the applicant therefor, upon the ground that public convenience and necessity do not require the operation of additional emergency medical services vehicles in the city, or because it has required persons then engaged in such business in the city and holding certificates, or any one or more of them, to provide such additional service, or because it is not satisfied as to suitability, character and qualifications of the applicant to conduct such business, or the financial responsibility of the applicant, or the applicant's experience or ability to conduct such business, the applicant may, within, ten days from the date of such refusal, file with the circuit court of the city a petition, in writing, to review the findings of the city council and its action with respect to such certificate. A copy of such petition, in which shall be stated the time and place at which it will be presented to the court, shall be served on the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 4-31) 
Sec. 118-346. - Term. 
    In order that any applicant granted a certificate under this article may justify the capital investment essential to the adequate and efficient emergency medical services vehicle service required in the public interest, the term of any certificate granted shall be ten years, unless such certificate is sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1981, § 4-32) 
Sec. 118-347. - Sale, transfer, etc. 
    No certificate granted under this article may be sold, assigned or transferred, nor shall such certificate in any way vest in any person other than the applicant to whom the certificate is granted any rights or privileges under such certificate. 
(Code 1981, § 4-33) 
Sec. 118-348. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any certificate granted under this article may be suspended or revoked by the city council, after a hearing held upon 30 days notice to the certificate holder, for failure to comply with any provision of this article. If, upon such hearing, the city council shall find that the certificate holder has corrected any deficiencies and has brought himself into compliance with the provisions of this article, the certificate shall not be suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1981, § 4-34) 
Secs. 118-349-118-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE HAULERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 118-371. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the term "employee hauler" shall mean any person operating a passenger vehicle, for pay or compensation to transport persons from various points within the city to their place of employment, either within or without the city. 
(Code 1981, § 37-191) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 118-372. - Application of and compliance with article. 
    The operation of passenger vehicles by employee haulers upon the streets of the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, within the city any such vehicle, unless such conditions, regulations and restrictions are complied with by the owners, operators and drivers of such vehicles. 
(Code 1981, § 37-192) 
Sec. 118-373. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 37-193) 
Sec. 118-374. - Insurance. 
    No employee hauler vehicle shall be operated on the streets of the city, unless the owner and driver are protected by liability and property damage insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in this state in the sum of such amounts as are required under section 118-39 for taxicabs. 
(Code 1981, § 37-194) 
Secs. 118-375-118-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 118-391. - Required. 
    No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any employee hauler vehicle upon the streets of the city, unless he has a current permit so to do issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 37-206) 
Sec. 118-392. - Application. 
    Application for a permit required by this division shall be filed with the city manager, upon forms prescribed by him. 
(Code 1981, § 37-207) 
Sec. 118-393. - Issuance. 
    The city manager shall issue a permit applied for under this division for the number of employee hauler vehicles specified in the application, without proof of public convenience and necessity. 
(Code 1981, § 37-208) 
Sec. 118-394. - Sale or transfer. 
    A permit issued under this division shall be sold or transferred only with the consent and approval of the city manager. The person making the sale or transfer shall state, under oath, if the city manager requires it, the selling price of the permit and the vehicle. If the city manager shall find that the proposed sale or transfer is other than bona fide, he shall refuse his consent to, or approval of, such sale or transfer. 
(Code 1981, § 37-209) 
Sec. 118-395. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Permits issued under this division shall expire on April 30 following the date of issue and shall be renewed annually thereafter. 
(Code 1981, § 37-210) 
Sec. 118-396. - Revocation. 
    Permits issued under this division may be revoked by the city manager, at any time, pursuant to uniform city standards. 
(Code 1981, § 37-211) 
Chapter 122 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; community development, ch. 38; environment, ch. 50; floods, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 78; planning, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 102. 
State Law reference- Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 122-1. - Fishing in Willcox Lake. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fish in the waters of Willcox Lake in the city, except from a boat and under a permit properly obtained from the city manager or his duly designated representative. 
(Code 1981, § 22-13) 
Secs. 122-2-122-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHESAPEAKE BAY PRESERVATION AREAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 122-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words and terms not defined in this article but defined in the zoning ordinance shall be given the meanings set forth therein. 
    Agricultural land means that land used for the planting and harvesting of crops or plant growth of any kind in the open; pasture; horticulture; dairying; floriculture; or raising of poultry or livestock. 
    Best management practice or BMP means a practice, or a combination of practices, that is determined by a state or designated area-wide planning agency to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated by nonpoint sources to a level compatible with water quality goals. 
    Buffer area means an area of natural or established vegetation managed to protect other components of a resource protection area and state waters from significant degradation due to land disturbances. 
    City means the city council. 
    CBLAD means the Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance Department. 
    Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area (CBPA) means an area delineated by the city in accordance with criteria established pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2107. A "Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area" shall consist of a resource protection area and a resource management area. 
    Construction footprint means the area of all impervious surface including, but not limited to, buildings, roads and drives, parking areas and sidewalks, and the area necessary for construction of such improvements. 
    Development means the construction or substantial alteration of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation, or utility facilities or structures. 
    Diameter at breast height or DBH means the diameter of a tree measured outside the bark at a point 4.5 feet above ground. 
    Dripline means a vertical projection to the ground surface from the furthest lateral extent of a tree's leaf canopy. 
    Highly erodible soils means soils (excluding vegetation) with an erodibility index (EI) from sheet and rill erosion equal to or greater than eight. The erodibility of any soil is defined as the product of the formula RKLS/T, as defined by the "Food Security Act (F.S.A.) Manual" of August 1988 in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, where K is the soil susceptibility to water erosion in the surface layer; R is the rainfall and runoff; LS is the combined effects of slope, length and steepness; and T is the soil loss tolerance. 
    Highly permeable soils means soils with a given potential to transmit water through the soil profile. Highly permeable soils are identified as any soils having a permeability equal to or greater than six inches of water movement per hour in any part of the soil profile to a depth of 72 inches (permeability groups "rapid" and "very rapid) as found in the "National Soil Survey Handbook" of November 1996 in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
    Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, roofs, buildings, streets, parking areas, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
    Infill means utilization of vacant land in previously developed areas. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means pollution consisting of constituents such as sediment, nutrients, and organic and toxic substances from diffuse sources, such as runoff from agriculture and urban land development and use. 
    Nontidal wetlands means those wetlands other than tidal wetlands that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, in 33 CFR 328.3b, as now or hereafter amended. 
    Nonvegetated wetlands means unvegetated lands lying contiguous to mean low water and between mean low water and mean high water, including those unvegetated areas of Back Bay and its tributaries and the North Landing River and its tributaries subject to flooding by normal and wind tides but not hurricane or tropical storm tides. 
    Noxious weeds means weeds that are difficult to control effectively, such as Johnson grass, kudzu, and multiflora rose. 
    Plan of development means the process for site plan or subdivision plat review to ensure compliance with Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2109 and this article prior to any clearing or grading of a site or the issuance of a building permit. 
    Public road means a publicly owned road designed and constructed in accordance with water quality protection criteria at least as stringent as requirements applicable to the Virginia Department of Transportation, including regulations promulgated pursuant to (i) the Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Code of Virginia § 10.1-560 et seq.) and (ii) the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (Code of Virginia § 10.1-603.1 et seq.). This definition includes those roads where the Virginia Department of Transportation exercises direct supervision over the design or construction activities, or both, and cases where secondary roads are constructed or maintained, or both, by a local government in accordance with the standards of that local government. 
    Redevelopment means the process of developing land that is or has been previously developed. 
    Resource management area or RMA means that component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area that is not classified as the resource protection area. RMAs include land types that, if improperly used or developed, have the potential for causing significant water quality degradation or for diminishing the functional value of the resource protection area. 
    Resource protection area or RPA means that component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area comprised of lands adjacent to water bodies with perennial flow that have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or are sensitive to impacts which may result in significant degradation to the quality of state waters. 
    Silvicultural activities means forest management activities, including but not limited to the harvesting of timber, the construction of roads and trails for forest management purposes, and the preparation of property for reforestation that are conducted in accordance with the silvicultural best management practices developed and enforced by the state forester pursuant to Code of Virginia § 10.1-1105 and are located on property defined as real estate devoted to forest use under Code of Virginia § 58.1-3230. 
    Substantial alteration means expansion or modification of a building or development that would result in a disturbance of land exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet in the resource management area only. 
    Tidal shore or shore means land contiguous to a tidal body of water between the mean low water level and the mean high water level. 
    Tidal wetlands means vegetated wetlands and nonvegetated wetlands as defined in Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300. 
    Use means an activity on the land other than development including, but not limited to, agriculture, horticulture and silviculture. 
    Vegetated wetlands means lands lying between and contiguous to mean low water and an elevation above mean low water equal to the factor 11/2 times the mean tide range at the site of the proposed project in the county, city, or town in question, and upon which is growing any of the following species: saltmarsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora), saltmeadow hay (Spartina patens), saltgrass (Distichlis spicata), black needlerush (Juncus roemerianus), saltwort (Salicornia spp.), sea lavender (Limonium spp.), marsh elder (Iva frutescens), groundsel bush (Baccharis halimifolia), wax myrtle (Myrica sp.), sea oxeye (Borrichia frutescens), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), big cordgrass (Spartina cynosuroides), rice cutgrass (Leersia oryzoides), wildrice (Zizania aquatica), bulrush (Scirpus validus), spikerush (Eleocharis sp.), sea rocket (Cakile edentula), southern wildrice (Zizaniopsis miliacea), cattail (Typha spp.), three-square (Scirpus spp.), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bald cypress (Taxodium distichurn), black gum (Nyssa sylvatica), tupelo (Nyssa aquatica), dock (Rumex spp.), yellow pond lily (Nuphar sp.), marsh fleabane (Pluchea purpurascens), royal fern (Osmunda regalis), marsh hibiscus (Hibiscus moscheutos), beggar's tick (Bidens sp.), smartweed (Polygonum sp.), arrowhead (Sagittaria spp.), sweet flag (Acorus calamus), water hemp (Amaranthus cannabinus), reed grass (Phragmites communis), or switch grass (Panicum virgatum). 
    Water-dependent facility means a development of land that cannot exist outside of the resource protection area and must be located on the shoreline by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operation. These facilities include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Ports. 
(2)  The intake and outfall structures of power plants, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants, and storm sewers. 
(3)  Marinas and other boat docking structures. 
(4)  Beaches and other public water-oriented recreation areas. 
(5)  Fisheries or other marine resources facilities. 
    Wetlands means tidal and non-tidal wetlands, and both vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands. 
(Code 1981, §§ 9.5-3, 9.5-4, 9.5-12; Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004) 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 122-32. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries represent one of the most important and productive estuarine systems in the world, providing economic and social benefits to the citizens of the city and the commonwealth. 
(b)  The Chesapeake Bay waters have been degraded significantly by many sources of pollution, including nonpoint source pollution from land uses and development. Existing high quality waters are worthy of protection to guard against further degradation. Certain lands that are proximate to shorelines have intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform. Other lands have severe development constraints attributable to flooding, erosion, and soil limitations. With proper management, these lands offer significant ecological benefits by providing water quality maintenance and pollution control, as well as flood and shoreline erosion control. These lands together, designated by the city council as Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, need to be protected from destruction and damage in order to protect the quality of water in the bay and consequently the quality of life in the city and the commonwealth. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-1) 
Sec. 122-33. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  This article is enacted to implement the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2100 et seq. (the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act). The intent of the city council is to establish an overlay district, the purpose of which is to: 
(1)  Protect existing high quality state waters. 
(2)  Restore state waters to a condition or quality that will permit all reasonable public uses and will support the propagation and growth of all aquatic life, including game fish, which might reasonably be expected to inhabit them. 
(3)  Safeguard the clean waters of the commonwealth from pollution. 
(4)  Prevent any increase in pollution. 
(5)  Reduce existing pollution. 
(6)  Promote water resource conservation in order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  This district shall be in addition to and shall overlay all other zoning districts so that any parcel of land lying in the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District shall also lie in one or more of the other zoning districts provided for by the zoning ordinance. Unless otherwise stated in the overlay district, the existing review and approval procedures provided in current city ordinances and regulations shall be followed in reviewing and approving development, redevelopment, and uses governed by this article. 
(c)  This article is enacted under the authority of Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2100 et seq. (the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act) and Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2283. Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2283 states that zoning ordinances may "also include reasonable provisions, not inconsistent with applicable state water quality standards, to protect surface water and groundwater as defined in Code of Virginia, § 62.1-255." 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-2) 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
Sec. 122-34. - Resource protection area and resource management area. 
    A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall consist of a resource protection area and a resource management area. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-4) 
Secs. 122-35-122-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 122-51. - Areas of applicability. 
(a)  The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District shall apply to all lands identified as CBPAs as designated by the city council and as shown on the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map. The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(1)  The resource protection area is all lands within the city lying within the Chesapeake Bay outfall including: 
a.  Tidal shores. 
b.  Tidal wetlands. 
c.  Nontidal wetlands connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or water bodies with perennial flow. 
d.  A 100-foot vegetated buffer area located adjacent to and landward of the components listed in subsections (a)(1)a. through c. of this section, and along both sides of any water bodies with perennial flow. 
(2)  The resource management area is composed of that area lying 100 feet landward of and contiguous to the resource protection area and, in addition, any area consisting of the 100-year floodplain and hydric soils adjacent to water bodies with perennial flow, included in the RPA, as delineated on the map referenced in this subsection. 
(b)  The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map shows the general location of CBPAs and shall be consulted by persons contemplating activities within the city prior to engaging in a regulated activity. Site specific determinations regarding CBPAs shall be accomplished as per the requirements of section 122-56 of this division. 
(c)  If the boundaries of an RPA or RMA include a portion of a lot or parcel, the entire lot or parcel shall comply with the requirements of the overlay district. The division of property shall not constitute an exemption from this requirement. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-5; Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 122-52. - Use regulations. 
    Permitted uses, special permit uses, accessory uses, and special requirements shall be as established by the underlying zoning district, unless specifically modified by the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-6) 
Sec. 122-53. - Lot size. 
    Lot size shall be subject to the requirements of the underlying zoning district, provided that any lot shall have sufficient area outside the RPA to accommodate an intended development, in accordance with the performance standards in subdivision II of this division, when such development is not otherwise allowed in the RPA. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-7) 
Sec. 122-54. - Required conditions. 
(a)  All development and redevelopment exceeding 2,500 square feet of land disturbance shall be subject to a plan of development process, including the approval of a site plan, in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance, or a subdivision plat, in accordance with the subdivision ordinance. 
(b)  Development in RPA's may be allowed only if it: 
(1)  Is water-dependent: 
a.  A new or expanded water dependent facility may be allowed provided that the following criteria are met: 
(i)  It does not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(ii)  It complies with the performance criteria set forth in section 122-77 of this article. 
(2)  Any nonwater-dependent component is located outside of the RPA; and 
a.  Access to the water-dependent facility will be provided with the minimum disturbance necessary. Where practicable, a single point of access will be provided. 
(3)  Constitutes redevelopment and meets the following criteria: 
a.  Redevelopment shall be permitted in the RPA only if there is no increase in the amount of impervious cover and no further encroachment within the RPA, and it shall conform to applicable erosion and sediment control set forth in subsection 122-77(d) and stormwater management criteria set forth in subsection 122-77(g) of this article. 
(4)  Is a new use established pursuant to subsection 122-78(d)(2) of this article. 
(5)  Is a road or driveway crossing satisfying the following conditions: 
a.  The director of planning/CD makes a finding that there are no reasonable alternatives to aligning the road or driveway in or across the RPA; 
b.  The alignment and design of the road or driveway are optimized, consistent with other applicable requirements, to minimize encroachment in the RPA and minimize adverse impacts on water quality; 
c.  The design and construction of the road or driveway satisfy all applicable criteria of this article; 
d.  The director of planning/CD reviews the plan for the road or driveway proposed in or across the RPA in coordination with the requirements under city site plan. 
(6)  Is a flood control or stormwater management facility that drains or treats water from multiple development projects or from a significant portion of a watershed, satisfying the following conditions: 
a.  The City of Petersburg Director of Public Works has conclusively established that location of the facility within the resource protection area is the optimum location; 
b.  The size of the facility is the minimum necessary to provide necessary flood control, stormwater treatment, or both; 
c.  The facility must be consistent with a stormwater management program that has been approved by the Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance Board as a Phase 1 modification; 
d.  All applicable permits for construction in state or federal waters must be obtained from the appropriate state and federal agencies, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission; 
e.  Approval must be received from the City of Petersburg prior to construction. 
f.  Provisions to require the owner/developer to perform and/or allow routine maintenance on such facility to assure the continued function of the facility as per its design. 
(c)  A water quality impact assessment shall be required for any proposed land disturbance, development or redevelopment within RPAs and for any development or redevelopment within RMAs when required by the city director of public works because of the unique characteristics of the site or intensity of development, in accordance with the provisions of subdivision III of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-8; Ord. No. 05-76, 9-6-2005) 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
Sec. 122-55. - Conflict with other regulations. 
    In any case where the requirements of this article conflict with any other provision of the Code of the city, the requirements of this article shall apply. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-9) 
Sec. 122-56. - Site-specific determination of resource protection area boundaries. 
(a)  Delineation by the applicant. The site-specific boundaries of the resource protection area shall be determined by the applicant through the performance of an environmental site assessment, subject to approval by the director of planning and in accordance with subdivision III of this division. The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map shall be used as a guide to the general location of resource protection areas. 
(1)  The determination of water bodies with perennial flow shall be made by use of a scientifically valid system of in-field indicators. 
(b)  Where conflict arises over delineation. When the applicant provides a site-specific delineation of the RPA, the director of planning will verify the accuracy of the boundary delineation. In determining the site-specific RPA boundary, the director of planning may render adjustments to the applicant's boundary delineation, in accordance with section subdivision III of this division. In the event the adjusted boundary delineation is contested by the applicant, the applicant may seek relief, in accordance with the provisions of section 122-105. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-10; Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004) 
Secs. 122-57-122-75. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Performance Standards 

Sec. 122-76. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The performance standards establish the means to minimize erosion and sedimentation potential, reduce land application of nutrients and toxins, and maximize rainwater infiltration. Natural ground cover, especially woody vegetation, is most effective in holding soil in place and preventing site erosion. Indigenous vegetation, with its adaptability to local conditions without the use of harmful fertilizers or pesticides, filters stormwater runoff. Minimizing impervious cover enhances rainwater infiltration and effectively reduces stormwater runoff potential. 
(b)  The purpose and intent of these requirements are also to implement the following objectives: 
(1)  Prevent a net increase in nonpoint source pollution from new development. 
(2)  Achieve a ten percent reduction in nonpoint source pollution from redevelopment. 
(3)  Achieve a 40 percent reduction in nonpoint source pollution from agricultural uses. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-11(a)) 
Sec. 122-77. - General performance standards for development and redevelopment. 
(a)  Land disturbance shall be limited to the area necessary to provide for the proposed use or development. 
(1)  In accordance with an approved site plan, the limits of land disturbance, including clearing or grading, shall be strictly defined by the construction footprint. These limits shall be clearly shown on submitted plans and physically marked on the development site. 
(2)  Ingress and egress during construction shall be limited to one access point, unless otherwise approved by the city director of public works. 
(b)  Indigenous vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable consistent with the use or development proposed and in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. 
(1)  Existing trees six inches in diameter or greater at breast height shall be preserved outside the construction footprint. However, trees may be pruned or removed as necessary to provide for sight lines and vistas, provided that where removed, they shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. Diseased trees or trees weakened by age, storm, fire, or other injury may be removed, as approved by the city director of public works. 
(2)  Clearing shall be allowed only to provide necessary access, positive site drainage, water quality BMPs, and the installation of utilities, as approved by the city director of public works. 
(3)  Prior to clearing or grading, suitable protective barriers, such as safety fencing, shall be erected five feet outside the dripline of any tree or stand of trees to be preserved. These protective barriers shall remain so erected throughout all phases of construction. The storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill shall not be allowed within the area protected by the barriers. 
(c)  Land development shall minimize impervious cover to promote infiltration of stormwater into the ground consistent with the use or development permitted. 
(1)  Pervious surfaces, such as grid and modular pavements, shall be used for any required parking area, alley, or other low traffic driveway, unless otherwise approved by the city director of public works. 
(2)  Parking space size, with the exception of disabled spaces, shall be 162 square feet. Parking space width shall be nine feet; parking space length shall be 18 feet. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or exceptions thereto, any land disturbing activity exceeding 1,000 square feet, including construction of all single-family houses, septic tanks, and drainfields, shall comply with the requirements of chapter 50, article V of this Code, the erosion and sediment control ordinance. 
(e)  All onsite sewage disposal systems not requiring a Virginia Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit shall be pumped out at least once every five years. However, the following alternatives to mandatory pump-out are available: 
(1)  Subject to conditions established by the local health department, local government through the director of public works may permit the installation of a plastic filter installed and maintained in the outflow pipe from the septic tank to filter solid material from effluent while sustaining adequate flow to the drain field to permit use of the septic system. Any such filter must meet or exceed standards established in the Sewage Handling and Disposal Regulations (12 VAC 5-610) as administered by the Virginia Department of Health; or 
(2)  In lieu of requiring proof of septic tank pump-out every five years, the director of public works and the Director of the Crater Health District may allow the owner(s) of on-site sewage treatment systems to submit documentation every five years, certified by a sewage handler permitted by the Virginia Department of Health that the septic system has been inspected, is functioning properly, and the tank does not need to have the effluent pumped out of it at that time. 
(f)  Where an area is not served by public sewer system, a reserve sewage disposal site with a capacity at least equal to that of the primary sewage disposal site shall be provided. This requirement shall not apply to any lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989, if such lot or parcel is not sufficient in capacity to accommodate a reserve sewage disposal site, as determined by the local health department. Building or construction of any impervious surface shall be prohibited on the area of all sewage disposal sites or on an onsite sewage treatment system which operates under a permit issued by the state water control board until the structure is served by public sewer. 
(g)  For any development or redevelopment, stormwater runoff shall be controlled by best management practices. Stormwater management criteria consistent with the water quality protection provisions of the Stormwater Management Regulations of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall be the standard. Stormwater BMPs shall be consistent with the water quality protection provisions of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations as set forth at 4 VAC 50-60-40 through 50-60-90. 
(h)  Prior to initiating grading or other onsite activities on any portion of a lot or parcel, all wetlands permits required by federal, state, and local laws and regulations shall be obtained and evidence of such submitted to the city director of public works, in accordance with subdivision III of this division. 
(i)  Land upon which agricultural activities are being conducted shall have a soil and water quality conservation assessment, that where necessary, results in a conservation plan. Such assessment and resulting necessary plan shall be based upon the Field Office Technical Guide of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service and accomplish water quality protection consistent with this article. Such assessment and resulting necessary plan shall be approved by the local soil and water conservation district. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-11(b); Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 05-76, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 08-103, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 122-78. - Buffer area. 
(a)  To minimize the adverse effects of human activities on the other components of resource protection areas, state waters, and aquatic life, a 100-foot buffer area of vegetation that is effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff shall be retained if present and established where it does not exist if erosion problems are evident. 
(b)  The buffer area shall be located adjacent to and landward of other RPA component and along both sides of any water bodies with perennial flow. The full buffer area shall be designated as the landward component of the RPA, in accordance with section 122-51 and subdivision III of this division. 
(c)  The 100-foot buffer area shall be deemed to achieve a 75 percent reduction of sediments and a 40 percent reduction of nutrients. 
(d)  The buffer area shall be maintained to meet the following additional performance standards: 
(1)  In order to maintain the functional value of the buffer area, indigenous vegetation may be removed, subject to local approval by the director of public works, only to provide for reasonable sight lines, access paths, general woodlot management, and BMPs, including those that prevent upland erosion and concentrated flows of stormwater, as follows: 
a.  Trees may be pruned or removed as necessary to provide for sight lines and vistas, provided that where removed, they shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. 
b.  Any path shall be constructed and surfaced so as to effectively control erosion. 
c.  Dead, diseased, or dying trees or shrubbery may be removed and thinning of trees may be allowed, pursuant to sound horticultural practice incorporated into locally adopted standards; 
d.  For shoreline erosion control projects, trees and woody vegetation may be removed, necessary control techniques employed, and appropriate vegetation established to protect or stabilize the shoreline in accordance with the best available technical advice and applicable permit conditions or requirements. 
(2)  When the application of the buffer areas would result in the loss of a buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989, the director of planning, after consulting with the city director of public works, may grant an encroachment into the buffer area through an administrative process in accordance with the following criteria: 
a.  Encroachment into the buffer areas shall be the minimum necessary to achieve a reasonable buildable area for a principal structure and necessary utilities. 
b.  Where practicable, a vegetated area that will maximize water quality protection, mitigate the effects of the buffer encroachment, and is equal to the area of encroachment into the buffer area shall be established elsewhere on the lot or. 
c.  In no case shall the encroachment extend into the seaward 50 feet of the buffer area. 
(3)  When the application of the buffer areas would result in the loss of a buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded between October 1, 1989 and March 1, 2002, the director of planning, after consulting with the city director of public works, may allow encroachments into the buffer area in accordance with subdivision III of this division and the following criteria: 
a.  The lot or parcel was created as a result of a legal process conducted in conformity with the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Petersburg; 
b.  Any specific conditions, mitigation measures or other such legally binding conditions or covenants imposed through a previously approved exception shall be binding and shall be met; 
c.  If the use of a best management practice (BMP) was previously required, the BMP shall be evaluated by a certified engineer (retained by the applicant) to determine if it continues to function effectively, and if deemed necessary, the BPM shall be reestablished or repaired and maintained, as required; and 
d.  The criteria in subsection (2) (immediately above) of this section (section 122-78, buffer area) shall be met. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, intensely developed areas may be designated redevelopment areas in which development is concentrated as of the initial effective date of this section. IDAs may be exempt from the buffer area, in accordance with subdivision III of this division. 
(5)  On agricultural lands, the agricultural buffer area shall be managed to prevent concentrated flows of surface water from breaching the buffer area and noxious weeds from invading the buffer area. The agricultural activities may encroach into the buffer area as follows: 
a.  Agricultural activities may encroach into the landward 50 feet of the 100-foot wide buffer area when at least one agricultural best management practice which, in the opinion of the local soil and water conservation district board, addresses the more predominant water quality issue on the adjacent land - erosion control or nutrient management - is being implemented on the adjacent land, provided that the combination of the undisturbed buffer area and the best management practice achieves water quality protection, pollutant removal, and water resource conservation at least the equivalent of the 100-foot wide buffer area. If nutrient management is identified as the predominant water quality issue, a nutrient management plan, including soil tests, must be developed consistent with the Virginia Nutrient Training and Certification Regulations (4 VAC 5-15) administered by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. 
b.  Agricultural activities may encroach within the landward 75 feet of the 100-foot wide buffer area when agricultural best management practices which address erosion control, nutrient management, and pest chemical control, are being implemented on the adjacent land. The erosion control practices must prevent erosion from exceeding the soil loss tolerance level, referred to as "T," as defined in the "National Soil Survey Handbook" of November 1996 in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service. A nutrient management plan, including soil tests, must be developed, consistent with the Virginia Nutrient Management Training and Certification Regulations (4 VAC 5-15) administered by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. In conjunction with the remaining buffer area, this collection of best management practices shall be presumed to achieve water quality protection at least the equivalent of that provided by the 100-foot wide buffer area. 
c.  The buffer area is not required to be designated adjacent to agricultural drainage ditches if at least one best management practice which, in the opinion of the local soil and water conservation district board, addresses the more predominant water quality issue on the adjacent land - either erosion control or nutrient management - is being implemented on the adjacent land. 
d.  Where land uses such as agriculture or silviculture within the area of the buffer cease and the lands are proposed to be converted to other uses, the full 100-foot wide buffer shall be reestablished. In reestablishing the buffer, management measures shall be undertaken to provide woody vegetation that assures the buffer functions as set forth in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-11(c); Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004) 
Secs. 122-79-122-95. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Plan of Development Process[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 122-96. - Required. 
    Any development or redevelopment exceeding 2,500 square feet of land disturbance shall be accomplished through a plan of development process prior to any clearing or grading of the site or the issuance of any building permit, to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-12) 
Sec. 122-97. - Information submitted. 
    In addition to the requirements of the zoning ordinance or the requirements of the subdivision ordinance, chapter 102 of this Code, the plan of development process shall consist of the plans and studies identified below. These required plans and studies may be coordinated or combined, as deemed appropriate by the city director of public works. The city director of public works may determine that some of the following information is unnecessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed development. The following plans or studies shall be submitted, unless otherwise directed: 
(1)  A site plan or a subdivision plat, in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision ordinance, chapter 102 of this Code. 
(2)  An environmental site assessment. 
(3)  A landscaping plan. 
(4)  A stormwater management plan. 
(5)  An erosion and sediment control plan, in accordance with the provisions of chapter 50, article V of this Code. 
(6)  A water quality impact assessment as necessary under the requirements of section 122-102. 
(Code 1980, § 9.5-12(1); Ord. No. 08-103, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
Sec. 122-98. - Environmental site assessment. 
    An environmental site assessment shall be submitted in conjunction with preliminary site plan or preliminary subdivision plan approval. 
(1)  The environmental site assessment shall be drawn to scale and clearly delineate the following environmental features: 
a.  Tidal shores. 
b.  Tidal wetlands. 
c.  Nontidal wetlands connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or water bodies with perennial flow. 
d.  A 100-foot buffer area located adjacent to and landward of the components listed in subsections (1)a. through c. of this section, and along both sides of any water bodies with perennial flow. 
e.  Other sensitive environmental features as determined by the city director of public works. 
(2)  Wetlands delineations shall be performed consistent with the procedures specified in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, 1987, as now or hereafter amended. 
(3)  The environmental site assessment shall delineate the site-specific geographic extent of the RPA. 
(4)  The environmental site assessment shall be drawn at the same scale as the preliminary site plan or subdivision plat, and shall be certified as complete and accurate by a professional engineer or a certified land surveyor. The requirement that the environmental site assessment be developed by a professional engineer or certified land surveyor may be waived by the city director of public works when the proposed use or development would result in less than 5,000 square feet of disturbed area. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-12(2); Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004) 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 50. 
Sec. 122-99. - Landscaping plan. 
(a)  A landscaping plan shall be submitted in conjunction with site plan approval or as part of subdivision plat approval. No clearing or grading of any lot or parcel shall be permitted without an approved landscaping plan. 
(b)  Landscaping plans shall be prepared and certified by design professionals practicing within their areas of competence as prescribed by the Code of Virginia. 
(1)  Contents of the plan. 
a.  The landscaping plan shall be drawn to scale and clearly delineate the location, size, and description of existing and proposed plant material. All existing trees on the site six inches or greater DBH shall be shown on the landscaping plan. Where there are groups of five or more trees, stands may be outlined instead. The specific number of trees six inches or greater DBH to be preserved outside of the construction footprint shall be indicated on the plan. Trees to be removed shall be clearly delineated on the landscaping plan. 
b.  Any required buffer area shall be clearly delineated, and any plant material to be added to establish or supplement the buffer area, as required by this article, shall be shown on the landscaping plan. 
c.  Within the buffer area, trees to be removed for sight lines, vistas, access paths, and BMPs, as provided for in this article, shall be shown on the plan. Vegetation required by this article to replace any existing trees within the buffer area shall also be shown on the landscaping plan. 
d.  Trees to be removed for shoreline stabilization projects and any replacement vegetation required by this article shall be shown on the landscaping plan. 
e.  The landscaping plan shall depict grade changes or other work adjacent to trees which would affect them adversely. Specifications shall be provided as to how grade, drainage, and aeration would be maintained around trees to be preserved. 
f.  The landscaping plan will include specifications for the protection of existing trees during clearing, grading, and all phases of construction. 
(2)  Plant specifications. 
a.  All plant materials necessary to supplement the buffer area or vegetated areas outside the construction footprint shall be installed according to standard planting practices and procedures. 
b.  All supplementary or replacement plant materials shall be living and in a healthy condition. Plant materials shall conform to the standards of the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
c.  Where areas to be preserved, as designated on an approved landscaping plan, are encroached, replacement of existing trees and other vegetation will be achieved at a ratio of three planted trees to one removed. Replacement trees shall be a minimum of 31/2 inches DBH at the time of planting. 
(3)  Maintenance. 
a.  The applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance and replacement of all vegetation as may be required by the provisions of this article. 
b.  In buffer areas and areas outside the construction footprint, plant material shall be tended and maintained in a healthy growing condition and free from refuse and debris. Unhealthy, dying, or dead plant materials shall be replaced during the next planting season, as required by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-12(3)) 
Sec. 122-100. - Stormwater management plan. 
    A stormwater management plan shall be submitted as part of the plan of development process required by this article and in conjunction with site plan or subdivision plan approval. Such plan shall clearly indicate how the stormwater management criteria consistent with the water quality protection provisions of (4 VAC 3-20-71 et seq.) of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations (4 VAC 3-20) shall be satisfied. 
(1)  Contents of the plan. The stormwater management plan shall contain maps, charts, graphs, tables, photographs, narrative descriptions, explanations, and citations to supporting references as appropriate to communicate the information required by this article. At a minimum, the stormwater management plan must contain the following: 
a.  Location and design of all planned stormwater control devices. 
b.  Procedures for implementing nonstructural stormwater control practices and techniques. 
c.  Pre- and post-development nonpoint source pollutant loadings with supporting documentation of all utilized coefficients and calculations. 
d.  For facilities, verification of structural soundness, including a professional engineer or class III B surveyor certification. 
(2)  Site specific facilities shall be designed for the ultimate development of the contributing watershed based on zoning, comprehensive plans, local public facility master plans, or other similar planning documents. 
(3)  All engineering calculations must be performed in accordance with procedures outlined in the current edition of the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook. 
(4)  The plan shall establish a long-term schedule for inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities that includes all maintenance requirements and persons responsible for performing maintenance. If the designated maintenance responsibility is with a party other than the city, then a maintenance agreement shall be executed between the responsible party and the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-12(4); Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 05-76, 9-6-2005) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 114. 
Sec. 122-101. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
    An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted that satisfies the requirements of this article and in accordance with chapter 50, article V of this Code, in conjunction with site plan or subdivision plan approval. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-12(5); Ord. No. 08-103, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Cross reference- Erosion and sediment control, § 50-91 et seq. 
Sec. 122-102. - Water quality impact assessment. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the water quality impact assessment is to: 
(1)  Identify the impacts of proposed land disturbance, development, or redevelopment on water quality and lands within RPAs and other environmentally-sensitive lands. 
(2)  Ensure that, where development activities do take place within RPAs and other sensitive lands, it will be located on those portions of a site and in a manner that will be least disruptive to the natural functions of RPAs and other sensitive lands. 
(3)  Protect individuals from investing funds for improvements proposed for location on lands unsuited for such development because of high groundwater, erosion, or vulnerability to flood and storm damage. 
(4)  Provide for administrative relief from the terms of this article when warranted and in accordance with the requirements contained in this article. 
(5)  Specify mitigation which will address water quality protection. 
(b)  Water quality impact assessment required. A water quality impact assessment is required for: 
(1)  Any proposed land disturbance, development, or redevelopment within an RPA, including any buffer area encroachment as provided for in subdivision II of this division. 
(2)  Any development in an RMA as deemed necessary by the city director of public works due to the unique characteristics of the site or intensity of the proposed development. 
There shall be two levels of water quality impact assessment: a minor assessment and a major assessment. 
(c)  Minor water quality impact assessment. A minor water quality impact assessment pertains only to development within CBPAs which causes no more than 5,000 square feet of land disturbance and requires any encroachment into the landward 50 feet of the 100-foot buffer area. Submission of a plan of development that demonstrates, through the use of calculations and information provided for by subsection 122-100(1), that the remaining buffer area and necessary BMPs will result in removal of no less than 75 percent of sediments and 40 percent of nutrients from post-development stormwater runoff shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirement for a minor water quality impact assessment. A revegetation plan shall be required. Proposed revegetation of disturbed areas will provide optimum erosion and sediment control benefits, as well as run-off and pollutant removal equivalent to the full 100-foot undisturbed buffer area. 
(d)  Major water quality impact assessment. A major water quality impact assessment shall be required for any development which: (i) exceeds 5,000 square feet of land disturbance within CBPAs and requires any encroachment into the landward 50 feet of the 100-foot buffer area; (ii) disturbs any portion of the seaward 50 feet of the 100-foot buffer area or any other component of an RPA; or (iii) is located in an RMA and is deemed necessary by the city director of public works. The information required in this section shall be considered a minimum, unless the city director of public works determines that some of the elements are unnecessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed use and development of land. The following elements shall be included in the preparation and submission of a major water quality assessment: 
(1)  All of the information required in a minor water quality impact assessment, as specified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  A hydrogeological element that: 
a.  Describes the existing topography, soils, hydrology, and geology of the site and adjacent lands. 
b.  Describes the impacts of the proposed development on topography, soils, hydrology, and geology of the site and adjacent lands. 
c.  Indicates the disturbance or destruction of wetlands and justification for such action. 
d.  Indicates the disruptions or reductions in the supply of water to wetlands, streams, lakes, rivers or other water bodies. 
e.  Indicates the disruptions to existing hydrology including wetland and stream circulation patterns. 
f.  Indicates the source, location, and description of proposed fill material. 
g.  Indicates the location of dredge material and location of dumping area for such material. 
h.  Indicates the location of and impacts on shellfish beds, submerged aquatic vegetation, and fish spawning areas. 
i.  Estimates percent increase in impervious surface on site and type(s) of surfacing materials used. 
j.  Indicates percent of site to be cleared for project. 
k.  Indicates duration and phasing schedule of construction project. 
l.  Lists requisite permits from all applicable agencies necessary to develop project. 
m.  Describes the proposed mitigation measures for the potential hydrogeological impacts which may include: 
1.  Proposed erosion and sediment control concepts; concepts may include minimizing the extent of the cleared area, perimeter controls, reduction of runoff velocities, measures to stabilize disturbed areas, schedule and personnel for site inspection. 
2.  Proposed stormwater management system. 
3.  Creation of wetlands to replace those lost. 
4.  Minimizing cut and fill. 
(3)  A landscape element that describes the potential measures for mitigation of the water quality and land impacts within the CBPAs. Possible mitigation measures include: 
a.  Replanting schedule for trees and other significant vegetation removed for construction, in accordance with a plan approved by the city director of public works. 
b.  Demonstration that the design of the plan will preserve to the greatest extent possible any significant trees and vegetation on the site and will provide maximum erosion control and overland flow benefits from such vegetation. 
c.  Demonstration that indigenous plants are to be used to the greatest extent possible. 
(4)  As part of any major water quality impact assessment submittal, the city director of public works may require review by the Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance Department. Upon receipt of a major water quality impact assessment, the city director of public works will determine if such review is warranted and may request CBLAD to review the assessment and respond with written comments. Any comments by CBLAD will be incorporated into the final review by the city director of public works, provided that such comments are provided by CBLAD within 90 days of the request. 
(e)  Evaluation procedure. 
(1)  Upon the completed review of a minor water quality impact assessment, the city director of public works will determine if any proposed encroachment into the buffer area is consistent with the provisions of this article and that the following criteria have been satisfied: 
a.  The proposed encroachment is necessary due to the inability to place improvements elsewhere on the site to avoid disturbance of the buffer area. 
b.  Impervious surface is minimized. 
c.  Proposed BMPs, where required, achieve the requisite in pollutant loadings. 
d.  The development, as proposed, meets the purpose and intent of this article. 
e.  The cumulative impact of the proposed development, when considered in relation to other development in the vicinity, both existing and proposed, will not result in a significant degradation of water quality. 
(2)  Upon the completed review of a major water quality impact assessment, the city director of public works will determine if the proposed development is consistent with the purpose and intent of this article and that the following criteria have been satisfied: 
a.  Within any RPA, the proposed development is water-dependent or redevelopment. 
b.  The disturbance of any wetlands will be minimized. 
c.  The development will not result in significant disruption of the hydrology of the site. 
d.  The development will not result in significant degradation to aquatic vegetation or life. 
e.  The development will not result in unnecessary destruction of plant materials on site. 
f.  Proposed erosion and sediment control concepts are adequate to control the stormwater runoff to achieve the required performance standard for pollutant control. 
g.  Proposed stormwater management concepts are adequate to control the stormwater runoff to achieve the required performance standard for pollutant control. 
h.  Proposed revegetation of disturbed areas will provide optimum erosion and sediment control benefits. 
i.  The development, as proposed, is consistent with the purpose and intent of the overlay district. 
j.  The cumulative impact of the proposed development, when considered in relation to other development in the vicinity, both existing and proposed, will not result in a significant degradation of water quality. 
(3)  The city director of public works shall require additional mitigation where potential impacts have not been adequately addressed. Evaluation of mitigation measures will be made by the city director of public works based on the criteria listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(4)  The city director of public works shall conclude that the proposal is inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this article when the impacts created by the proposal cannot be mitigated. Evaluation of the impacts will be made by the city director of public works based on the criteria listed in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-12(6); Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004) 
Sec. 122-103. - Final plan. 
    Final plans for property within CBPAs shall be final plats for land to be subdivided or site plans for land not to be subdivided. 
(1)  Final plans for all lands within CBPAs. Final plans for all lands within CBPAs shall include the following: 
a.  The delineation of the RPA boundary, including all water bodies with perennial flow. 
b.  The delineation of required RPA buffer areas. 
c.  All wetlands permits required by law. 
d.  A maintenance agreement as deemed necessary and appropriate by the city director of public works to ensure proper maintenance for BMPs in order to continue their functions. 
(2)  Installation and bonding requirements 
a.  Where buffer areas, landscaping, stormwater management facilities, or other specifications of an approved plan are required, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the installation of required plant materials or facilities is completed, in accordance with the approved site plan. 
b.  When the occupancy of a structure is desired prior to the completion of the required landscaping, stormwater management facilities, or other specifications of an approved plan, a certificate of occupancy may be issued only if the applicant provides to the city a form of surety satisfactory to the city attorney in amount equal to the remaining plant materials, and installation costs of the required landscaping or other specifications or maintenance costs for any required stormwater management facilities. 
c.  All required landscaping shall be installed and approved by the first planting season following issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the surety may be forfeited to the city. 
d.  All required stormwater management facilities or other specifications shall be installed and approved within 18 months of project commencement. Should the applicant fail, after proper notice, to initiate, complete, or maintain appropriate actions required by the approved plan, the surety may be forfeited to the city. The city may collect from the applicant the amount by which the reasonable cost of required actions exceeds the amount of the surety held. 
e.  After all required actions of the approved site plan have been completed, the applicant must submit a written request for a final inspection. If the requirements of the approved plan have been completed to the satisfaction of the city director of public works, such unexpended or unobligated portion of the surety held shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated within 60 days following the receipt of the applicant's request for final inspection. The city director of public works may require a certificate of substantial completion from a professional engineer or class III B surveyor before making a final inspection. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-12(7); Ord. No. 05-76, 9-6-2005) 
Sec. 122-104. - Administrative responsibility. 
    Administration of the plan of development process shall be in accordance with the site plan procedure described in this subdivision or the subdivision regulations in chapter 102 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-12(8)) 
Sec. 122-105. - Denial of plan, appeal of conditions or modifications. 
    If the final plan or any component of the plan of development process is disapproved, and recommended conditions or modifications are unacceptable to the applicant, the applicant may appeal such administrative decisions to the planning commission. In granting or denying an appeal, the planning commission must find such plan to be in accordance with all applicable ordinances and include necessary elements to mitigate any detrimental impact on water quality and upon adjacent property and the surrounding area, or such plan meets the purpose and intent of the performance standards in this article. If the planning commission finds that the applicant's plan does not meet the above stated criteria, it shall deny approval of the plan. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-12(9)) 
Subdivision IV. - Discharges to the Stormwater Sewer System 

Sec. 122-106. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Administrator. The water quality administrator or the water quality administrator's designee. 
    Discharge. To dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, dump, leak or place by any means; and any substance which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected, dumped, leaked or placed by any means. 
    Illicit discharge. Any discharge to the storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of storm water except (i) discharges pursuant to a VPDES or NPDES permit, (ii) discharges resulting from fire fighting activities and (iii) discharges listed in section 122-107(b) unless such discharges are identified by the City of Petersburg as sources of pollutants of waters of the United States pursuant to section 122-107(c). 
    Industrial wastes. Wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business, or from the development of any natural resource. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. The permit issued by the federal government for imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Other wastes. Wastes that can adversely affect waters of the United States when discharged into those waters, including, but not limited to, garbage, refuse, lime, fertilizer, ashes, offal, tar, paint, solvents, petroleum products, antifreeze and chemicals. 
    Person. An individual, association, partnership, corporation, municipality, state or federal agency, or an agent or employee of any such person. 
    Sanitary sewer line. An underground conduit that collects and delivers sanitary wastewater to a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Storm sewer system. The conveyance or system of conveyances located within the City of Petersburg which are designed or used for collecting, storing or conveying storm water or through which storm water is collected, stored or conveyed, including but not limited to roads, municipal streets, catch basins, drop inlets, curbs, gutters, ditches, pipes, lakes, ponds, man-made channels, storm drains, outfalls, retention, detention and infiltration basins and other facilities. 
    Stormwater. Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff and drainage. 
    Surface waters. All waters that run across the surface of land, including but not limited to natural or man-made ponds, lakes, impoundments, rivers, streams (including intermittent and ephemeral streams), natural or man-made water courses and tidal and non-tidal wetlands, except that waste treatment systems, treatment ponds and lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act shall not be surface waters. 
    Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES). The permit issued by the State of Virginia for imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Waters of the City of Petersburg. All waters, whether on the surface or under the ground, that are wholly or partially within or bordering the City. 
    Waters of the United States. All waters, whether on the surface or under the ground, the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce, including but not limited to intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent and ephemeral streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie pot-holes, wet meadows, playa lakes and natural ponds, except that waste treatment systems, treatment ponds and lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act shall not be waters of the United States. 
    Wetlands. Land that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, generally including but not limited to swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 122-107. - Prohibited discharge to the stormwater sewer system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Cause or allow illicit discharges to the storm sewer system or to waters of the City of Petersburg; 
(2)  Cause or allow the discharge of industrial waste or other waste to the storm sewer system or to waters of the City of Petersburg without a VPDES or NPDES permit; 
(3)  Violate any condition or provision of this article; and 
(4)  Connect, or cause or allow to be connected to the storm sewer system or waters of the City of Petersburg, without a VPDES or NPDES permit, any structure that conveys any liquid other than stormwater or discharges listed in paragraph (b) of this section, including but not limited to pipes, drains, sanitary sewer lines, washing machine drains or floor drains. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of paragraph (c) of this section, the following activities shall not be unlawful illicit discharges: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows or rising groundwaters; 
(4)  Infiltration of uncontaminated groundwater; 
(5)  Pumping of uncontaminated groundwater; 
(6)  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl spaces or footing drains; 
(7)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(8)  Lawn watering; 
(9)  Residential car washing; 
(10)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and 
(11)  Public street washing. 
(c)  If any activity listed in paragraph (b) of this section is found by the administrator to be a source of pollutants to waters of the United States, the administrator shall serve a written notice on the party responsible for the activity which orders that the activity be ceased or conducted in a manner that will avoid the discharge of pollutants to the storm sewer system or waters of the City of Petersburg. The notice shall state the date by which the activity shall cease or be conducted without pollution. Failure to comply with any such order within the time stated in the notice shall constitute a violation of paragraph (a)(3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 122-108. - Inspecting and monitoring stormwater discharge. 
    The administrator shall have the authority to inspect and monitor discharges and sources of potential discharge to the storm sewer system to ensure compliance with this article, including the authority to enter upon private property to inspect or monitor such discharges or sources of potential discharge, the administrator shall also have the authority to initiate enforcement actions in accordance with section 122-109. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 122-109. - Penalties for violations of this article. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that such violation is committed, and each day that such violation is permitted to remain uncorrected shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who otherwise violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty between $250.00 and $1,000.00 for each day that the violation continues. The court assessing such civil penalty may order the penalty to be paid into the treasury of the City of Petersburg and designated for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing or mitigating pollution of the waters of the city. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be responsible for testing, containing, cleaning up, abating, removing and disposing of any substance unlawfully discharged into the storm sewer system or into waters of the City of Petersburg, or, if the administrator determines that correction of the violation can best be accomplished by the city, shall be liable to the city for all costs of testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the storm sewer system or into waters of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 1, 4-6-2010) 
Secs. 122-110-122-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NONCONFORMING USE, DEVELOPMENT WAIVERS; EXEMPTIONS; EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 122-121. - Nonconforming use and development waivers. 
(a)  The lawful use of a building or structure which existed at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or which exists at the time of any amendment to such ordinance or this article, and which is not in conformity with the provisions of the overlay district may be continued in accordance with the nonconforming use provisions of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(b)  No change or expansion of use shall be allowed with the exception that: 
(1)  The zoning administrator may grant a nonconforming use and development waiver for structures on legal nonconforming lots or parcels to provide for remodeling and alterations to such nonconforming structures provided that: 
a.  There will be no net increase in nonpoint source pollution load, as certified by the city director of public works. 
b.  Any development or land disturbance exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet complies with all erosion and sediment control requirements of this article. 
c.  The requested exception to the criteria is the minimum necessary to afford relief. 
d.  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by this part to other property owners who are subject to its provisions and who are similarly situated. 
e.  The exception request is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ordinance and is not of substantial detriment to water quality. 
f.  The exception request is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed. 
g.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed, as warranted, that will prevent the allowed activity from causing a degradation of water quality. 
(2)  An application for a nonconforming use and development waiver shall be made to and upon forms furnished by the zoning administrator and shall include, for the purpose of proper enforcement of this article, the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant and property owner. 
b.  Legal description of the property and type of proposed use and development. 
c.  A sketch of the dimensions of the lot or parcel, location of buildings and proposed additions relative to the lot lines and boundary of the RPA. 
d.  Location and description of any existing private water supply or sewerage system. 
(3)  A nonconforming use and development waiver shall become null and void 12 months from the date issued if no substantial work has commenced. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, additions and modifications to the existing legal principal structures may be processed through this nonconforming use and development waiver review process subject to the findings required by subsection (b)(1) of this section. This provision shall not apply to accessory structures. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-13; Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 05-76, 9-6-2005) 
Editor's note- The zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
Sec. 122-122. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Exemptions for public utilities, railroads, public roads and facilities. 
(1)  Construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of electric, natural gas, fiber-optic, and telephone transmission lines, railroads, and public roads and their appurtenant structures in accordance with the city's erosion and sediment control ordinance at chapter 50, article V of this Code will be deemed to constitute compliance with this article. Exempted public roads shall be designed and aligned to minimize to the extent practical encroachment into the RPA and adverse effects on water quality. 
(2)  Construction, installation, and maintenance of water, sewer, underground telecommunications lines, underground cable television lines and local natural gas lines shall be exempt from the overlay district provided that: 
a.  To the degree possible, the location of such utilities and facilities shall be outside RPAs. 
b.  No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide for the proposed utility installation. 
c.  All construction, installation, and maintenance of such utilities and facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable state and federal requirements and permits and designed and conducted in a manner that protects water quality. 
d.  Any land disturbance exceeding an area of 1,000 square feet complies with all city erosion and sediment control requirements, contained in the erosion and sediment control ordinance at chapter 50, article V of this Code. 
e.  All such exempt public utilities or facilities shall be either owned by the City of Petersburg or permitted by the City of Petersburg. 
(b)  Exemptions for silvicultural activities. Silvicultural activities are exempt from the requirements of this article provided that silvicultural operations adhere to water quality protection procedures prescribed by the Virginia Department of Forestry in the 1997 edition of "Forestry Best Management Practices for Water Quality in Virginia Technical Guide". 
(c)  Exemptions in resource protection areas. The following land disturbances in resource protection areas may be exempted from the overlay district: 
(1)  Water wells. 
(2)  Passive recreation facilities such as boardwalks, trails, and pathways. 
(3)  Historic preservation and archaeological activities. The immediately above listed land disturbances in resource protection areas may be exempted from the overlay district, provided that it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of planning that: 
a.  Any required permits, except those to which this exemption specifically applies, shall have been issued. 
b.  Sufficient and reasonable proof is submitted that the intended use will not deteriorate water quality. 
c.  The intended use does not conflict with nearby planned or approved uses. 
d.  Any land disturbance exceeding an area of 1000 square feet shall comply with all city erosion and sediment control requirements, contained in the erosion and sediment control ordinance at chapter 50, article V of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-14; Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 05-76, 9-6-2005; Ord. No. 08-103, § 2, 11-18-2008) 
Sec. 122-123. - Exceptions. 
(a)  A request for an exception to the requirements of this article shall be made in writing to the director of planning. The director of planning shall identify the impacts of the proposed exception on water quality and on lands within the RPA through the performance of a water quality impact assessment which complies with the provisions of section 122-102. 
(b)  The exceptions review committee, consisting of the director of planning, director of public works, building official, zoning administrator, chairman of the planning commission, and two citizens of the city appointed by city council, shall review the request for an exception and the water quality impact assessment. The exceptions review committee may grant the exception with such conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary to further the purpose and intent of this article if the committee finds: 
(1)  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by this article to other property owners in the overlay district. 
(2)  The exception request is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed, nor does the request arise from conditions or circumstances either permitted or nonconforming that are related to adjacent parcels. 
(3)  The exception request is the minimum necessary to afford relief. 
(4)  The exception request will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of the overlay district and not injurious to the neighborhood, detrimental to the public welfare, and not of substantial detriment to water quality. 
(5)  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed which will prevent the exception request from causing a degradation of water quality. 
(6)  The provisions of this section not withstanding, no exception shall be authorized except after notice and a hearing, conducted by the exceptions review committee, as required by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204, except that only one hearing shall be required. However, when giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the notice may be given by first-class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. 
(c)  Appeals of the decisions of the exceptions review committee shall be made to the board of zoning appeals. The board of zoning appeals shall apply the criteria listed in this section when considering the request for an exception upon appeal. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5-15; Ord. No. 04-51, 6-15-2004) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1981 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1981 Code, as updated through July 18, 1995, which are included herein. Sections of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1981 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-3 1-1-1-3 1-4-1-8 1-6-1-10 1-9-1-15 1-12-1-18 1-16 42-1 1-17 1-19 2-1 2-1 2-2 2-311 2-3 2-191 2-4, 2-5 2-2, 2-3 2-6 2-313 2-9 2-312 2-10 70-151 2-11 98-51 2-26, 2-27 2-61, 2-62 2-27.1 2-31 2-28-2-33 2-63-2-68 2-51-2-54 2-86-2-89 2-71-2-74 2-106-2-109 2-86-2-88 2-126-2-128 2-101-2-104 2-146-2-149 2-116-2-121 2-166-2-171 2-136-2-141 2-211-2-216 2-156-2-158 82-31-82-33 2-171-2-175 2-281-2-285 2-176 2-314 2-189-2-193 2-331-2-335 3-1-3-3 6-1-6-3 3-5-3-8 6-4-6-7 3-9-3-11 6-31-6-33 3-12-3-14 6-8-6-10 4-1-4-15 118-311-118-325 4-27 118-341 4-28(1)-(7) 118-342 4-29-4-34 118-343-118-348 5-1(a) 14-1 5-1(c), (d) 14-1 5-16-5-21 14-31-14-36 6-1-6-3 18-2-18-4 6-4, 6-5 18-31, 18-32 6-6, 6-7 18-61, 18-62 6-8, 6-9 18-5, 18-6 6-10 74-209 6-11 18-9 6-23 18-1 6-24-6-26 18-91-18-93 6-27 18-150 6-28-6-30 18-94-18-96 6-42 18-1 6-43-6-53 18-116-18-126 6-67 18-181 6-68 18-1 6-69, 6-70 18-182, 18-183 6-72-6-93 18-184-18-205 6-94 18-205 6-106-6-112 18-231-18-237 6-113 18-231, 18-232 18-234, 18-235 18-237 7-1-7-4 110-351-110-354 7-16-7-22 110-371-110-377 8-1, 8-2 30-31, 30-32 8-3 30-66 8-4 30-68 8-5 30-67 8-6-8-9 30-33-30-36 8-10 30-43 30-86 8-11, 8-12 30-87, 30-88 8-13-8-26 30-37-30-50 8-27 74-95 8-39 30-106 8-40 30-43 30-107 8-41, 8-42 30-108, 30-109 8-51-8-57 30-126-30-132 8-69-8-72 30-151-30-154 9-1 22-2 9-16-9-21 22-31-22-36 9-31-9-40 22-56-22-65 9-81-9-83 22-91-22-93 9-126 22-37 9.5-1, 9.5-2 122-32, 122-33 9.5-3 122-31 9.5-4 122-31 122-34 9.5-5-9.5-10 122-51-122-56 9.5-11(a)-9.5-11(c) 122-76-122-78 9.5-12 122-31 122-96 9.5-12(1)-9.5-12(9) 122-97-122-105 9.5-13-9.5-15 122-121-122-123 10-1 2-571 11-1-11-3 46-31-46-33 11-21-11-27 46-61-46-67 11-39-11-46 46-91-46-98 12-2-12-5 50-91-50-94 12-6 50-92 12-7 50-99 12-8 50-98 12-9 50-97 12-10, 12-11 50-95, 50-96 12-23-12-30 50-116-50-123 12.5-2-12.5-9 66-46-66-53 12.5-10 66-47 66-54 12.5-11 66-55 13-1 54-1 13-2 54-91 74-159 13-3 54-92 13-4, 13-5 54-2, 54-3 13-21-13-29 54-31-54-39 13-41, 13-42 54-61, 54-62 13-42.1 54-63 13-43, 13-44 54-64, 54-65 13-46 54-66 13-48, 13-49 54-67, 54-68 13-60-13-63 54-111-54-114 13-65 54-115 13.5-1-13.5-4 58-31-58-34 13.5-5(a)-(c) 58-35 13.5-6, 13.5-7 58-36, 58-37 13.5-19-13.5-22 58-56-58-59 13.5-34, 13.5-35 58-76, 58-77 13.5-41-13.5-43 58-96-58-98 13.5-50 58-116 13.5-67-13.5-69 58-136-58-138 13.5-70(a)(1)-(12) 58-156 13.5-70(b), (c) 58-156 13.5-71, 13.5-72 58-157, 58-158 13.5-73 58-176 14-1, 14-2 62-31, 62-32 14-3(a), (c) 62-33 14-4-14-10 62-34-62-40 15-1-15-8 74-261-74-268 15-9, 15-10 74-286, 74-287 15-12 74-288 17-1-17-11 2-541-2-551 18-1 110-1 18-2, 18-3 110-31, 110-32 18-4, 18-5 110-3, 110-4 18-6-18-10 110-33-110-37 18-11 110-2 18-12-18-15 110-5-110-8 18-16, 18-17 110-401, 110-402 18-18 110-9 18-19-18-21 110-446-110-448 18-36-18-50 110-61-110-75 18-66-18-75 110-101-110-110 18-77 110-111 18-89-18-95 70-56-70-62 18-107-18-111 110-211-110-215 18-113 110-216 18-115 110-217 18-117-18-121 110-218-110-222 18-132-18-139 110-251-110-258 18-140-18-144 110-258-110-262 18-145 110-331 18-147, 18-148 110-263, 110-264 18-149, 18-150 118-1, 118-2 18-152-18-156 110-265-110-269 18-166-18-170 110-286-110-290 18-172, 18-173 110-291, 110-292 18-179, 18-180 110-311, 110-312 18-185-18-190 110-491-110-496 19-1 50-31 19-2 50-33 19-3 50-32 19-4, 19-5 50-36, 50-37 19-5.1 50-38 19-6 50-35 19-7 50-34 20-1-20-7 74-306-74-312 20-8, 20-9 74-314, 74-315 20-9.1 74-316 20-10, 20-11 74-317, 74-318 20-23 74-336 20-24-20-27 74-337 20-28 74-338 21-1 74-31 21-2 74-413 21-3 74-241 21-4 74-1 21-5 14-2 21-6 74-412 21-7 74-411 21-8 74-159 21-9 74-2 21-10 74-61 21-11, 21-12 74-363, 74-364 21-13 74-161 21-14 74-362 21-15 74-242 21-15.1 10-2 21-16 74-361 21-17 74-160 21-18 74-231 21-19 74-233 21-20 74-232 21-21-21-26 74-234-74-239 21-27 26-3 21-27.1 74-240 21-27.2 74-234 21-28 74-181 21-30 74-152 21-31 74-156 21-32-21-34 74-153-74-155 21-35 74-157 21-37 74-122 74-124-74-126 21-38 74-91 21-39 74-103, 74-104 21-40, 21-41 74-98, 74-99 21-42 74-101 21-43 74-95 21-44 74-100 21-45 74-102 21-46 74-92 21-48 74-93 21-49 74-97 21-50 30-1 21-51 74-96 21-52 74-94 21-53 74-184 21-54 50-61 21-54.1 50-62 21-55 74-183 21-56 50-63 21-57 98-23 21-58 110-471 21-59 50-64 21-60, 21-61 74-182 21-63 26-2 21-64 26-1 21-65(a)-(e) 86-3 21-65(f) 86-1 21-66 26-4 21-68 18-8 21-69 74-151 21-70 74-158 22-1, 22-2 78-1, 78-2 22-4 78-3 22-5 78-106 22-6 78-146 22-7 78-126 22-8-22-11 78-61-78-64 22-13 122-1 22-14, 22-15 78-147, 78-148 22-27-22-32 78-31-78-36 23-1, 23-2 86-1, 86-2 23-3, 23-4 86-31, 86-32 23-17 86-51 23-19 86-52 24-1 70-31 24-2 70-33 24-3 70-32 70-34 24-4 70-35 24-5 70-32 24-6, 24-7 70-36, 70-37 24-8 70-2 70-7 24-9-24-12 70-3-70-6 24-13 70-1 24-14 70-7 24-47, 24-48 70-91, 70-92 24-53-24-62 70-121-70-130 24.6-1-24.6-3 2-351-2-353 24.6-4, 24.6-5 2-371, 2-372 24.6-6 2-354 24.6-7 2-391 24.6-8 2-411 24.6-9-24.6-18 2-414-2-423 24.6-19-24.6-31 2-426-2-438 24.6-32-24.6-37 2-456-2-461 24.6-39 2-462 24.6-40-24.6-43 2-481-2-484 24.6-44-24.6-50 2-501-2-507 24.6-51 2-509 24.6-52 2-512 25-5-25-8 110-521-110-524 27-1 114-171 27-2-27-9 114-175-114-182 27-10, 27-11 114-172, 114-173 27-12-27-14 114-174 27-26-27-41 114-201-114-216 27-52-27-56 114-236-114-240 27-57-27-59 114-242-114-244 27-71-27-84 114-261-114-274 27-85(a)-(c) 114-275 27-85(d)(1)-(9) 114-275 27-85(d)(11)-(13) 114-275 27-85(e)-(x) 114-275 27-86-27-90 114-276-114-280 27-92 114-281 27-94 114-282 27-101-27-108 114-301-114-308 27-115 118-42 28-1-28-3 90-31-90-33 28-14-28-16 90-61-90-63 28-17-28-20 90-63-90-66 29-1, 29-2 34-1, 34-2 29-3, 29-4 34-4, 34-5 29-16, 29-17 34-31, 34-32 29-29 34-51 29-30(a)(1)-(5) 34-52 29-30(b) 34-52 29-31-29-37 34-53-34-59 29-61-29-66 34-96-34-101 30-1-30-4 94-1-94-4 30-16-30-18 94-31-94-33 30-20-30-22 94-35-94-37 30-38, 30-39 94-81, 94-82 30-40-30-42 94-56-94-58 31-16-31-20 26-151-26-155 31-31-31-35 26-171-26-175 31-47, 31-48 26-201, 26-202 31-49-31-52 26-221-26-224 31-53 26-203 32-1-32-10 98-1-98-10 32-11 98-121 32-12 98-11 32-13, 32-14 98-122, 98-123 32-15, 32-16 98-12, 98-13 32-17, 32-18 98-124, 98-125 32-19 98-14 32-21, 32-22 98-15, 98-16 32-24-32-27 98-126-98-129 32-28-32-30 98-17-98-19 32-31 74-3 32-32, 32-33 98-20, 98-21 32-34, 32-35 98-130, 98-131 32-36 98-22 32-37 98-132 32-49, 32-50 98-71, 98-72 32-51-32-54 98-91-98-94 32-66 98-152 32-67 98-151 32-68, 32-69 98-171, 98-172 32-70, 32-71 98-191, 98-192 32-72 98-173 32-73 98-153 32-80, 32-81 118-35, 118-36 32-86 98-212 32-87 98-211 32-88-32-91 98-236-98-239 32-92-32-96 98-213-98-217 32-108 98-262 32-109 98-261 32-121-32-123 98-281-98-283 33-1-33-84 102-1 33.1-1 26-91 33.1-2-33.1-4 26-126-26-128 33.1-5-33.1-20 26-93-26-108 34-1-34-13 106-1-106-13 34-21-34-27 106-31-106-37 34-37-34-40 106-61-106-64 34-51-34-57 106-81-106-87 34-69-34-74 106-106-106-111 34-75(a) 106-112 34-76 106-113 34-78 106-131 34-78.1 106-132 34-79 106-133 34-79.1 106-134 34-80, 34-81 106-14 34-82-34-84 106-151-106-153 34-89, 34-90 106-171, 106-172 34-105, 34-106 106-204 34-107-34-115 106-205-106-213 34-127-34-130 106-231-106-234 34-142-34-151 106-261-106-270 34-166-34-177 106-291-106-302 34-189-34-191 106-345-106-347 34-192-34-198 106-331-106-337 34-199-34-203 106-361-106-365 34-211 106-391 34-223 106-411 34-224, 34-225 42-2 34-230-34-246 106-441-106-457 35-1, 35-2 74-381, 74-382 35-4-35-8 74-383-74-387 35.5-1-35.5-7 38-31-38-37 36.1-2, 36.1-3 38-61, 38-62 36.1-4-36.1-7 38-81-38-84 36.1-8 38-63 37-1 118-3 37-16, 37-17 118-231, 118-232 37-25-37-30 118-251-118-256 37-31(a) 118-257 37-32-37-37 118-258-118-263 37-49-37-51 118-281-118-283 37-53-37-55 118-284-118-286 37-76-37-79 118-31-118-34 37-82-37-84 118-37-118-39 37-85-37-94 118-146-118-155 37-95 118-40 37-96, 37-97 118-156, 118-157 37-99-37-104 118-91-118-96 37-105-37-113 118-176-118-184 37-114 118-41 37-127-37-138 118-61-118-72 37-138(a) 118-252 37-139 118-73 37-151-37-162 118-116-118-127 37-174-37-178 118-201-118-205 37-191-37-194 118-371-118-374 37-206-37-211 118-391-118-396 38-1-38-18 114-31-114-48 38-30-38-35 114-66-114-71 38-47-38-53 114-91-114-97 38-65-38-68 114-116-114-119 38-81 114-136 38-81.1 114-137 38-82-38-92 114-138-114-148 38-93, 38-94 114-150, 114-151 39-2-39-5 74-201-74-204 39-5.1 74-205 39.5-16-39.5-21 90-91-90-96 39-6-39-10 74-206-74-210 39-11, 39-12 74-210, 74-211 39-13, 39-14 74-211, 74-212 39.5-16-39.5-21 90-91  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1981 Code, as updated through July 18, 1995, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1981 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since July 18, 1995, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 95-96  9- 5-1995 2-157 82-32 95-109  9-19-1995 28-16 90-63 96-13  9-19-1995 4-11 118-321 96-56  5-14-1996 34-190 106-347 34-191.1 106-348 34-200 106-362 96-58  5-14-1996 6-45 18-118 96-80  7- 2-1996 11-24 46-64 11-43 46-95 96-183a 12- 6-1996 16.1-1, 16.1-2 26-31, 26-32 16.1-3-16.1-8 26-34-26-39 16.1-9-16.1-12 26-61-26-64 16.1-13 10-1 16.1-14, 16.1-15 26-65, 26-66 16.1-16, 16.1-17 26-40, 26-41 16.1-18 26-33 16.1-19-16.1-21 26-42-26-44 16.1-22 26-67 16.1-23 26-45 16.1-85, 16.1-86 110-131, 110-132 16.1-96-16.1-108 110-151-110-163 16.1-119-16.1-124 110-181-110-186 97-12  1-21-1997 34-10-34-13 106-10-106-13 97-11  1-27-1997 21-54.2 74-3 97-59  5-20-1997 38-81 114-136 97-60  5-20-1997 30-40 94-56 97-69  6- 3-1997 32-38 110-403 97-70  6- 3-1997 39-5.1 74-205 97-84  6-17-1997 16-108 110-163 97-106  7- 1-1997 20.1-1(1) 74-441 20.1-1(2) 74-461 20.1-1(3) 74-441 20.1-1(4)-(7) 74-461 20.1-1(8) 74-441 20.1-2-20.1-4 74-462-74-464 20.1-6(1) 74-441 20.1-6(2) 74-481 20.1-6(3) 74-441 20.1-6(4)-(6) 74-481 20.1-6(7) 74-441 20.1-7-20.1-9 74-482-74-484 97-122  9-16-1997 21-44.1 22-3 97-123  9-16-1997 21-9 74-2 97-124  9-16-1997 18-152 110-265 97-145 11- 4-1997 34-101-34-103 106-201-106-203 97-157 12- 2-1997 16.1-9 26-61 98-49  3- 3-1998 21-22.1 14-3 98-110  7- 7-1998 18-11 110-2 18-107 110-211 98-129  7-21-1998 34-72 106-109 98-131  7-21-1998 34-78.1 106-132 34-79.1 106-134 98-171  9-30-1998 21-58 110-471 99-04  1- 5-1999 5-20 14-35 99-05  1- 5-1999 34-27 106-37 99-89  6-15-1999 18-11 110-2 18-107 110-211 99-90  6-15-1999 106-362 99-91  6-15-1999 14-3 99-92  6-15-1999 27-56.1 114-241 38-92.1 114-149 99-183 12- 6-1999 12.5-3-12.5-9 66-47-66-53 12.5-13 66-56 99-191 11-16-1999 39.5-16 90-91 39.5-18 90-93 39.5-19 90-94 00-26  5-16-2000 6-8 18-5 6-43 18-116 6-45 18-118 6-46 18-119 00-34  6-20-2000 4-11 118-321 00-38  6-20-2000 37-87 118-148 37-175 118-202 00-39  6-20-2000 18-11 110-2 18-107 110-211 00-40  6-20-2000       Added 106-135 00-51  7-18-2000 37-175 118-202 00-58  9- 5-2000       Added 110-355 00-67 10- 3-2000 106-345, 106-346, 106-351-106-353 00-70 10-17-2000 9-21 22-36 00-78 11-21-2000 16.1-9 26-61 01-04  1-16-2001 Adopting Ord. xi 01-09  3- 6-2001       Added 106-65 01-14  4- 3-2001 46-94 01-21  4-17-2001 106-85 01-29  5-15-2001       Rpld 106-81-106-84 106-85       Rpld 106-86 01-30  5-15-2001 94-56 01-31  5-15-2001 106-292 01-32  5-15-2001 114-136 01-37  6-19-2001 118-258 01-43  6-10-2001       Added 106-81-106-84       Added 106-86 01-44  6-19-2001 110-2, 110-211 01-64 11-13-2001 46-61-46-67 46-91-46-98 01-72 12-11-2001 118-321 02-10  1-22-2002 70-34 02-22  4- 2-2002       Added 38-1 02-23  4- 2-2002 90-91 02-29  5-21-2002       Added 110-356 02-30  6- 4-2002       Added 42-3 02-31  6- 4-2002       Added 42-4 02-32  6- 4-2002 18-94 02-38  6-18-2002 110-2, 110-211 02-70 10- 1-2002 82-32 03-10  2- 4-2003       Added 18-245-18-249 03-40  6- 3-2003 110-2, 110-211 03-52  7-15-2003       Added 38-90-38-98 03-55  7-15-2003 46-95 03-79 11-18-2003 26-61 03-80 11-18-2003       Added 98-24 04-12  2- 3-2004       Added 62-41 04-37  5-18-2004 114-140 114-150 04-48  6-15-2004 110-2 110-211 04-49  6-15-2004 106-109 04-50  6-15-2004 54-61-54-63 04-51  6-15-2004 122-31 122-51 122-56 122-77, 122-78 122-98 122-100 122-102 122-121-122-123 04-58  7- 6-2004 114-136 04-98 11- 9-2004 118-321 05-38  6- 7-2005 114-236 05-39  6- 7-2005 110-2 110-211 05-59  7- 5-2005       Added 114-152-114-162 05-60  7- 5-2005 110-2 110-211 05-61  7- 5-2005 74-102 05-75  9- 6-2005       Added 46-68       Added 46-99 05-76  9- 6-2005 122-54 122-77 122-100 122-103 122-121 122-122 05-103 11- 1-2005 118-202 05-116 12-13-2005       Added 106-15 06-56  6- 6-2006 106-262 06-60  6-20-2006 110-2 110-211 06-32  3-21-2006 114-68 114-204 06-55  6- 6-2006 114-236 07-01  1- 2-2007 118-258 07-15  2-20-2007       Added 46-100 07-23  3-20-2007 114-136 07-24  3-20-2007 114-236 07-38  5-15-2007 46-95 07-51  6-19-2007 46-97 07-53  6-19-2007 22-1-22-5, 22-31-22-36, 22-46-22-50, 22-61-22-79, 22-91-22-94, 22-101-22-108, 22-116-22-130, 22-140-22-143, 22-155-22-165 07-57  6-19-2007 110-2 110-211 07-60  7- 3-2007 42-3 07-98 10-23-2007 114-31-114-48       Added 114-49-114-53 08-14  2- 5-2008 118-321 08-15  2- 5-2008 106-109 08-26  3- 4-2008 1       Added 38-105-38-109 08-30  4- 1-2008 1       Added 78-150-78-153 08-34  4-15-2008 46-93 08-93 10-28-2008 1 114-68 2 114-72 3 114-204 4       Added 114-217 5       Rpld 114-70 114-206 08-100 11-18-2008 1 114-171 2       Added 114-283-114-295 3       Rpld 114-261-114-282 08-103 11-18-2008 1       Added 50-124-50-139 2 122-77 122-97 122-101 122-122 3       Rpld 50-91-50-99, 50-116-50-123 08-107 12- 9-2009 1 114-31 114-39 114-45 114-136 114-140-114-142 114-144-114-146 114-150 2       Rpld 114-143 10-14  4- 6-2010 1       Added 122-106-122-109 10-15  4- 6-2010 10-2 10-16  4- 6-2010 1       Added 106-136 10-17  4- 6-2010 1       Added 106-137 10-31  5- 4-2010 1 2-414       Rpld 2-415 2-416 10-42  6-15-2010 1       Added 18-91 18-97 10-54  7- 6-2010 110-2 10-88 10-26-2010 106-136 11-09  1-18-2011 58-31-58-37, 58-56-58-60, 58-76-58-98, 58-116, 58-136-58-138, 58-156-58-158, 58-176 11-40  5-17-2011 46-61-46-67 46-91-46-98 11-59  6- 7-2011 94-36 11-60  6- 7-2011 54-61 11-86  7-19-2011 110-2 11-97  9-20-2011 1 50-63 12-06  1-17-2012 1       Rpld 2-331-2-335 2       Rpld 38-31-38-37 3       Rpld 90-91-90-96 4       Rpld 110-61-110-75 12-21  3- 6-2012 1 114-136 114-236 12-22  4- 3-2012 1 106-292 12-41  5-15-2012 1 114-136 2 114-236 12-50  5-15-2012 1       Added 110-38 12-55  6- 5-2012 1       Added 2-90 12-56  6-19-2012 114-237(a) 12-64  9-18-2012 42-2 12-66 10- 2-2012 94-32 94-33 94-56 94-58       Dltd 94-81       Dltd 94-82 98-3 98-10 98-22       Added 94-59 12-83 12-18-2012 1 106-109 106-112 12-85 12-18-2012 1 2-1 12-86 12-18-2012 1       Added 22-196 12-87 12-18-2012 42-2 13-06  1-22-2013 94-32, 94-33 94-56 94-58(b) 94-59 98-3 98-10 98-22 13-23  4- 2-2013 1       Added 114-400-114-412 13-32  5- 7-2013 1 18-1       Added 18-7       Added 18-10-18-12 2 18-31 3 18-61 4 18-190 5       Added 18-250 13-37  5-21-2013 1       Added 35-1-35-5 2       Rpld 74-2 3       Added 36-1-36-5 13-38  5-21-2013 22-140(c) 22-141(a) 13-39  5-21-2013 1 114-136 2 114-236 13-44  5-21-2013 94-35(a) 94-36       Added 94-38 13-57  6-18-2013       Added 2-5 13-61  7- 2-2013 74-205 13-62  7- 2-2013 74-210 13-92  7-16-2013       Added 106-138 14-01  1- 7-2014       Rpld 2-351-2-354, 2-371, 2-372, 2-391, 2-411-2-438, 2-456-2-462, 2-481-2-484, 2-501-2-512       Added 2-351-2-359, 2-371, 2-372, 2-391-2-426, 2-431-2-435, 2-441-2-444, 2-451-2-460, 2-471-2-482, 2-491-2-502 14-13  3- 4-2014 26-1       Rnbd 26-2-26-4       as 26-5-26-7       Added 26-2-26-4 14-17  3-18-2014 70-124 70-127-70-130       Added 70-131, 70-132 14-24  4-15-2014 98-51 14-47  5-20-2014 50-62, 50-63 14-52  6- 3-2014 1 114-136 2 114-236 14-66  7- 1-2014       Added 54-4-54-8 14-67  7- 1-2014       Added 50-101-50-116 14-77  7-22-2014       Rpld 66-46-66-56       Added 66-46-66-56 14-82  9- 2-2014 35-3 14-83  9- 2-2014 106-8 106-10 110-161 14-100 10-21-2014 50-31, 50-32       Rpld 50-33       Added 50-33 50-34       Rpld 50-35       Added 50-35 50-36       Rpld 50-37, 50-38       Added 50-37, 50-38 14-101 10-21-2014 38-93(1) 38-97 14-104 11-25-2014 26-6(b) 14-109 12- 9-2014       Added 110-10-110-12 14-110 12- 9-2014       Added 70-8 15-30  4-21-2015 114-136 114-236 15-47  6- 2-2015       Added 110-270 15-64 10-20-2015 18-1 18-6, 18-7 18-31 18-95 18-116 18-184       Added 18-206 16-01  1- 5-2016       Added 106-139-106-147 16-18  4-19-2016 110-265 16-34  9- 6-2016 106-262 16-35  9-16-2016 106-292 16-36  9- 6-2016 106-442 16-38  9- 6-2016 94-56 17-15  4- 4-2017 1 114-136 2 114-236 17-16  4- 4-2017 106-10 17-17  5- 2-2017 106-10 17-20  5-16-2017 106-132, 106-134-106-137 17-25  6- 6-2017 1 114-136 2 114-236 17-30  7-11-2017 22-61(a), 22-78 22-142(a), 22-155 30-43(a), 30-87 30-108, 30-128 30-153(a) 42-1(a), 42-2 42-3(b), 42-4(b) 94-57, 98-7(d) 98-171, 106-8 106-10(a),106-15(d) 106-34-106-36 106-84, 106-85 106-111, 106-207 106-233(c) 106-265-106-267 106-296, 106-297 106-334, 106-336 106-364, 16-441 106-444, 106-445(a) 106-446, 106-450(a) 106-451(a) 106-456(5) 110-132, 110-156 110-161, 110-162 110-265, 110-266(a) 110-372, 114-31 114-68(e), 114-144(b) 114-147, 114-148 114-150(b), 114-151 114-204(e) 114-243(c) 114-405(2), 118-120       Rpld 106-31-106-33 >       Added 2-174-2-183 17-37  9- 5-2017       Added 42-5 17-38  9- 5-2017 118-321 19-10  2- 5-2019 106-61 106-63 19-11  2- 5-2019       Added 106-67, 106-68 19-12  2- 5-2019       Added 106-69  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Code of Virginia. 
Code of Virginia 
Section Section  
this Code 1-13.3 et seq. 1-2 1-13.9 1-3 1-13.19 1-2 1-13.32, 1-13.33 1-2 1-13.39:2 110-2 110-211 1-13.42 14-36 1-220 54-61 2.1-133.6 2-2 2.1-340 et seq. Ch. 2 Char. § 2-5 2.1-359 et seq. 2-168 2.1-517 Ch. 22 2.1-639.1 et seq. Ch. 2 2-66 2-501, 2-502 2.1-639.23 1-16 2.2-1124(B)(1) 2-432 2.2-1124(B)(12) 2-434 2.2-3100 et seq. 2-435 2-471 2-472 2.2-3101 2-479 2.2-3112(A)(2)-(4) 2-473 2.2-3700 et seq. 2-355 2-492 2-497 2.2-3799 et seq. 2-355 2.2-4027 114-287 2.2-4301 2-354 2-422 2.2-4302.1 2-401 2.2-4303(A) 2-395 2.2-4303(C), (D) 2-421 2.2-4303(E) 2-392 2.2-4303(F) 2-393 2.2-4303(G) 2-391 2.2-4304 2-394 2.2-4305 2-396 2.2-4308 2-398 2.2-4309 2-413 2.2-4311 2-424 2.2-4315 2-402 2.2-4316 2-403 2.2-4317 2-399 2-400 2.2-4318 2-409 2.2-4319 2-426 2.2-4321 2-441 2-442 Ch. 2, Art. VII, Div. 3, Subdiv. V 2.2-4326 2-358 2.2-4328(A) 2-410 2.2-4330 2-407 2.2-4331 2-411 2.2-4333 2-414 2.2-4334 2-415 2.2-4335 2-416 2.2-4336 2-404 2.2-4337 2-417 2-499 2.2-4338 2-420 2.2-4339 2-405 2.2-4340 2-418 2.2-4341 2-419 2.2-4342 2-355 2.2-4343.1 2-397 2.2-4343-2.2-4346 2-353 2.2-4352 2-359 2.2-4357 2-451 2.2-4358 2-452 2.2-4359 2-453 2.2-4360 2-454 2.2-4361 2-455 2.2-4362 2-456 2.2-4363 2-457 2.2-4364 2-459 2.2-4365 2-458 Ch. 2, Art. VII, Div. 3, Subdiv. VI 2.2-4366 2-460 2.2-4367 2-471 2.2-4368 2-472 2.2-4369 2-473 2.2-4370 2-475 2.2-4371(a) 2-474 2.2-4371(b) 2-476 2.2-4372 2-477 2.2-4373 2-478 2.2-4374 2-479 2.2-4375 2-480 2.2-4376 2-481 2.2-4377 2-482 2.2-5200-2.2-5214 2-353 3.1-361 et seq. Ch. 62 3.1-562.4 Ch. 26 3.1-796.66 et seq. Ch. 18 Ch. 18, Art. IV 3.1-796.68 18-1 3.1-796.68 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. V 3.1-796.69 18-192 18-193 3.1-796.70 18-194 3.1-796.71 18-191 3.1-796.72, 3.1-796.73 18-196, 18-197 3.1-796.74 18-182 3.1-796.75, 3.1-796.76 18-198, 18-199 3.1-796.77 18-185 3.1-796.85, 3.1-796.86 18-116, 18-117 3.1-796.86 18-121 18-126 3.1-796.87, 3.1-796.88 18-118, 18-119 3.1-796.89 18-122 3.1-796.90 18-121 3.1-796.91 18-124 3.1-796.92 18-122 3.1-796.93 18-91 3.1-796.93:1 Ch. 18, Art. IV, Div. 3 3.1-796.94:1 Char. § 4-1 Ch. 18 18-61 18-183 3.1-796.96 18-94 18-191 18-204 18-234-18-236 3.1-796.97:1 18-231 3.1-796.98 18-232-18-236 3.1-796.100 Ch. 18, Art. VI 3.1-796.104 18-1 18-3 3.1-796.105 18-94 18-153 18-205 3.1-796.105(B) 18-199 3.1-796.107, 3.1-796.108 18-201, 18-202 3.1-796.113 18-201 3.1-796.115 18-202 18-205 3.1-796.119 18-147 3.1-796.122 18-183 3.1-796.128 18-200 3.1-796.128(A)(1) 18-117 3.1-796.128(A)(2) 18-120 3.1-796.128(A)(6) 18-92 3.1-796.128(A)(8) 18-123 3.1-884.17 et seq. 62-33 3.1-884.31 62-33 62-34 tit. 3.2 18-184 3.2-2600 18-1 3.2-6500 18-1 18-206 3.2-6503 18-1 18-11 18-12 18-190 3.2-6508 18-206 3.2-6538 18-95 3.2-6543 18-95 3.2-6544 18-7 18-10 18-31 18-61 3.2-6555 18-1 3.2-6571 18-184 tit. 4.1 Ch. 10 10-1 14-2 14-36 4.1-100 106-4 4.1-205 10-1 4.1-233 10-1 8.01-296(1) 18-6 8.01-296(2)(a)-(c) 18-6 8.01-316-8.01-320 18-6 8.01-324 2-109 9-169 70-32 tit. 10.1 58.31 10.1-506 50-125 10.1-560 et seq. Ch. 50 122-31 10.1-561 F. 50-125 10.1-562 Ch. 50 10.1-563(E) 50-139 10.1-564 50-126 10.1-600 58-31 10.1-600 et seq. Ch. 58 10.603.1 et seq. 50-125 122-31 10.1-603.3 Ch. 50 10.1-604 et seq. 50-92  
Code of Virginia 
Section Section  
this Code 50-126 10.1-1100 et seq. 50-92 50-103 50-126 10.1-1105 122-31 10.1-1142 54-4 10.1-1143 54-7 10.1-1163(B) 50-92 50-126 10.1-1321 Ch. 50 10.1-1400 et seq. Ch. 94 10.1-1425 Ch. 62 10.1-1700 et seq. Ch. 38 10.1-2100 et seq. Ch. 122 122-33 10.1-2107 50-125 122-31 10.1-2109 122-31 11-35 et seq. Ch. 2 13.1-501 et seq. 26-32 15-77.9 Char. § 7-2 15-448-15-454 Char. § 2-7 15.1-837-15.1-915 Char. § 4-1 15.1-939-15.1-945 Char. § 2-7 tit. 15.2 Ch. 2 15.2-106 2-313 15.2-600 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. IV 15.2-900 et seq. 22-196 15.2-900 1-15 22-163 Ch. 50 50-61 15.2-901 50-62 50-63 Ch. 62 Ch. 94 94-1 15.2-904 110-471 15.2-906 et seq. Ch. 22 15.2-911 Ch. 70, Art. IV 70-124 70-127 15.2-911(B), (C) 70-122 15.2-912 Ch. 26, Art. III 26-92 15.2-915.4 74-210 15.2-922 Ch. 54 15.2-922.1 54-4 15.2-927 Ch. 94 15.2-927 et seq. Char. § 4-1 Ch. 94, Art. II 15.2-930 Ch. 94 15.2-932, 15.2-933 Ch. 94 15.2-940 Ch. 38 15.2-953 Ch. 54 15.2-967 Ch. 110 15.2-968.1 110-38 15.2-968.1(h) 110-38 15.2-968.1(l) 110-38 15.2-971 Ch. 2, Art. VIII 15.2-972 Ch. 30 15.2-974 54-6 15.2-980 50-34 15.2-1100 et seq. Char. § 4-1 15.2-1104 Ch. 106 15.2-1107 Char. § 7-2 15.2-1110 Ch. 114 15.2-1111 Ch. 30 15.2-1113 Ch. 54 74-208 15.2-1114 Ch. 26, Art. IV 15.2-1115 1-15 22-163 Ch. 50 50-61 50-63 50-64 94-1 98-22 98-132 15.2-1116 Ch. 54 15.2-1117 Ch. 22 15.2-1118 Ch. 54 15.2-1121 Ch. 30 Ch. 30, Art. II, 
Div. 4 30-43 30-86 15.2-1129.1 38-106 15.2-1412 2-285 15.2-1414.5 Char. § 2-7 2-31 15.2-1414.6 Char. § 2-7 2-31 15.2-1425 1-1 15.2-1429 1-14 15.2-1429 et seq. Char. § 4-1 15.2-1430 1-14 15.2-1431 1-17 15.2-1432 1-14 15.2-1433 1-1 1-12, 1-13 Ch. 102 Ch. 106 15.2-1505 Char. § 4-10 15.2-1510 Char. § 4-1 15.2-1527 et seq. 2-62 15.2-1603 2-171 15.2-1627 1-16 15.2-1700 Ch. 14 15.2-1700 et seq. Ch. 70 15.2-1705 70-32 15.2-1717.1 70-8 15.2-1719 70-151 15.2-1720 Ch. 110, Art. VIII, Div. 2 15.2-1800 114-407 15.2-1806 et seq. Ch. 78 15.2-1808 Char. § 4-1 15.2-1812 74-98 15.2-2000 et seq. Char. § 4-1 Ch. 98 15.2-2010 98-13 98-123 15.2-2015 Ch. 118 Ch. 118, Art. II 15.2-2019 Ch. 98, Art. II 98-51 15.2-2026 Ch. 110 15.2-2028, 15.2-2029 Ch. 110 15.2-2109 Ch. 114, Art. II 15.2-2109 et seq. Ch. 114 15.2-2111 114-283 15.2-2114 114-402 15.2-2122 et seq. Ch. 114 Ch. 114, Art. III 15.2-2134 et seq. Ch. 114 Ch. 114, Art. II 15.2-2143 Ch. 114, Art. II, 
Div. 4 114-38 114-66 15.2-2143 et seq. Char. § 4-1 15.2-2157 Ch. 114, Art. III 15.2-2200 et seq. Ch. 82 15.2-2204 122-123 15.2-2210 82-31 15.2-2210 et seq. Ch. 82 82-33 15.2-2212 82-32 15.2-2240 et seq. Ch. 102 15.2-2241 Ch. 102 15.2-2283 122-33 15.2-2500 2-311 15.2-4900 et seq. Ch. 38 15.2-5702 74-102 16.1-123.1 Ch. 42 16.1-228 74-241 16.1-253 74-92 16.1-253.1, 
16.1-253.4 74-92 16.1-278 et seq. 74-441 110-211 16.1-278.2- 
16.1-278.6 74-92 16.1-278.8 74-92 16.1-278.14 74-92 16.1-278.15 74-92 16.1-279.1 74-92 16.1-309.2-16.1-309.10 2-353 17.1-208 30-87 17.1-238 Ch. 98 17.1-275.1- 
17.1-275.4 1-17 17.1-279.1 42-5 17.1-281 42-2 tit. 18.2 Ch. 74 18.2-9 1-14 18.2-11 1-14 18.2-27 74-31 18.2-57 54-39 74-61 18.2-87, 18.2-88 54-2, 54-3 18.2-103 Ch. 74, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 74-122 18.2-104 Ch. 74, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 18.2-104.1 74-124 18.2-105 74-125 18.2-105.1 74-126 18.2-106 74-121 18.2-108 74-91 18.2-119 70-8 18.2-119-18.2-121 74-92-74-94 18.2-125 30-1 18.2-125 et seq. Ch. 30 18.2-127, 18.2-128 74-95, 74-96 18.2-130 74-97 18.2-132-18.2-136 74-92 18.2-137, 18.2-138 74-98, 74-99 18.2-140 74-101 18.2-146-18.2-148 74-102 18.2-152 110-292 18.2-159-18.2-161 110-522-110-524 18.2-162, 18.2-163 74-103, 74-104 18.2-174, 18.2-175 70-4, 70-5 18.2-176 74-151 18.2-179 74-152 18.2-187.1 74-153 18.2-188, 18.2-189 74-154, 74-155 18.2-190.1 74-153 18.2-192 74-156 18.2-195 74-156 18.2-202 74-157 18.2-209 74-161 18.2-211 74-158 18.2-212 Ch. 54 70-132 74-159 18.2-212.1 74-160 18.2-216 6-9 18.2-222 6-10 18.2-223 Ch. 26 Ch. 26, Art. V 18.2-224 Ch. 26 Ch. 26, Art. V 26-223 18.2-247- 
18.2-264.01 74-461 18.2-258 Ch. 14 18.2-258.01 Ch. 14 18.2-264 74-181 18.2-266 et seq. 110-211 18.2-267 et seq. Ch. 10 18.2-280 74-208 18.2-283 74-206 18.2-284 74-202 18.2-286 74-208 18.2-287.1 74-212 18.2-308 74-204 74-207 18.2-308(A) 74-207 18.2-308(D) 74-204 18.2-308(J1) 74-204 18.2-308.1 74-207 18.2-309, 18.2-310 74-203, 74-204 18.2-311 74-201 18.2-313 18-8 18.2-316, 18.2-317 74-182 18.2-318 Ch. 62 18.2-318, 18.2-319 74-182, 74-183 18.2-322 74-184 18.2-323 Ch. 18 18-186 18.2-324 98-21 18.2-325-18.2-327 74-261-74-263 18.2-329-18.2-331 74-264-74-266 18.2-332 74-268 18.2-333, 18.2-334 74-286, 74-287 18.2-336 74-267 18.2-337 74-288 18.2-340.15 et seq. Ch. 14 18.2-341 86-32 18.2-344, 18.2-345 74-231, 74-232 18.2-346 74-234 74-481 18.2-347-18.2-351 74-235-74-239 18.2-351 74-241 18.2-361 74-234 74-236 18.2-365 74-231 18.2-366 74-233 18.2-371 74-241 18.2-371.3 Ch. 26, Art. III 26-95 18.2-372 Ch. 74, Art. VII, 
Div. 3 18.2-372-18.2-378 74-306-74-312 18.2-379 74-317 18.2-380 74-313 18.2-382 74-314 18.2-383 74-318 18.2-387 74-315 18.2-388 74-242 18.2-389 Ch. 74 Ch. 74, Art. VII, 
Div. 3 74-242 18.2-390, 18.2-391 74-336, 74-337 18.2-391.1 74-338 18.2-403.1 et seq. Ch. 18 18.2-404 74-361 18.2-410 Ch. 70 18.2-415-18.2-417 74-362-74-364 18.2-425 74-383 18.2-425.1 74-384 18.2-426 74-381 18.2-427-18.2-429 74-385-74-387 18.2-431 74-382 18.2-432 Ch. 14 14-2 14-36 18.2-433 Ch. 14 14-2 18.2-438 et seq. 2-471 18.2-440 74-411 18.2-446 et seq. 2-471 18.2-460 74-412 18.2-461 70-7 18.2-462 74-413 18.2-463 70-3 18.2-498.1 et seq. 2-400 2-471 18.2-510 Ch. 18 18-9 18-96 19.2-8 Ch. 22 19.2-76.2 Ch. 94 19.2-119 et seq. 110-35 19.2-152.1 Ch. 26 19.2-152.8- 
19.2-152.10 74-92 19.2-354 et seq. 1-17 19.2-393 et seq. Ch. 62 20-103 74-92 tit. 22.1 2-571 22.1-28 et seq. 2-571 22.1-49 2-571 22.1-254 et seq. 2-571 tit. 24.2 Ch. 46 24.2-222 46-100 24.2-222.1 46-100 24.2-305 et seq. 46-33 24.2-307 et seq. 
24.2-310 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III 
Ch. 46, Art. IV 24.3-507 46-100 24.2-712 46-68 tit. 25 22-155 tit. 25.1 22-161 25-233 Char. § 4-7 tit. 27 Ch. 54 27-1 et seq. Ch. 54 27-6.1 et seq. Ch. 54 27-14 Ch. 54 27-30 et seq. Ch. 54 27-39 et seq. Ch. 54 27-94 et seq. 54-61 27-97 26-2 54-61 27-98.1 26-3 27-100 26-2 27-100.1 54-6 28.2-1300 122-31 tit. 29.1 Ch. 18 74-209 29.1-100 74-209 29.1-200 et seq. 74-204 29.1-527 Ch. 18 tit. 32.1 Ch. 62 tit. 32.1, ch. 1, art. 2 114-152 32.1-30 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 32.1-111.1 118-311 32.1-111.1 et seq. Ch. 118, Art. IV 32.1-111.4 118-316 32.1-111.5 118-319 32.1-111.14 Ch. 118, Art. IV 118-313 118-341 32.1-163 et seq. Ch. 114 Ch. 114, Art. III 32.1-167 et seq. Ch. 114 Ch. 114, Art. II 32.1-289 et seq. 34-1 33.1-12 2-404 3-417 98-51 33.1-25 et seq. Ch. 98 33.1-224 et seq. Ch. 98 33.1-346 94-2 33.1-351 et seq. Ch. 6 33.1-369(1) Ch. 30 34-26 Ch. 30 34-28 Ch. 30 35.1-1 26-2 35.1-1 et seq. Ch. 62 35.1-9 26-1 35.1-25 62-41 36-1 et seq. Ch. 38 36-11 38-1 36-49.1:1 22-155 22-164 36-55.24 et seq. Ch. 38 36-70 et seq. Ch. 22 36-85.3 106-107 36-94.4 66-49 36-96.1 et seq. Ch. 66 36-96.2 66-53 36-96.3 66-48 36-96.5 66-50 36-96.6 66-51 36-96.21 Ch. 66 36-97 Ch. 22 36-98 Ch. 22 22-31 36-99.11 Ch. 110 36-105 Ch. 22 22-36 22-91 36-105.1:1 22-119 22-120 36-106 22-127 36-137 22-61 37.1-1 2-353 40.1-100 Ch. 14 40.1-117 et seq. Ch. 22 42.1-70 42-1 42.1-76 et seq. Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. VI Ch. 102 42.1-82 2-285 43-32 74-155 43-32-43-36 110-495 43-33 74-155 44-152 et seq. Ch. 54 tit. 45.1 50-103 tit. 46.2 110-2 118-316 tit. 46.2, ch. 6 11-270 46.2-100 50-32 74-96 110-12 110-355 110-471 46.2-100 et seq. Ch. 110 46.2-102 110-32 46.2-113 110-31 46.2-300 et seq. Ch. 110 46.2-301, 46.2-302 110-35 46.2-310 Ch. 118 Ch. 118, Art. II 118-116 46.2-341.24 110-35 46.2-341.26:2, 
46.2-341.26:3 110-35 46.2-341.31 110-35 46.2-372 110-446 46.2-373 110-448 46.2-381 110-446 46.2-600 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. V 110-267 46.2-617 110-494 46.2-662 et seq. 
46.2-685 et seq. 110-152 
110-153 46.2-711 Ch. 118 46.2-752 et seq. Ch. 110 Ch. 110, Art. V 46.2-752(C) 110-157 46.2-752(K) 110-163 46.2-828 110-213 46.2-844 110-270 46.2-859 110-270 46.2-878.2 110-10 110-12 46.2-882 Ch. 110 46.2-908 Ch. 110, Art. VIII, Div. 2 46.2-923 110-402 46.2-931 35-3 46.2-935 110-401 46.2-936 110-35 110-36 46.2-937 110-37 46.2-938 110-35 46.2-940 110-36 46.2-941 110-266 46.2-945 110-36 46.2-1046 110-221 46.2-1200 110-491 110-495 46.2-1200 et seq. Ch. 110 46.2-1200- 
46.2-1208 110-495 46.2-1201 Ch. 110, Art. XI 46.2-1201- 
46.2-1205 110-492-110-496 46.2-1206 110-496 46.2-1212 Ch. 110 46.2-1213 Ch. 110, Art. XI 110-268 110-492 46.2-1216 Ch. 110 110-268 46.2-1217 Ch. 110, Art. XI 46.2-1219, 46.2-1220 Ch. 110 46.2-1220 Ch. 110, Art. VII Ch. 110, Art. VII, Div. 2 110-265 110-267 46.2-1225 110-265 110-266 46.2-1230 Ch. 110, Art. VII, Div. 3 46.2-1239 110-251 46.2-1242 110-265 46.2-1300 110-31 46.2-1300 et seq. Ch. 110 46.2-1301 110-108 46.2-1304 110-220 46.2-1309 110-32 46.2-1313 Ch. 10 110-2 110-211 46.2-2016 et seq. Ch. 118 Ch. 118, Art. II 46.2-2020 118-4 118-36 tit. 48 1-15 50-61 48-7 et seq. 74-235 49-1 Char. § 3-1 49-12 et seq. 2-62 51.1-803 2-353 53.1-1 70-32 53.1-29 74-204 53.1-60 1-17 53.1-96 70-92 53.1-96 et seq. 70-92 53.1-120D 42-3(a) 53.1-131 1-17 53.1-131.1 1-17 53.1-131.2 1-17 53.1-150 1-17 53.1-151 74-239 53.1-153 74-239 tit. 54.1 Ch. 26 26-92 26-95 54.1-400 et seq. 50-106 50-125 54.1-828 et seq. 14-1 54.1-1100 et seq. Ch. 22 54.1-1100 22-101 54.1-1101 22-101 54.1-1117 Ch. 22 54.1-2310 et seq. Ch. 30 54.1-2967 70-1 54.1-3401 74-181 54.1-4000 et seq. Ch. 86 54.1-4001 86-51 54.1-4002 86-31 54.1-4003(B) 86-52 54.1-4010 86-33 54.1-4014 86-34 54.1-4111 Ch. 26 54.1-4200 et seq. Ch. 26 55-202 et seq. Ch. 18 55-210.1, et seq. 70-151 55-217 et seq. 22-128 55-248.2 et seq. 22-128 55-248.31:01 70-8 55-336 et seq. Ch. 102 tit. 56, ch. 22 2-491 2-495 2-499 tit. 56, ch. 22.1 2-491 2-495 2-499 56-257 et seq. Ch. 98 56-265.14 et seq. 2-394 56-345.1 et seq. Ch. 110, Art. XII 56-412.1 110-521 56-557 2-491 56-557.1 2-491 56-575.1 2-491 56-575.3 2-492 56-575.3:1 2-500 56-575.4 2-493 56-575.5 2-501 56-575.6 2-500 56-575.9 2-499 56-575.9:1 2-499 56-575.15 2-502 56-575.16 2-492 56-575.17 2-497 56-594 106-351 57-22 et seq. Ch. 30 57-48 34-1 57-48 et seq. Ch. 34 57-59 34-2 57-63 Ch. 34 tit. 58 Char. § 6-6 Char. § 6-8 58-895 et seq. Char. § 6-10, Char. § 6-11 58-1118 et seq. Char. § 6-9 tit. 58.1 Char. § 6-6 Char. § 6-8 26-32 106-87 58.1-1 et seq. Ch. 106 58.1-6 et seq. Ch. 106 58.1-15 50-115 106-234 58.1-400.2 26-62 58.1-520 et seq. Ch. 106 58.1-600 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. IV 106-171 58.1-603, 58.1-604 106-171 58.1-605 Ch. 106, Art. V 106-172 58.1-605 et seq. Ch. 106 58.1-622 106-171 58.1-628 106-171 58.1-814 106-391 58.1-1200 et seq. 106-232 106-233 58.1-1201 106-231 58.1-1204 106-232 58.1-1205 106-231 58.1-1207 106-233 58.1-1208 et seq. Ch. 106 58.1-1211 106-232 106-233 58.1-1212 106-233 58.1-1718 106-411 58.1-1820 et seq. Char. § 6-9 58.1-1821, 58.1-1822 26-37 58.1-2901 106-352 106-353 58.1-3000 et seq. Ch. 106 58.1-3100 et seq. 106-5 58.1-3107 106-6 58.1-3111 106-7 58.1-3130 2-314 58.1-3137 2-170 58.1-3200 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. III 58.1-3210 Ch. 106, Art. III, Div. 3 106-107 58.1-3211 106-111 58.1-3213 106-111 58.1-3219 Ch. 106, Art. III, Div. 4, Subdiv. II 58.1-3230 106-82 106-83 122-31 58.1-3230 et seq. 106-81 58.1-3233 106-83 58.1-3233(2) 106-82 58.1-3234 106-82 58.1-3236 106-82 58.1-3237, 58.1-3238 106-85, 106-86 58.1-3240 106-83 58.1-3250 et seq. 106-61 58.1-3253 106-63 58.1-3292 106-69 58.1-3370 et seq. Char. § 6-10, Char. § 6-11 58.1-3373 106-14 58.1-3401 106-152 58.1-3505 106-4 58.1-3523 106-15 58.1-3600 et seq. 106-151 58.1-3605 106-138 58.1-3606 et seq. 106-138 58.1-3606(A)(1) 106-151 58.1-3606(A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(7) 106-151 58.1-3607(A)(2)-(A)(7) 106-151 58.1-3609 et seq. 106-138 106-151 58.1-3650 et seq. 106-138 106-151 58.1-3651 106-138 58.1-3660 106-3 58.1-3700 et seq. Ch. 26 26-32 58.1-3700.1 26-32 58.1-3701 26-32 26-35 58.1-3703.1(A)(1), (2) 26-34 58.1-3703.1(A)(3)-58.1-3703.1(A)(6) 26-35-26-38 58.1-3712 26-61 58.1-3712.1 26-61 58.1-3713 26-61 58.1-3714(D) 26-32 58.1-3715 26-32 26-34, 26-35 58.1-3717 98-15 58.1-3717 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. IV 58.1-3719.1 26-61 58.1-3726 26-61 58.1-3800 et seq. 106-391 58.1-3805 et seq. 106-411 58.1-3812 106-348 58.1-3812 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. IX 58.1-3813 106-362 58.1-3814 106-352 106-353 58.1-3817 106-202 58.1-3830 et seq. Ch. 106, Art. XII 58.1-3832 106-451 58.1-3840 Ch. 106, Art. V Ch. 106, Art. VII, Ch. 106, Art. VIII Ch. 106, Art. XII 58.1-3850 38-90 58.1-3895 et seq. 22-4 58.1-3900 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 106 58.1-3903 26-36 58.1-3910 et seq. 106-36 58.1-3916 26-34 58.1-3916.1 26-40 58.1-3940 22-4 26-36 58.1-3940 et seq. 50-63 58.1-3965 22-142 58.1-3965(A) 22-142 58.1-3965 et seq. 50-63 106-65 58.1-3965.1 106-65 58.1-3970.1 22-142 58.1-3980 et seq. Char. § 6-9 58.1-3984 26-36 26-37 58.1-3986 26-35 58.1-3993 26-35 58.2-3231 Ch. 106, Art. III, Div. 2 59.1-68.6 et seq. 2-400 59.1-117 86-3 59.1-117-59.1-136 86-3 59.1-118 86-3 59.1-120, 59.1-121 86-2 59.1-123 86-3 59.1-137 et seq. Ch. 54 59.1-142 et seq. Ch. 54 59.1-270 et seq. 38-61 59.1-279 38-81-38-84 59.1-280 38-81 59.1-282 38-84 59.1-467 et seq. 1-2 62.1-44.2 et seq. 50-102 Ch. 114 62.1-44.15:24 et seq. 50-102 62.1-44.15:27 50-104 62.1-44.15:27 et seq. 50-101 62.1-44.15:35 50-106 62.1-44.15:40 50-111 62.1-44.15:46 50-113 62.1-44.15:67 et seq. 50-102 50-103 62.1-44.26 50-112 62.1-44.32 114-292 62.1-255 122-33 tit. 63.1 Ch. 90 90-33 90-65 63.1-38 et seq. 90-32 63.1-43 90-32 90-33 63.1-43.1 90-62-90-66 63.2-100 2-353  

Art. 1.
Art. 2.
Art. 3.
Art. 4.
Art. 4-A.
Art. 5.
Art. 6.
Art. 7.
Art. 7-A.
Art. 8.
Art. 9.
Art. 10.
Art. 11.
Art. 12.
Art. 13.
Art. 14.
Art. 15.
APPENDIX A
ZONING ORDINANCE*
Title,§ 1
Purpose,§ 1
Definitions, §§ 1, 2
General Provisions, Districts and District Maps,§§ 1-4.1
"A" Agricultural District Regulations, §§ 1-9
"R-1A" Single-Family Residence District Regulations,§§ 1-7
"R-1" Single-Family Residence District Regulations,§§ 1-4
"R-2" Single-Family Residence District Regulations,§§ 1-4
"RMH" Residential Mobile Homes District Regulations,§§ 1-10
"R-3" Two-Family Residence District Regulations,§§ 1-4
"R-4" Multiple Dwelling District Regulations,§§ 1-4
"R-5" Multiple Dwelling District Regulations,§§ 1-4
"R-6" High Rise District Regulations, §§ 1-4
"RTH'' Residential Town House District Regulations, 1-8
"RB" Office-Apartment District Regulations,§§ 1-4
"B-1" Shopping Center District Regulations, §§ 1-6
"B-2" General Commercial District Regulations,§§ 1-4
~
*Editor's note- The zoning ordinance of the city, adopted April20, 1971, effective July 1,
1971, and revised for annexation June 76, 1972, as from time to time amended, has been included
herein as App. A, Arts. 1-35, at the editor's discretion. Sections that have been revised or added
by amendment, subsequent to the inclusion of the zoning ordinance as App. A of this volume, are
followed by a history note; prior to such inclusion, certain articles of the ordinance had been
amended by the following legislation:
Ordinance Article
Number Date Amended
6726 11-7-72 16
6817 5-1-73 35
6831 6-5-73 10, 13
6933 12-18-73 7-A, 12,27
6979 6-18-74 31
7588 3-21-78 35
7685 8-1-78 36(§§ 1-5)
7854 7-17-79 27
8085 11-18-80 16
Cross Reference- Planning commission, § 2-156 et seq.; building regulations Ch. 9; plan and
permit for land-disturbing activities, § 12-23 et seq.; floodplain management, Ch. 13.5; sewers and
sewage disposal, Ch. 27; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 32; subdivisions, Ch. 33; real estate taxes,§
34-37 et seq.; trailers and trailer camps, Ch. 36; water supply, Ch. 38.
Supp. No.l2
3
Art. 1, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE ART.2, § 1
Art. 16. "B-3" Central Commercial District Regnlations, §§ 1-4
Art. 17. "M-1" Light Industrial District Regnlations, §§ 1-4
Art. 18. "M-2" Heavy Industrial District Regnlations, §§ 1-5
Art. 18.1. "MXD-1" Mixed Use District,§§ 1-8
Art. 18.2. "MXD-2" Mixed Use District,§§ 1-8
Art. 19. Off-Street Parking Regnlations, §§ 1-4
Art. 20. Off-Street Loading Regulations, §§ 1-4
Art. 21. Sign Regnlations, §§ 1-11
Art. 22. Height, Area and Bulk Requirements, § 1
Art. 23. Supplementary Use Regnlations- Special Uses, §§ 1-5
Art. 24. Nonconforming Uses,§§ 1-7
Art. 25. Supplementary Height, Area and Bulk Regnlations, §§ 1-3
Art. 26. "PUD" Planned Unit Development District,§§ 1-6
Art. 26A. Conditional Zoning, §§ 1-6
Art. 27. The Board of Zoning Appeals, §§ 1-9
Art. 28. Changes and Amendments, §§ 1-5
Art. 29. Newly Annexed Territory,§ 1
Art. 30. Certificate of Occupancy,§§ 1-5
Art. 31. Permits, Plats and Filing Fees,§§ 1-3
Art. 32. Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict, § 1
Art. 33. Enforcement, Violation and Penalties, §§ 1-3
Art. 34. Validity and Effective Date, §§ 1-3
Art. 35. Preservation and Historical Areas Within the city, §§ 1-20
Art. 36. Historic Buildings, §§ 1-5
ARTICLE 1. TITLE
[Section 1. Title.]
This ordinance shall be known as the Petersburg zoning ordinance.
ARTICLE 2. PURPOSE
[Section 1. Regulations and districts established in accordance with
comprehensive plan.]
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made
in accordance with a comprehensive plan to promote, in accordance with present
and future needs, the safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general
welfare of the citizens of Petersburg, Virginia, and to provide for efficiency and
economy in the process of development, for the appropriate and best use of
Supp.No.l2
4
Art. 2, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 3, § 2
land, for convenience of traffic and circulation of people and goods for the use
and occupancy of buildings, for healthful and convenience distnbution of
population, for good civic design and arrangement, and for adequate public
utilities and facilities, by regulating the location and use of buildings, structures
and land for trade, industry, and residence, by regulating and limiting or
determining the height and bulk of buildings and structures, the area of yards and
other open spaces and the density of use. They have been made with reasonable
consideration, naming other things, to the c~acter of the district and its peculiar
suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of building
and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City of
Petersburg, Virginia.
ARTICLE3. DEFU«TIONS
Section I. General rules of construction.
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in singular
number include the plural number, and words in plural number include the
singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is
mandatory and not directory.
(Ord. No. 94-140, 11-15-94)
Section 2. Definitions.
Abattoir. A commercial slaughterhouse.
Accessory building. An accessory building is a subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the
use of which is clearly incidental to or customarily found in connection with, and (except as otherwise provided in
this ordinance) located on the same lot as the main building or principal use of the land
Accessory use. An accessory use is one which is clearly incidental to or customarily found in connection
with, and (except as otherwise provided in this ordinance) on the same lot as the principal use of the premises.
When "accessory'' is used in the text, it shall have the same meaning as "accessory use."
Adult book store. A commercial establishment which has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade, books, magazines, periodicals, films or similar printed materials and which, with respect to the entire premises
or a portion or a section of the preniises, limits its customers to persons over eighteen (18) ye~ of age, or as one of
its principal business purposes offers for sale, rental or viewing for any form of consideration any one or more of the
following:
5
(1)
(2)
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, ~' mo~on pic~es,
video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or
describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified
sexual activities."
Adult Entertainment Establishment. A restaurant, nightclub, private club or similar establishment which
allows live performances involving persons who are semi-nude. For the purposes of this provision, semi-nude shall
mean:
(1)
(2)
Less than completely and opaquely covered pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a
point immediately above the top of the areolae, excepting any portion of the cleavage of the
female breast exhibited by a dress, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided
the areolae are not exposed, but under no circumstances less than completely covered genitals,
anus, or areolae of the female breast;
Male genitals in a state of arousal, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Any establishment which features such performances shall be deemed to be an adult entertainment
establishment. The above restrictions shall not apply to a legitimate theatrical performance where nudity or seminudity
is only incidental to the priniary purpose of the performance.
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films
(which term shall also include videotapes and other, comparable technology) containing "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas" ("sexually oriented films") are predominantly shown;' or where a predominant
number of films are limited to adults only. For the purposes of this section, sexually oriented films will be deemed
predominantly shown if they are shown more frequently than other, nonsexually oriented films, or if there is
regularly greater audience attendance at such films than at other, nonsexually oriented films. A finding of the
Zoning Administrator that sexually oriented films predominate or that a predominant number of films are restricted
to adults shall be presumed to be correct unless the subject owner or operator rebuts the presumption by clear and
convincing evidence.
Adult video store. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, including
videotapes/video cassettes, motion pictures, slides and other, comparable technology, containing "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (sexually oriented films) are offered for sale or rent; such films are a
substantial portion of the stock-in-trade of such establishment; or where a substantial portion of such films are
limited to adults only.
Alley. A public way which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
6
Alteration. Any change in the total floor area, use, adaptability or external appearance of an existing
structure.
. Apar~ent. A part _of a building containing cooking and housekeeping facilities, consisting of a room or
swte of rooms, mtended, destgned and used as a residence by an individual or a single family.
Apartment house: Same as "Dwelling, multiple-family."
Automobile. A motor vehicle designed to transport property and/or persons on its own structure. The term
"automobile" shall include, but not be limited to, ''passenger car," ''pickup truck," ''panel truck," "van," or "light
truck, with a capacity of four tons or less and having no more than two axles."
Automobile self-service station. Any establishment having pumps and storage tanks at which fuels and oils
for automobiles are dispensed or sold at retail, and where dispensing is performed by the customer or an employee,
but where automotive repair is not performed. A gasoline service station shall not have parking or refueling
facilities for semi-trailer trucks, nor shall the refueling of such vehicles be permitted, although semi-trailer trucks
may be permitted to park on the site for the purpose of off-loading goods to the businesses located on the premises.
Automobile service station. Any establishment having pumps and storage tanks at which fuels and oils for
automobiles are dispensed or sold at retail, and where dispensing is performed by the customer or an employee. A
gasoline service station shall not have parking or refueling facilities for semi-trailer trucks, although semi-trailer
trucks may be permitted to park on the site for the purpose of off-loading goods to the businesses located on the
premises. fu addition, only the following services and sales may be made: sale and servicing of spark plugs,
batteries and/or distributors and ignition system parts; replacement or muffler or other exhaust system parts;
replacement of coolant hoses, accessory drive belts, windshield wipers or blades, light bulbs or parts; the changing
or oil and filters and lubrication of parts; repairs to fuel injectors or related systems; adjustment and repair of brakes;
repair of automotive wiring systems; and minor motor repairs not involving the removal of the engine head or
crankcase, or transmission; sales of beverages, packaged foods, tobacco products and similar convenience goods for
customers, as accessory and incidental to the principal operations; provision of restroom facilities; and state motor
vehicle inspections.
Basement. That portion of a building between the floor and ceiling which is wholly or partly below grade,
and having more than one-half (112) of its height below grade.
Bed-and-breakfast inn. A structure or building containing sleeping and eating accommodations for
compensation and allowing only overnight transient guests and which is operated in accordance with all pertinent
city code requirements and regulations.
Boardinghouse. A building or portion thereof where no more than six (6) rooms, limited to no more than
one (1) occupant each, are rented on a weekly or monthly basis, where renters may share common cooking or
bathroom facilities.
7
Breezeway. A structure, entirely open, except for roof and supporting columns, which connects a residence
and an accessory building on the same lot.
Building. Any structure, having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the housing or enclosure of
persons or property of any kind.
Building, height of. The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or
to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roof.
Buildable width. The width of that part of a lot not included within the open space herein required.
Child-care center. A facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and guidance to a group
often (10) or more children separated from their parents or guardian during a part of the day only, except:
(1) A facility required to be licensed as a summer camp under the Code of Virginia, Sections
35-43 through 35-53;
(2) A public school, unless the Commission of Welfare and Institutions determines that such
private schools is operating a child care outside the scope of regular classes;
(3) A facility which provides child care on a hourly basis, which is contracted for by parent
only occasionally;
(4) A facility operated by a hospital on the hospital's premises, which provides care to the
children of the hospital employees while such employees are engaged in performing work
for the hospital;
(5) Sunday School conducted by a religious institution or a facility operated by a religious
organization, where children are cared for during short periods of time while persons
responsible for such children are attending religious study;
( 6) Those operated as an auxiliary use on the premises of a church or religious institution.
Clinic. An office building or a group of offices for one (1) or more physicians, surgeons or dentists
engaged in treating the sick or injured, but not incluc::ling rooms for abiding patients.
Club. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons, for a
social, educational or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit which inures to any individual, and not
primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
Conditional zoning. As part of classifying land within a govermnental entity into areas and districts by
legislative action, the allowing of reasonable conditions governing the use of such property, such conditions being in
addition to the regulations provided for a particular zoning district or zone by the overall zoning ordinance.
8
Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Petersburg.
Court. An open space, which may or may not have direct street access and around which is arranged a
single building or a group of related buildings.
District. Any section of the City of Petersburg within which the zoning regulations are uniform
Drive-in restaurant. A retail food-dispensing and eating establishment where patrons are permitted to park
cars on the premises and food or drinks are served to patrons in cars.
Dwelling. Any building, or portion thereof: designed or used for residential purposes.
Dwelling, single-family. A building designed for use, or occupied exclusively, by one (1) family.
Dwelling, two-family. A building designed for, or occupied exclusively, by two (2) families living
independently of each other.
Dwelling, multiple-family. A building designed for, or occupied exclusively, by three (3) or more families
living independently of each other.
Dwelling, townhouse. One of a series of from three (3) to twelve (12) attached dwelling units separated
from one another by continuous vertical walls without openings from basement floor to root: and having diversified
architectural facades or treatment of materials on both front and rear of the building group, with not more than four
(4) or any twelve (12) abutting townhouses having the same architectural facades and treatment of materials, and
with same front and rear setbacks. Minimum setback offset shall be one (1) foot.
Dwelling unit. A room or group of rooms occupied or intended to be occupied as separate living quarters
by a single family or other group of persons living together as a household, or by a person living alone.
Family. One (1) person, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage living and
cooking together as a single housekeeping unit with not more that two (2) boarders; or a number of persons, but not
exceeding two (2) living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, though not related by blood, adoption
or marriage shall be deemed to constitute a family. The term ''person" used herein shall not be construed to include
lodger(s) or boarder(s).
Family day-care home. Any private family home in which five (5) to nine (9) children are received for
care, protection and guidance during only a part of the twenty-four-hour-day, except children who·are related by
blood or marriage to the person who maintains the house.
9
Floor area. The gross horizontal area of all floors, including basements, cellars and penthouses (but
excluding such areas within a building which are used for parking), measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
of a building.
Frontage.
(I)
(2)
Street frontage. All of the property on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street; or if the street is
dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and
the dead-end of the street.
Lot frontage. The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line
are coincident.
Garage, private. An accessory building, not exceeding nine hundred (900) square feet in area, designed or
used for the storage of not more than four (4) motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the
building to which it is accessory. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle[, such vehicle] of
not more than two (2) tons capacity.
Garage, storage or parking. A building, or portion thereof: designed or used exclusively for storage of
motor-driven vehicles, and at which motor fuels and oils may be sold without exterior advertising, and where motordriven
vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired, or sold.
Gasoline service station. Same as automobile self-service station.
Grade.
(1) For buildings having a wall or walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the
sidewalk grade at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
(2) For buildings having a wall or walls adjoining more than one street, the average elevation
of the sidewalk grade at the centers of all walls adjoining the streets.
(3) For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface
of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
Any wall parallel to, or within ten (10) degrees of being parallel to and not more than fifteen (15) feet from a street
line is to be considered as adjoining the street. Sidewalk grades shall be as established by the Director of Public
Works.
Guesthouse. ·Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same premises with the
main building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises; such quarters having no kitchen
facilities or separate utilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.
10
Home occupation. Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental and secondary to use of the
premises for dwelling, and which is carried on wholly within a main building by a member of a family residing on
the premises; in connection with which there is no advertising other than an identification sign of not more than one
square foot in area; and no other display or storage of materials, or generation of substantial volumes of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or parking demand, or other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the
residential character of the building; and in connection with which no person outside the resident family is
employed, and no equipment used, other than that normally used in connection with a residence. A home
occupation shall not include beauty parlors, barbershops, or doctors' or dentists' offices for the treatment of patients,
or similar establishments offering services to the general public.
Hospital. A building or group of buildings, having room facilities for one or more abiding patients, used
for providing services for the in-patient, medical or surgical care of sick or injured humans, and which may include
related facilities, such as laboratories, out-patient department, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff
offices; proVided, however, that such related facility must be incidental and subordinate to the main use, and must be
an integral part of the hospital operation.
Hotel, motel. An establishment primarily engaged in the rental or more than sis (6) rooms on a daily basis.
As such, it is open to the public in contradistinction to a boardinghouse, rooming house, lodging house or apartment,
which are herein separately defined. The term "motel" includes "motor court," "motor hotel," or "motel lodge."
The term "hotel" includes "apartment hotel." A hotel or motel shall be deemed to include any establishment which
provides residential living accommodations for transients on a short-term basis.
Loading space. A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith providing for temporary
parking of motor vehicles while transferring, loading or unloading goods, merchandise, or products.
Lodging house. Same as "boardinghouse."
Lot. A portion or parcel of land devoted to a common use, or occupied by a principal building or group of
buildings devoted to common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to same, and
having its principal frontage on a public street or a private street of record.
Lot, area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
Lot, comer. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
Lot, depth of. The distance from the front street line to the reallot line, measured in the mean direction of
the side lot lines.
Lot, interior. A lot whose side line or lines do not abut upon any street.
Lot, through. An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
11
Lot of record. A lot which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the Hustings Court of the City of
Petersburg or the Circuit Court of Dinwiddie or Prince George County.
Lot, width. The distance between the side lot lines measured at the required front yard line.
Mini-storage facility, mini-warehouse, or self-storage facility. A facility consisting of individual, small,
self-contained units or areas within a building which are rented individually for storage, that is used or is designed to
be used for storing household goods, business records or supplies, vehicles or recreational vehicles.
Mobile home. An industrialized building unit which is eight (8) feet or more in width and thirty-two (32)
feet or more in length and is constructed on a chassis for towing to the point of used and designed to be used with or
without a foundation for occupancy as a dwelling when connected to required utilities; or two (2) or more such
units, separately towable, but designed to be joined together at the point of use to form a single dwelling, and which
is designed for removal to and installation or erection on other sites.
Mobile home park. Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling
sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations.
Mobile home space. A plot of ground within a mobile home par~ designed for accommodation for one
mobile home.
Mobile home subdivision. Any division of land into three (3) or more lots, for the intended purpose of
occupation of the resultant lots by mobile homes. Each lot to be occupied by no more than one mobile home at any
onetime.
Modular home or unit. An industrialized building assembly or system of building subassemblies, including
the necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and other service systems, manufactured off-site and
transported to the point of use for installation or erection, with or without other specified components, as a finished
building or as a part of a finished building, comprising two (2) or more industrialized building unites and not
designed for ready removal to or installation or erection on another site. For the purpose of this ordinance, a
modular unit shall be deemed a single-family dwelling and shall not be deemed a mobile home.
Nightclub. An establishment which provides entertainment, including but not limited to live bands, floor
shows, comedians, solo artists or dance floor for patrons, stays open after 11:00 p.m., and has a capacity exceeding
100 persons. A restaurant that provides a dance floor for its patrons shall be excluded from this definition, provided,
however, that the area devoted to dancing shall not exceed 250 square feet or ten percent of total floor area
(exclusive of food preparations and service area), whichever is greater. A private club shall be excluded from this
definition, provided attendance is limited to bonafide members of such club and bonafide guests of such members.
If admission privileges to a private club are sold or otherwise permitted to the general public at any time, then such
club shall be classified as a nightclub and shall conform to all applicable requirements of this ordinance.
12
Noncoriforming use. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of this
ordinance, or amendment thereto, which does not conform after the passage of this ordinance, or amendment
thereto, with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Parking space, off-street. An all-weather surfaced area, not in the street or alley, and having an area of not
less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet, exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved :fro the temporary
storage of one automobile, and connected with a street or alley by an all-weather surfaced driveway which affords
satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles.
Premises. A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
Private nursery school. A school operated primarily for the educational instruction of children three (3) to
five (5) years of age, at which [school] children three (3) or four (4) years of age do not attend in excess of four (4)
hours per day and children (5) years of age do not attend in excess of six and one-half(6 ~)hours per day.
Proffer. A condition voluntarily offered by a developer that limits or qualifies how the property in question
will be used or developed.
Rooming house. Same as ''boardinghouse."
Sign. A sign is any structure, or part thereo~ or any device attached to, painted on, or represented on a
building, fence or other structure, upon which is displayed or included any letter, work, model, banner, flag,
pennant, insignia, decoration, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature o~ an announcement,
direction, advertisement or other attention-directing device. A sign shall not include a similar structure or device
located within a building, except illuminated signs within show windows.
Sign area. That area within a line including the outer extremities of all letters, figures, characters and
delineations, or within a line, including the outer extremities of the :framework or background of the sign, whichever
line includes the larger area. The support for the sign background, whether it be columns, a pylon or a building, or
part thereo~ shall be included in the sign area.
Sign. flashing. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary
and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. Any revolving illuminated sign shall be considered a
flashing sign.
Sign. illuminated. Any sign designed to give forth artificial light, or designed to reflect light :from one or
more sources of artificial light erected to provide light for the sign.
Specified anatomical area. As used herein, specified anatomical areas means and includes any of the
following:
13
(1)
(2)
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus,
or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
Specified sexual activities. As used herein, specified sexual activities means and includes any of the
following:
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breasts;
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy;
Masturbations, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subdivisions
(1) through (3) of this subsection.
Stand-a/one used vehicle sales. A business which is not a part of and not on the same parcel as a
franchised new vehicle sales business, but which is subject to licensing by the Virginia Department of Motor
Vehicles as a vehicle dealership.
Stand-a/one vehicle repair shop. A business which is engaged in the provision of general repairs to motor
vehicles, including the serving or rebuilding of engines and transmissions, vehicle suspensions, vehicle electrical,
hydraulic, or fuel systems, or the provision of major overhauls and maintenance, or minor repairs and routine
maintenance to vehicles or parts thereof, and the washing or waxing of vehicles either through the use of automated
devices or by hand. The term "stand alone vehicle repair shop" shall not include the painting of vehicles, bodywork
or frame work performed on vehicles. Neither shall the term "stand alone vehicle repair shop" apply to the service
shops of franchised new vehicle dealerships licensed as such by the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles Dealer
Services Division.
Story. That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above it; or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling
next above it.
Story, half. A space under a sloping roof at the· top of a building, the floor of which is not more than two
(2) feet below the plate, shall be counted as a half-story when not more than sixty (60) percent of said floor area is
used for rooms, baths or toilets. A half-story containing an independent apartment or living quarters shall be
counted as a full story.
Street. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
14
Street line. A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
Structure. Anything, other than a fence, constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or
attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, advertising signs, billboards
and posterboards.
Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, including, but not limited to,
bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
Tourist court, auto court. Same as ''motel."
Tractor-trailer. A truck equipped with a coupling device to pull trailers, tankers, or semi-trailers, and
having a gross vehicular weight of more than five tons. The term "tractor-trailer" shall include, but not be limited to,
''tractor truck," and "semi-trailer."
Tractor-trailer service station or truck stop. Any establishment having pumps and storage at which fuels
and oils for tractor-trailers, trucks, or buses are dispensed or sold at retail. The facility may also have provisions for
the following; tractor trailer, truck, or bus parking; automobile fueling; repair or maintenance of automobiles, trucks,
buses, or tractor-trailers; sleeping accommodations; sanitation facilities; or sale of parts or accessories for
automobiles or tractor trailers, trucks or buses.
Trailer park, auto trailer camp or mobile home court. That area of land on which two (2) or more trailers
or mobile homes being used for living purposes are parked.
Travel trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed to be used for temporary
occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation use; with manufacturers' permanent identification, ''travel trailer,"
thereon and when factory-equipped for the road, being of any weight, provided its gross weight does not exceed
forty-five hundred ( 4,500) pounds; or being of any length provided its overall length does not exceed thirty-two (32)
feet.
Truck. A vehicle with a gross weight of more than five tons.
Vehicle demolisher. Any person whose business it is to crush, flatten, or otherwise reduce a vehicle to a
state where it can no longer be considered a vehicle.
Vehicle rebuilder. Any person who acquires and repairs, for use on the public highways, two or more
salvage vehicles within a twelve-month period.
Vehicle removal operator. Any person who acquires a vehicle for the purpose of reselling it to a
demolisher, scrap metal processor, or salvage dealer.
Vehicle salvage dealer. Any person who acquires any vehicle for the purpose of reselling any parts thereof.
15
Vehicle tow lot or storage lot. The use of a parcel or lot for the temporary storage of damaged, disabled,
inoperative, or impounded motor vehicles or machinery. Except as noted below, temporary storage shall be limited
to a maximum of thirty (30) days per vehicle unless the vehicle has been abandoned by its owner. Abandoned
vehicles may remain on the lot a maximum of ninety (90) days. Maximum storage times shall be extended up to six
(6) months if the owner submits certification to the zoning administrator and to the Bureau of Police that legal
obligations preclude removal of such vehicles. The term vehicle tow lot or storage lot shall not include junkyards;
nor any vehicle or machinery storage on the same property or portion of property as and directly related to any
permitted motor vehicle sales, service, repair and rental use, automobile service station, body shop or similar use and
permitted as part of that use. The term vehicle tow lot or storage lot shall include the storage of vehicles in
association with the operation of wreckers or similar vehicles, and the parking of wreckers whether or not attached
to wrecked, damaged, disabled, inoperative, or impounded vehicles.
Yard. An open space, other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
Yard. front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines; and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the street line and the main building, or any projections thereof: other than the
projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, terraces, or uncovered porches. On comer lots, the front yard
shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.
Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot lines, and measured between the
rear lot lines and the rear of the main building or any projection other than steps, unenclosed porches, or entrance
ways.
Yard. side. A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot; extending from the front lot line
to the rear yard; and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and side of the main building, or
any projection thereof.
16
Art. 4, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING
ARTICLE 4. GENERAL PROVISIONS,
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT MAPS
Section 1. [Districts established.]
Art. 4, § 2
In order to regulate and redistrict the location of trades and industries, and the
location of buildings erected or altered for specific uses; to regulate and limit the
height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered; to regulate
and limit population density and the intensity of the use of lot areas; and to
regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts and other open spaces within and
surrounding such buildings; the City of Petersburg is hereby divided into districts,
of which there shall be nineteen (19) in number, known as:
"A" Agricultural District
"R-IA" Single-Family Residence District
"R-1" Single-Family Residence District
"R-2" Single-Family Residence District
"RMH'' Residential Mobile Homes District
"R-3" Two-Family Residence District
"R -4" Multiple Dwelling District
"R-5" Multiple Dwelling District
"R -6" High Rise District
"RTH'' Residential Town House District
"RB" Office-Apartment District
"B-1" Shopping Center District
"B-2" General Commercial District
"B-3" Central Commercial District
"M-1" Light Industrial District
"M-2" Heavy Industrial District
"MXD-1" Mixed Use District
"MXD-2" Mixed Use District
"PUD" Planned Unit Development District
- Editor's note - This section has been updated, at the editor's discretion, to reflect the current number of zoning
districts and to list the "MXD-1" and MXD-2" districts established by Ord. No. 82-111, enacted Dec. 7, 1982.
Section 2. (Zoning maps incorporated.]
Such land, and the district classification thereof, shall be shown on the map
designated as the "Zoning District Map of Petersburg,
Supp.No.2
17
Art. 4, § 2 PETERSBURG CODE ART.4, §2
Virginia," dated and signed by the mayor and the city clerk of Petersburg upon
adoption. lbis zoning district map, and all notations, dimensions, references and
symbols shown thereon pertaining to such districts, shall be as much a part of this
ordinance as if
18
Art. 4, § 2 APPENDIX A-ZONING ART .. 4, §4
fully described herein and shall be filed as part of this ordinance by the clerk of
the City of Petersburg. Said map shall be available for public inspection in the
office of the city clerk, and any later alterations of this map, adopted by
amendment as provided in this ordinance, shall be similarly dated, filed and made
available for public reference.
Section 3. [Publication of zoning district designations; availability of copies of
map.]
The city shall cause to be published, no later than ninety (90) days following
adoption of this ordinance, the official zoning district names and designations for
the City of Petersburg. In each calendar year thereafter, if there have been any
changes in the permitted uses, zoning district boundaries, zoning regulations and
classifications in the preceding year, such map shall also be published no later
than March 31, reflecting all such changes as of December 31 of the preceding
year.
Any person desiring a copy of said official zoning district map or a copy of
official zoning ordinance shall pay one dollar ($1.00) for each map or ten dollars
($10.00) for each ordinance, to the appropriate city official. Upon written request,
all future amendments shall be furnished at cost of printing.
Section 4. Interpretation of district boundaries.
(1) A district name or letter-number combination shown on the district maps
indicates that the regulations pertaining to the district designated by that name or
letter-number combination extend throughout the whole area in the municipality
bounded by the district boundary lines within which such name or letter-number
combination is shown or indicated, except as otherwise provided by this section.
(2) Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the accompanying map and made a part of this ordinance,
the following rules shall apply:
(a) In cases where a boundary line is given a position within a street or alley
or nonnavigable stream, it shall be deemed to be in the center of the street,
alley or stream and if the actual
Supp.No.l
19
Art.4,§4 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 4, § 4.1
location of such street, alley or stream varies slightly from the location as
shown on the district map, then the actual location shall control.
(b) In cases where a boundary line is shown as being located in specific
distance from a street line or other physical feature, this distance shall
control.
(c) In cases where a boundary line is shown adjoining or coincident with a
railroad, it shall be deemed to be in the center of the railroad right-of-way,
and distances measured from a railroad shall be measured from the center
of the designated track.
(d) Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the
property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines; and where the
districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this
ordinance are bounded approximately by lot lines, said lot lines shall be
construed to be the boundary of such districts, unless said boundaries are
otherwise indicated on the map or by ordinance.
Section 4.1. [Uses to conform to district regulations; exceptions.]
Except as hereinafter provided:
(1) No land may be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in
which it is located.
(2) No buildings shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved
or structurally altered, nor shall any building, or part thereof, be used,
except for a use permitted in the district in which the building is located.
(3) No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which the building is located.
(4) No building shall be erected, enlarged or structurally altered to the extent
of increasing the floor area by fifty (50) per cent or more, except in
conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of the
district in which the building is located.
Supp.No.l
20
Art. 4, § 4.1 APPENDIX A- ZONING Art. 4-A, § 2
(5) No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered, except in conformity with the floor-lot ratio
regulations of the district in which it is located.
( 6) The minimum yards, parking space and open spaces, including lot area per
family, required by this ordinance for each and every building existing at
the time of the passage of this ordinance, or for any building hereafter
erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as required yard or
open space for any other building; nor shall any lot area be reduced below
the requirements of this ordinance.
(7) Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on
a lot, as herein defmed and, except as hereinafter provided, in no case shall
there be more than one main building on one lot.
ARTICLE 4- A. "A" AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
- REGULATIONS
Section 1. Purpose.
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "A" Agricultural District.
The purpose of this district is to provide for the orderly growth and development
of relatively large parcels of undeveloped land, and the protection of activities
generally considered rural in nature, i.e., crop, dairy or tree fanning, the raising of
cattle and poultry, and other activities normally compatible with rural or
agricultural surroundings.
Section 2. Use regulations.
Any building to be erected or land to be used shall be for one or more of the
following uses:
(1) Single-fa,mily dwellings.
(2) Accessory buildings for residential purposes, as defined, the rear yards
only; however, garages or other accessory structures attached to the main
building shall be considered part of the main building. No accessory
building may be closer than five ( 5) feet to any party lot line. Accessory
buildings and uses customarily incident
Supp. No.1
21
Art 4-A, §2 . PETERSBURG CODE Art.4-A, § 2
to any use permitted by this section, such as servants quarters,
greenhouses, and workshop; provided, that none shall be conducted for ·
gain; provided, further, accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty (30)
percent of the area of the rear yard; provided, still further, that any
accessory building to be erected containing an area in excess of one
thousand (1,000) square feet shall be referred to the city planning
commission, which commission shall make its recommendations to the
council. Prior to the recommendation thereof, the planning commission
shall give notice and hold a public hearing on such use, after notice is
require by article 28 of this ordinance. The council shall likewise hold a
public hearing after proper notice, before making its determination as to
whether the property can or cannot be used for such purposes.
(3) Public and nonprofit organizations uses, such as game preserves,
playgrounds and parks.
( 4) Community clubs and community-operated playgrounds, parks and
nonprofit little theater operations, and similar recreational facilities,
including golf courses.
(5) Agriculture, including accessory buildings and uses incidental thereto.
(6) The raising of cattle and/or poultry.
(7) Commercial forestry operations in the nature of tree farms, not including
sawmills.
(8) Public utilities, and poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters
and other facilities necessary for the provision of maintenance of public
utilities, as provided in article 23.
(9) The location and occupancy of a single mobile home; provided, that the
following conditions are met:
(a) That the parcel which the mobile home is to occupy is located entirely
within an area zoned as agricultural ("A");
(b) That a property owner residing on the premises in a permanent home
wishes to place said mobile home on
Supp.No.l
22
Art. 4-A, § 2 APPENDIX A-ZONlNG Art. 4-A, § 6
!
this property in order to maintain his or her immediate family or fulltime
agricultural employee. Immediate family shall be defmed as
lineal relatives of the applicant and his brothers or sisters;
(c) That the mobile home and its site satisfy all sanitary and structural
requirements deemed applicable by the city building inspector and the
state health department;
(d) That the mobile home has received a conditional use permit from the
board of zoning appeals.
Section 3. Sign regulations.
In agricultural district, sign regulations shall confirm to article 21 of this
ordinance.
Section 4. Area, frontage and width regulations.
For.permitted uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required
area for any such use shall be approved by the state health department. The city
council may require a greater area, if considered necessary by the state health
department.
Section 5. Setback regulations.
Buildings shall be located thirty-five (35) feet or more from any street rightof-
way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width, or fifty-five (55) feet or more
from the center line of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width.
This shall be known as the "setback line"; provided, no building shall be required
to setback a distance greater than the setback line reserved by the one (of two (2)
existing buildings on the immediately adjoining lots on either side) which is the
further removed from the street. Also see article 25, Supplementary height, area
and bulk regulations, section 3.3.
Section 6. Yard regulations.
In open spaces, the yard regulations shall be as follows:
(1) Side: The minimum side yard shall be ten (10) per cent, and the total
width of the two (2) required side yards shall be the total of the side yard
widths is more than thirty (30) feet, one of such side yards need not be
more than ten (10) feet in width.
Supp. No.1
23
Art. 4-A, § 6 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 4-A, § 9
(2) Rear: Each main building shall have a minimum rear yard of thirty (30)
feet.
Section 7. Height regulations.
In open spaces, the height regulations shall be as follows: Buildings may be
erected up to forty-five (45) feet in height from grade, except that church spires,
belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, silos, chimneys and flues are exempt.
Parapet walls may be erected up to four ( 4) feet above the height of the building
on which the walls are constructed.
Section 8. Parking regulations.
Parking regulations shall conform to article 19 of this ordinance.
Section 9. Special requirements.
(1) No subdivision development shall be permitted in areas zoned agricultural.
Any area sought to be subdivided, that is presently zoned agricultural, shall first
be rezoned to a residential classification.
(2) Any area* to be classified as agricultural shall contain a minimum
contiguous acreage of eight (8) acres.
24
Art. 5, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 5, § 2
ARTICLE 5. "R-lA" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "R-1A" Single-Family
Residence District. The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family
residential development of relatively more spacious character, generally in
outlying areas, together with such public buildings, schools, churches, public
recreational facilities and accessory uses as may be necessary or area normally
compatible with residential surroundings. The district is located to protect
existing development of this character and contains vacant land considered
appropriate for such development in the future.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Farm, truck garden, orchard, or nursery for growing or propagation of
plants, trees and shrubs; including temporary stands for seasonal sales of
products raised on the premises; but not including the raising for sale of
birds, bees, rabbits, or other anima1s, fish or other creatures, to such an
extent as to be objectionable to surrounding residences by reason of odor,
dust, noise, or other factors; and provided no retail or wholesale business
office or store is permanently maintained on the premises;
Single-family dwellings;
Churches and parish halls, temples, convents and monasteries;
Colleges and schools, public or private, having a curriculum and conditions
under which teaching is conducted equivalent to a public school and
institutions of higher learning;
(4.1) Private nursery school.
*"Area" is defined here as one or more contiguous parcels, or parts thereof: falling under the same zoning
classification district
Supp. No.I
25
Art. 5, § 2 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 5, § 2
(5) Home occupations;
(6) Nonprofit libraries or museums and art galleries;
(7) Public parks, playgrounds, golf courses (except miniature golf courses,
putting greens, driving ranges and similar activities operated as a business);
nonprofit, nongovernmental public recreation an4 community buildings;
(8) Railroad rights-of-way, including a strip of land with tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operations, but not including passenger stations, freight
terminals, switching and classification yards, repair shops, roundhouses,
power houses, interlocking towers and fueling, sanding and watering
stations;
(9) Temporary buildings, the uses of which are incidental to construction
operations or sale of lots during development being conducted on the same
or adjoining tract or subdivision, and which shall be removed upon
completion or abandonment of such construction, or upon the expiration of
a period of two (2) years from the time of erection of such temporary
buildings, whichever is sooner;
(10) Accessory building and uses including, but not limited to, accessory private
garages, servants' quarters, guest houses, swimming pools, home barbeque
grills, customary church bulletin boards or identification signs not
exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area for permitted public and
semipublic uses, accessory storage, and accessory off-street parking and
loading spaces. (Ord. No. 82-99, 11-16-82)
Supp. No.2
26
Art. 5, § 3 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 5, § 7
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
Height, area and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of article
22, which chart, and all notifications and requirements shown therein, shall be a
part of this ordinance and have the same force and effect as if all the notifications
and requirements set forth therein were fully set forth or described therein.
Section 4. Off-street parking regulations.
The parking regulations for permitted uses are contained in article 19.
Section 5. Off-street loading regulations.
The off-street loading regulations for permitted uses are contained in article
20.
Section 6. Supplementary use regulations.
Supplementary use regulations are contained in article 23.
Section 7. Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations are contained in article 25.
27
Art. 6, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE
ARTICLE 6. "R-1" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
Art. 6, § 4
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "R-1" Single-Family
Residence District. The purpose of this district is to provide for single-family
residential development of relatively spacious character; together with such public
buildings, schools, churches, public recreational facilities and accessory uses as
may be necessary or are normally compatible with residential surroundings. The
district is located to protect existing development of high character, and contains
vacant land considered appropriate for such development in the future.
Section 2. Use regulations.
The use regulations are the same as those in "R-IA" Single-Family Residence
District.
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
Height, area and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of article
22. .
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
28
Art. 7, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING
ARTICLE 7. "R-2" SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
Art. 7, § 4
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "R-21" Single-Family
Residence District. The purpose of this district is to improve for single-family
residential facilities and accessory uses, as may be necessary, or are normally
compatible with residential surroundings. The district is located to protect
existing development of this character, and contains vacant land considered
appropriate for such development in the future.
Section 2. Use regulations.
The use regulations are the same as those contained in the "R-IA" SingleFamily
Residence District.
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
Height, area and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of article
22.
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regul~tions;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
Supp.No.l
29
Art. 7-A, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 7-A, § 2
ARTICLE 7-A. "RMH" RESIDENTIAL MOBILE HOMES
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
The purpose of this district is to provide for well-designed mobile home parks
or subdivisions, and to establish basic standards which will determine the
character of this land use and its effect on surrounding properties. Single-family
residential development is permitted as an alternative to mobile home park use.
Section 2. Permitted uses.
A building, or land, shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the "R-1" Single-Family Residential District, subject
to the lot size, yard, height and other requirements of that district.
(2) Mobile homes subdivision, subject to the lot size, yard, height and other
requirements of the "R-1" Single-Family Residential District, and the
subdivision ordinance of the City of Petersburg.
(3) Mobile home park, provided:
(a) That the mobile home park shall comply with all sanitary and other
requirements prescribed by law or regulation;
(b) That the number and location of access drives shall be subject to
approval by the traffic commission, and controlled for traffic safety
and protection of surrounding properties; that no mobile home space
shall be designed for direct access to a street outside the boundaries of
the park; and that the interior access drives shall be properly lighted
and at least fifty (50) feet in width, hard surfaced and maintained at
least twenty-four (24) feet in width in accordance with applicable state
highway specifications and ordinances;
(c) That the topography of the site be such as to facilitate rapid drainage,
and that adequate drainage facilities be provided;
Supp. No.1
30
Art. 7-A, § 2 APPEND IS A- ZONING Art. 7-A, § 2
(d) The minimum width and/or depth of the mobile home park shall be
two hundred (200) feet. The minimum total area of the park shall be
ten (1 0) acres. Any extension of an existing park must bring the total
area to [at least] ten (10) acres;
(e) All utility lines shall be underground, including electrical wiring, cable
television and telephone lines;
(f) The mobile home park shall be surrounded by a landscaped or wooded
strip of open space at least fifty (50) feet wide along the street frontage
with an arterial street or major highway, and at least twenty-five (25)
feet wide along all other lot lines or street frontage;
(g) Each mobile home site shall be provided with individual water and
sewer connections to central sewer and water systems. Such water and
sewer facilities shall be subject to the approval of, and inspection by,
the public works department, department of inspections, and the state
health department, and may be either public facilities or· privately
owned sewer and water systems, but in either case shall be designed to
serve the entire mobile home park;
(h) Each mobile home site shall be provided with electrical outlets
installed in accordance with the National Electrical Code.
(4) No existing mobile home park shall be enlarged or extended, unless the
area to be enlarged or extended is made to conform to all requirements for
a new mobile home park, and until recommended approval by the traffic
commission and the planning commission.
Supp. No.I
31
Art. 7-~ § 3 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 7-~ § 4
Section 3. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) For uses permitted in the ''R-1" Single-Family District, those accessory
uses are also permitted in the ''RMH'' Residential Mobile Home District.
(2) For individual mobile home spaces, one awning or porch an done storage
building; provided that all the materials and construction methods are
acceptable and are in accordance with sound building practices; and that the
finished product does not extend to closer than five (5) feet of the boundaries
of the individual mobile home space.
(3) For the mobile home park, buildings used for management headquarters,
recreational facilities, community building, toilets, showers, coin-operated
laundry facilities and vending machines, and other uses and structures
customarily incidental to operation of a mobile home park, are authorized,
provided:
(a) Such establishments and parking areas primarily related to their operations
shall not occupy more than ten (10) per cent of the area of the park;
(b) Such establishments shall be restricted in their use primarily to occupants
ofthepark;
(c) Such establishments shall present no visible evidence of their commercial
character which would attract customers primarily other than occupants of
the park.
Section 4. Permitted signs.
The following nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated signs are permitted,
subject to the general sign regulations of article 21:
Supp.No.l
32
Art. 7-A, § 4 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 7-A, § 7
(1) Any sign permitted in the "R-1" Single-Family Residential District;
(2) A sign limited in area to thirty-two (32) square feet, giving the name
and/or address or management of a mobile home park.
Section 5. Conditional uses.
The following uses may be permitted as conditional uses, if approved by the
city council, in accordance with the procedures, guides and standards of article
23:
(1) Any conditional use permitted in the "R-1" Single-Family Residential
District.
Section 6. Uses permitted as special exceptions.
The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions, if approved by the
board of zoning appeals, in accordance with the procedures, guides and standards
of article 27:
(1) Any special exception permitted in the "R-1" Single-Family Residential
District.
Section 7. Lot size requirements.
(1) For uses permitted in the "R-1" Single-Family Residential District, the lot
size requirements are the same as for that district.
(2) In a mobile home subdivision, the lot size requirements are the same as in
the "R-1" Single-Family Residential District.
(3) In a mobile home park:
(a) The minimum area for a mobile home site for parking one mobile home
shall be four thousand (4,000) square feet, with no width less than forty
( 40) feet, and with comers of each site visibly marked and numbered by a
permanent marker. The width of the site shall be measured perpendicular
to the side lot line. No more than one mobile home shall be parked on any
one site.
(b) In addition to the requirement of subsection (a) above, an open space, or
spaces, accessible to all mobile home occupants and suitable for use as a
Supp. No.1
33
Art. 7-A, § 7 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 7-A, § 10
Recreational land area shall be provided within the mobile home park, at a
ratio of a minimum of one hundred (1 00) square feet of recreational area
per mobile home space in such park, provided that no recreation area shall
contain less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
Section 8. Yard requirements.
(1) For uses permitted in the "R-1" Single-Family Residential District, the
yard requirements are the same as for that district.
(2) In a mobile home subdivision, the yard requirements are the same as the
"R-1" Single-Family Residential District.
(3) In a mobile home park, no mobile home shall be parked closer than fifteen
(15) feet to another mobile home or service building, and no part of a mobile
home shall extend closer than seven and one-half (7 ~)feet to the boundaries of
the individual mobile home site. There shall be a minimum setback of fifteen
(15) feet from the front service street.
Section 9. Height requirements.
(1) Single-family dwellings and all other structures except mobile homes and
those specifically exempted in article 23, maximum height, two an done-half (2
·~)stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
(2) Mobile homes, park or subdivision, maximum height, fifteen (15) feet.
Section 10. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
(1) At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on each mobile
home site in a mobile 'home park and, in addition, off-street parking spaces for
automobiles shall be provided in the ratio of one-half (112) space per mobile
home, in locations convenient to groups of homes. No parking shall be permitted
on the street.
(2) Additional off-street parking and loading requirements are contained in
article 23.
Supp.No.l
34
Art. 8, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 8, § 4
ARTICLE 8. "R-3" TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "R-3" Two-Family
Residence District. The purpose of this district is to maintain a generally spacious
residential environment, but at the same time permit a variety of housing types.
Population density and height of buildings are low enough to be compatible with
neighboring single-family development. Permitted community facilities are the
same as for the one-family districts.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the "R-IA" Single-Family Residence District;
(2) Institutions of an educational or religious nature;
(3) Two-family dwellings
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
Height, area and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of article
22.
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
Supp. No.1
35
Art. 9, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 9, § 4
ARTICLE 9. "R-4" MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "R-4" Multiple Dwelling
District. This district provides for medium-density, multiple-family residence,
and is usable for construction of garden-type apartments in appropriate locations.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the "R-IA" Single-Family Residence District;
(2) Two-family dwelling;
(3) Multiple-family dwelling or group of dwellings designed to be operated as
a unit by an individual, partnership, corporation or cooperative;
( 4) Off-street parking of private automobiles in connection with any use
permitted in this section.
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
The height, area and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of
article 22 of this ordinance.
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
Supp. No.1
36
Art. 10, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONlNG
ARTICLE 10. "R-5" MULTIPLE DWELLING
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
Art. 10, § 3
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the ''R-5" Multiple Dwelling
District. This district provides for the highest density multiple-family residence,
either in new construction or for conversion of existing dwellings to apartments,
in older sections of the city.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the "R-1" Two-Family Residence District and the
"R-3" Two-Family Residence District;
(2) Multiple-family dwellings;
(3) Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, and lodges excepting those the chief
activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business;
(4) Parking areas (Ground level);
(5) Accessory buildings and uses not otherwise prohibited in this section;
(6) Nonprofit religious, educational and philanthropic institutions.
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
The height, are and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of
article 22 of this ordinance; except:
(1) Requirements for lot area per family shall not apply to dormitories,
fraternities or sororities where no cooking facilities are provided in
individuai·rooms or apartments.
Supp.No.l
37
Art. 10, § 4 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 11, § 2
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations, except that required off-street
parking shall be provided in the rear of such buildings or in the
portion of the side yards except adjacent to a street, if a comer lot,
lying to the rear of extensions of the front line of such building;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
ARTICLE 11. "R-6" ffiGH RISE DISTRICT
REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations governing the use of buildings
or premises in the ''R-6" High Rise District.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the "RB" Office Apartment DiStricts set out in article 13
of this ordinance; ·
(2) Incidental uses in multiple dwellings and office buildings for the convenience
of the occupants thereof, including restaurants, beauty parlors, and
barbershops; provided, that there is no advertising sign, no show window, or
no entrance to such place of business, except from the inside of the building;
(3) Not more than two (2) individual signs or nameplates having a total area of
five ( 5) square feet or less shall be permitted on any one building. Such signs
shall be attached flat against the building wall or on an awning or canopy
affixed to the front of the building, but there shall be no illuminated sign nor
any display or other form of advertisement.
Supp.No.l
38
Art. 11, § 2 APPENDIX A- ZONING Art. 11, § 3
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
(1) Height. No building shall exceed one hundred fifty (15) feet in height.
(2) Front yard There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than
fifteen (15) feet; provided, that no building or part there of shall penetrate an
inclined plane rising from the street line and extending over the lot at an
inclination of one foot horizontal for each four ( 4) feet vertical.
(3) Side yard
(a) Buildings used exclusively for non residential purposes, with a height of
three (3) stories or less, are not required to provide side yards;
(b) Buildings used, wholly or in part, for residential purposes, with a height of
three (3) stories or less, shall have a side yard as required in the "R-5"
Multiple Dwelling District;
(c) Buildings more than three (3) stories in height shall have a sideyard on
each side of the building often (10) feet for the first three (3) stories. All
parts of the building above the third story shall be set back a minimum of
one foot for each story above the third; except, that no setback shall be
required above the third story along the side street of a comer lot.
(4) Rear yard Except as provided in article 23 of this ordinance, there shall
be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet.
(5) Unobstructed open space. Buildings more than three (3) stories in height
shall cover not more than fifty (50) per cent of the area.
( 6) Floor area.
(a) The maximum permitted floor area, as hereinafter defined, shall not
exceed seven (7) times the lot area upon which the building is constructed.
Supp. No.1
39
Art. 11, § 3 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 11, § 4
(b) The floor area of a building," or buildings, is the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of all buildings on the lot, measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls. In calculating floor area, the
following need not be included.
1. Uncovered steps;
2. Attic space providing structural head room of less than seven (7) feet,
six (6) inches; ,
3. Terraces, breezeways, porte cocheres and open porches;
4. Enclosed automobile parking space provided for the use of occupants
of the building, in basements, or lower stories of the building;
5. Basement or ground floor areas used for storage or the housing of
mechanical equipment;
6. Areas of penthouse for the housing of elevator machinery, cooling
tanks or similar equipment.
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
Supp.No. I
40
Art. 12, § 1 APPENDIX A- ZONING
ARTICLE 12. "RTH" RESIDENTIAL TOWN HOUSE
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
Art. 12, § 3
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "RTH" Residential Town
House District.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the "R-IA" Single-Family Residence District;
(2) Town houses for sale;
(3) Swimming pools, recreational and athletic facilities, community buildings
and other similar related improvements for the common use of occupants
of the development, and their guests.
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
The height, area and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of
article 22 of this ordinance, especially the following:
(1) Area and density. The area and density of development of town houses
for sale shall not exceed twenty (12) units per acre;
(2) Frontage.
(a) A minimum lot frontage, measured at the setback line, of fifteen (15)
feet shall be provided;
(b) All town house units, except end units and those on comer lots, shall
occupy the full width of the lot on which they are constructed;
(c) Town house lots may front on a dedicated street or public access
easements containing roadways, walkways or both;
(3) Front yards. The front yard setback for town houses shall be a minimum
of fifteen (15) feet from project drives and walkways, twenty-five (25) feet
minimum from secondary residential streets, and thirty-five (35) feet from
all other streets;
(4) Side yards. Town houses on ends of groups shall have a minimum side
yard of fifteen (15) feet, and for town houses at comers, the side yard shall
be a minimum of twenty (20) feet;
41
(5) Rear yards. Town houses shall have a minimum rear yard of thirty (30)
feet;
(6) Building height. Town houses shall have a maximum building height of
thirty-five (35) feet.
Section 4. Off-street parking regulations.
There shall be a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces provided for
each dwelling unit in the town house development. Required parking shall be
provided on individual lots, or within common parking areas, or along common
drives, or on internal dedicated streets. If parking is provided in front or rear
yards, each space shall be at least twenty (20) feet in depth, and located in such
manner that no part of any parked vehicles will extend over the property line.
Section 5. Architectural treatment.
There shall be at least three (3}, but no more than twelve (12) town house
dwelling units continuously connected. If streets, drives or walkways do not
intervene, there shall be an open space of at least thirty (30) feet between [one
series of town houses and] the next series of town house units.
Not more than four (4) abutting town houses shall have the same, or
essentially the same, architectural facades and trea1ment of facing materials, and
not more than three (3) abutting town houses shall have the same front and rear
setbacks. Such variations may be achieved by variations in colors, material
textures or sculptural effect. Minimum setback offset shall be one foot.
Supp.No.l
42
Art. 12, § 6 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 12, § 8
Section 6. Party wall.
A party wall shall separate each town house unit, and have a minimum
nominal thickness of eight (8) inches, and be constructed of noncombustible
material, and said wall shall be carried tightly to the underside of the roof
construction.
Section 7. Accessory buildings.
Accessory buildings may be located in rear yards only, and shall not occupy
over twenty-five (25) percent thereof, and shall be located not less than eight (8)
feet from a rear lot line, nor closer than three (3) feet to a side lot line.
Section 8. Common areas.
In the event common areas are provided, which are not contained in lots or
streets conveyed to individual owners, said common areas shall be ffiaintained by
and be the sole responsibility of the developer-owner of the town house
development, until such time as the developer-owner conveys such areas to a
nonprofit corporate owner, whose members shall be all of the individual owners
of town houses in the town house development. Said land shall be conveyed to,
and be held by, said nonprofit corporate owner of the individual town house lots
in the town house development. In the event of such conveyance by the
developer-owner to a nonprofit corporate owner, deed restrictions and covenants,
in form and substance satisfactory to the city attorney of the City of Petersburg,
Virginia, shall provide, among other things, that any assessments, charges and
costs of the maintenance of such common areas shall constitute a pro rata lien
upon the individual town house lots, inferior in lien and dignity only to taxes and
bonafide duly recorded first deeds of trust on each town house lot.
Supp. No. I
43
Art. 13, § 1 APPENDIX A- ZONING
ARTICLE 13. "RB" OFFICE-APARTMENT
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
Art. 13, § 2
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "RB" Office-Apartment
District. This district is intended to encourage office development of high
character, in attractive surroundings, with types of uses and exterior indication of
these uses so controlled as to be generally compatible with single-family or
multiple-family dwellings, conveniently located within or adjacent to the district.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the "R-5" Multiple Dwelling District;
(2) Business and professional offices, and office buildings and research
laboratories; provided however, that there shall be no advertising sign or
device on the lot, on the building, or in or on any of the exterior doors or
windows of the building, except for each business or professional office
occupying the building, there may by one advertising sign not exceeding two
(2) square feet in area attached to the exterior of the building; that no building
may be constructed with, or altered to produce a store front, show window or
display window; there shall be no display from windows or doors and no
storage of merchandise in the building or on the premises; there shall be no
machinery or equipment, other than machinery or equipment customarily
found in professional or business offices, used or stored in the building or on
the lot; that required off-street parking shall be provided in the rear of such
buildings or in the portion of the side yards, except adjacent to a street, if a
comer lot, lying to the rear of extensions of the front line of such b,oilding.
(3) Clinics, including a pharmacist's shop for dispensing of drugs and medical
supplies primarily to patients or occupants of the building; provided, however,
there shall be no entrance to such shop except from inside the building; and
further provided, that there be no exterior signs advertising such shop, except
as provided in subsection (2) above;
Supp.No.1
44
Art. 13, § 2 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 13, § 2
(2) Business and professional offices, and office buildings and research
laboratories; provided however, that there shall be no advertising sign or
device on the lot, on the building, or in or on any of the exterior doors or
windows of the building, except for each business or professional office
occupying the building, there may by one advertising sign not exceeding two
(2) square feet in area attached to the exterior of the building; that no building
may be constructed with, or altered to produce a store front, show window or
display window; there shall be no display from windows or doors and no
storage of merchandise in the building or on the premises; there shall be no
machinery or equipment, other than machinery or equipment customarily
found in professional or business offices, used or stored in the building or on
the lot; that required off-street parking shall be provided in the rear of such
buildings or in the portion of the side yards, except adjacent to a street, if a
comer lot, lying to the rear of extensions of the front line of such building.
(3) Clinics, including a pharmacist's shop for dispensing of drugs and medical
supplies primarily to patients or occupants of the building; provided, however,
there shall be no entrance to such shop except from inside the building; and
further provided, that there be no exterior signs advertising such shop, except
as provided in subsection (2) above;
( 4) Studio for an artist, photographer, sculptor, or musician, including teaching of
art, music, dancing, or other artistic instructions; provided, however, that there
shall be no advertising sign or device on the lot, or on the building, or in or on
any of the doors or windows of the building, except for each permitted use
occupying the building, there may be one advertising sign not exceeding two
square feet in area attached to the exterior of the building. No building may
be constructed or altered to produce a store front, show window or display
window; there shall be no display from windows or doors and no storage of
merchandise in the building or on the premises; no machinery or equipment
other than machinery or equipment customarily accessory to permitted uses;
and further provided, that there shall be created no adverse effect on adjacent
or neighborhood properties by reason of dust, odor, vibration, glare or noise;
(5) Accessory buildings and uses not otherwise prohibited in this section.
45
Art. 13, § 3 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 13, § 4
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
The height, area and bulk requirements will be as set forth in the chart of
article 222, except as follows:
(1) Requirements for lot area per family shall no apply to dormitories,
fraternities or sororities, where no cooking facilities are provided in
individual rooms or apartments.
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
ARTICLE 14. "B-1" SHOPPING CENTER
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations of the "B-1" Shopping Center
District. The purpose of this district is to provide for attractive and efficient retail
shopping facilities of integrated design, in appropriate locations to serve
residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the district shall be laid out and
developed as a unit, according to an approved plan, so that the purpose of the
district may be accomplished.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises may be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Retail sale of merchandise, services, recreational areas, parking areas and
other facilities, as set forth and described in this section and ordinarily
accepted as shopping center uses;
(2) Uses permitted in the project area, according to the residential district
regulations in force prior to the establishment of
Supp. No.1
46
Section 5. Special conditions.
The plan for the shopping center district shall show the requirements set forth
in this article and shall include the width of right-of-way, and pavement of
existing streets; the district shall be developed according to those requirements.
In addition, it is hereby specified and required that:
(1) The aggregate plan area of all buildings proposed shall not exceed thirty
(30) per cent of the entire lot area of the project; all buildings shall be set
back not less than thirty (30) feet from all street lines adjoining the
shopping center site;
(2) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the ration of at least one
parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, in the
building of the shopping center;
(3) Service drives or other areas shall be provided for off-street loading, and
in such a way that in the process of loading or unloading, no truck will
block the passage of other vehicles on the service drive, or extend into any
other public or private drive or street used for traffic circulation;
(4) The drives, parking areas, loading areas, and walks shall be paved with
hard surface material meeting applicable specifications of the director of
public works;
(5) Any part of the project area not used for buildings or other structures,
loading and access-ways shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubs or
pedestrian walks;
(6) The shopping center buildings shall be designed and built as a whole,
unified and single project; but may, however, be built in stages, in
accordance with a construction timing schedule approved by the city
council. If there is not substantial compliance with the approved schedule,
the city council may, after expiration of a period of three (3) years from
the date of final approval of the district in question, study conditions and
changes of conditions in the area, and after report by the commission, the
city council may, by ordinance, reduce the size or eliminate the district
from the district map.
Supp. No.1
48
Art. 14, §I PETERSBURG CODE
ARTICLE 14. "B-1" SHOPPING CENTER
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
Art. 14, § 5
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations of the "B-1" Shopping Center
District. The purpose of this district is to provide for attractive and efficient retail
shopping facilities of integrated design, in appropriate locations to serve
residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the district shall be laid out and
developed as a unit, according to an approved plan, so that the purpose of the
district may be accomplished.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises may be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Retail sale of merchandise, services, recreational areas, parking areas and
other facilities, as set forth and described in this section· and ordinarily
accepted as shopping center uses;
(2) Uses permitted in the project area, according to the residential district
regulations in force prior to the establishment of the shopping center
district on the tract in question as the only alternative in case the district is
not used for the purpose for which it was especially intended, namely a
shopping center.
Section 3. Ownership control.
In order that the purpose of this district shall be realized, the land and the
buildings and appurtenant facilities shall be in a single ownership, or under
management or supervision of a central authority; or they shall be subject to such
other supervisory lease or ownership control as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this ordinance relating to "B-1" Shopping Center Districts.
Section 4. Procedure.
The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than
two (2) acres may submit a plan for the use and development of all or part of the
tract for the purposes of, and meeting the requirements set forth in this article, as a
separate proposal or as a part of a planned unit development as set forth in article
26. Public hearings shall be held in accordance with procedures in article 28.
Any recommendations from the commission to the city council shall be
accompanied by a report, stating the reasons for such recommendation and
whether the application meets the requirements of the "B-1" Shopping Center
District, as set forth in this article.
47
Art. 14, § 6 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 14, § 6
Section 6. Additional requirements by the commission.
Before recommending approval of a shopping center district, the commission
may make reasonable additional requirements as to utilities, drainage,
landscaping, lighting, signs and advertising devices, screening, accessways, curb
cuts, traffic control, height of buildings, to protect adjoining residentially zoned
lots or residential uses. The plans for the district shall be amended in accordance
with these requirements, before being submitted to the city council. If required by
the city council, a surety bond shall be flled for, or deposited in escrow with the
city, in a sum sufficient to insure completion of special requirements, as may be
imposed by the council.
Supp. No. 12
49
Art. 15, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE
ARTICLE 15. "B-2" GENERAL COMMERCIAL
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
ART. 15,§2
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "B-2" General
Commercial District. The purpose of this district is to provide sufficient space
inappropriate locations for all types of commercial and miscellaneous service
activities, particularly along certain existing major streets where a general mixture
of commercial and .service activity now exists, but which uses are not
characterized by extensive warehousing, frequent heavy trucking activity, open
storage of material, or the nuisance factors of dust, odor and noise associated with
·manufacturing. (Ord. No. 94-140, 11-15-94)
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Any use permitted in the "B-1" Shopping Center District and "RB"
Office-Apartment District;
(2) Amusement place in an enclosed building, auditorium or theater,
except open air drive-in theaters;
(3) Athletic field or baseball field;
(4) Bottling works; dyeing and cleaning works or laundry; plumbing and
heating shop; painting shop; upholstering shop, not involving furniture
manufacture; tinsmithing shop; tire sales and service, including
vulcanizing, but no manufacturing; appliance repairs; and general
service and repair establishments similar in character to those listed in
this item; provided, that no outside storage of material is permitted;
and further provided, that no use permitted in this item shall occupy
more than six thousand (6,000) square feet of floor area;
Supp.No.12
50
( 5) Bowling alleys and billiard parlors;
(6) Food storage lockers;
(7) Hotels, motels, and motor hotels containing forty-five or more units
only;
(8) Outdoor advertising structure or sign. Any sign or display in excess of
one hundred (100) square feet in area shall be attached flat against a
wall of a building.
(9) Bus terminals;
(I 0) Printing, publishing, and engraving;
(II) Stone yard or monumental works located within three hundred (300)
feet of a cemetery;
(12) Accessory buildings and uses;
(13) Family day care home;
(14) Child care center;
(15) Private nursery school;
(16) Adult book store, provided that the property devoted to such use shall
not be situated within five hundred (500) feet of property in a
residential district, nor within five hundred (500) feet of any property
occupied by a church or other place of worship, public or private
elementary, intermediate or high school, public library, lodginghouse,
day care center, nursing home, hotel, motel, adult book store, adult
entertainment establishment, adult motion picture theater or adult
video store;
(17) Adult entertainment establishment, provided that the property devoted
to such use shall not be situated within five hundred (500) feet of any
property in a residential district, nor within five hundred (500) feet of
any property occupied by a church or other place of worship, public or
private elementary, intermediate or high school, public library,
lodginghouse, day care center, nursing home, hotel, motel, adult book
store, adult entertainment establishment, adult motion picture theater,
or adult video store;
(18) Adult motion picture theater, provided that; the property devoted to
such use shall not be situated within five hundred (500) feet of
property in a residential district, nor within five hundred (500) feet of
51
any property occupied by a church or other place of worship, public or
private elementary, intermediate or high school, public library,
lodginghouse, day care center, nursing home, hotel, motel, adult book
store, adult entertainment establishment, adult motion picture theater,
or adult video store;
(19) Adult video store, provided that the property devoted to such use shall
not be situated within five hundred (500) feet of property in a
residential district, nor within five hundred (500) feet of any property
occupied by a church or other place of worship, public or private
elementary, intermediate, or high school, public library, lodginghouse,
day care center, nursing home, hotel, motel, adult book store, adult
entertainment establishment, adult motion picture theater, or adult
video store.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Petersburg Zoning Ordinance, a
building or premises may be used for an adult book store, and adult entertainment
establishment, and adult motion picture theater, or an adult video store, as
restricted and limited by this sectiqn, only in the "B-2" General Commercial
District with the issuance of a Special Use Permit and in no other zoning district
established by the Petersburg Zoning Ordinance.
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
Height, area and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of article
22, and in addition, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) There shall be a side yard not less than five (5) feet in width on the side of
a lot adjoining a residence district;
(2) There shall be a rear yard not less than ten (1 0) feet in depth on the rear of
a lot adjoining a residence district. Existing alley at ·rear will eliminate
this requirement;
(3) The lot area requirements for dwellings are the same as those in the "R-5"
Multiple Dwelling District.
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained to this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
Supp.No. 12
52
Art. 16, 1 APPENDIX A- ZONING Art. 16, § 3
ARTICLE 16. "B-3" CENTRAL COMMERCIAL
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "B-3" Central
Commercial District. This district encompasses the shopping and office core of
the central business district. Appropriate uses are the same as for the "B-2"
General Commercial District, but with altered off-street parking requirements, in
recognition of the practical difficulty of providing off-street parking for smaller
establishments, and because of the relatively small area included in the district, all
points being within convenient walking distance of the boundaries beyond which
additional off-street parking should be provided.
Section 2. Use regulations.
The use regulations for the "B-3" Central Commercial District are as follows:
(1) Any use allowed in the "B-2" General Commercial District;
(2) The manufac~e of plastic lenses,' subject to the parking requirements of
article 19;
(3) The fabrication of soft goods from materials not manufactured on the
premises; provided, that the portion of the building adjacent to a public
street retain a commercial character, so as not to cause the interruption of
the commercial frontage in the district, and that all loading of fabricated
goods and materials not manufactured on the premises be restricted to
loading areas at the rear of the building, and as prescribed under article 20
of this ordinance.
Section 3. Height and area.
Height and area regulations shall be as set forth in the chart of article 22, and
in addition the following regulations shall apply:
(1) On an interior lot there shall be a side yard not less than five (5) feet in
width on the side of a lot adjoining a residence district;
(2) On an interior lot there shall be a rear yard not less than twenty (20) feet in
depth on the rear of a lot adjoining a residential district;
(3) The lot area requirements for dwellings are the same as those in the "R-5"
Multiple-Family Residence District.
Supp. No. 12
53
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
54
Art. 17, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING
ARTICLE 17. "M-1" LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. (Purpose.]
Art. 17, § 2
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "M-w'' Light Industrial
District. This district is intended primarily for light manufacturing, fabricating,
warehousing and wholesale distributing, in low buildings, with off-street loading,
and off-street parking for employees, and with access by major streets or
railroads, in either central or outlying locations.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(I) Any use permitted in the "B-2" General Commercial District, except
dwellings, hospitals, institutions, or other buildings used for permanent or
temporary housing of persons, except as described in (a) and (b) of this
subsection, below:
(a) Dwellings for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the
premises;
(b) Accessory farm dwellings on a farm of ten (1 0) acres or more;
(2) The following uses, and any similar uses which are not likely to create any
more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare or other
objectionable influences than the minimum amount normally resulting
from other uses permitted; such permitted uses being generally wholesale
and retail trade, service industries, light industries that manufacture,
process, store and distribute goods and materials and are, in general,
dependent on raw materials refined elsewhere, and manufacture,
compounding, processing, packaging or treatment, as specified, of the
following products or similar products:
Chemicals, petroleum, coal and allied products.
Supp. No.1
Cosmetics and toiletries;
Ice manufacture, including dry ice;
Ink manufacture (mixing only);
Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants, and related industrial and
household chemical compounds;
Laboratories;
Perfumes and perfumed soap (compounding only);
Pharmaceutical products;
Soap, washing, cleaning, powder or soda (compounding only).
55
Clay, stone and glass products.
Clay, stone and glass products;
Concrete products (except central mixing and proportioning plant);
Pottery and porcelain products (electric or gas fired).
Food and beverages.
Bakery products, wholesale (manufacturing permitted);
Beverage blending, bottling (all types);
Candy, wholesale (manufacturing permitted);
Chewing gum;
Chocolate, .cocoa and cocoa products;
Coffee, tea and spices processing and packaging;
Condensed and evaporated milk processing and canning;
Creamery and dairy operations;
Dairy products;
Fish, shrimp, oyster and other seafood processing, packing and
storing, except fish curing;
Flour, feed and grain (packaging, blending and storage only);
Fruit and vegetable processing (including canning, pre-serving,
drying and freezing);
Gelatin products;
Glucose and dextrine;
Grain blending and packaging, but not milling;
Ice cream, wholesale (manufacturing permitted);
Macaroni and noodle manufacture;
Malt products manufacture (except breweries);
Meat products, packing an processing (no slaughtering);
Oleomargarine (compounding and packaging only);
56
Metals and metal products.
Agriculture or farm implements; Aircraft and aircraft parts;
Aluminum extrusion, rolling, fabrication and forming;
AUtomobile, truck trailer, motorcycle and bicycle assembly;
Boat manufacture (vessels less than five (5) tons);
Bolts, nuts, screws, washers and rivets;
Container (metal);
Culvert;
Firearms;
Foundry products manufacture (electrical only);
Heating, ventilating, cooking and refrigeration supplies and
appliances;
Iron (ornamental) fabrication;
Machinery manufacture;
Nails, brads, tacks, spikes and staples;
Needle and pin;
Plating, electrolytic process;
Plumbing supplies; Scale and fault;
Sheet metal products;
Silverware and plated ware;
Stove and range;
Tool, die, gauge and machine shops;
Tools and hardware products;
Vitreous enameled products.
Textiles, fibers and bedding.
Bedding (mattress, R!llow_and" quilt); .
Carpet, rug or mat;'· ~ · ·
Hat bodies of fur and wool felt (including men's hats)
manufacture;
Hosiery mill;
Knitting, weaving, printing, finishing of textiles and fibers into
fabric goods;
Rubber and synthetic treated fabrics (excluding all rubber and
synthetic processing);
Yam, threads and cordage.
Wood and paper products.
Basket and hamper (wood, reed, rattan, etc.);
Box and crate;
Cooperage works (except cooperage stock mill);
Furniture (wood, rattan, reed, etc.);
Pencils; Planing and millwork;
Pulp goods, pressed or molded (including papier mache products);
Shipping container (corrugated board, fiber or wire bound);
Trailer, carriage and wagon; Wood products.
57
Unclassified uses.
Animal pound;
Animal, poultry and bird raising, commercial;
Building materials (cement, lime (in bags or containers}, sand,
gravel, shell, lumber and the like) storage and sales;
Carbon paper and inked ribbons manufacture;
Cigar and cigarette manufacture;
Cleaning and dyeing of garments, hats and rugs;
Exposition building or center;
Fairgrounds;
Fur finishing;
Greenhouses, wholesale;
Industrial vocational training school, including internal combustion
engines;
Kennels;
Laboratories, research experimental, including combustion-type
motor testing;
Leather goods manufacture, but not including tanning operations;
Laundries;
Livery stables and riding academy;
Market, wholesale;
Motion picture production;
Opthalmic goods;
Plastic fabrications;
Printing, publishing and engraving;
Produce and storage warehouse;
Railroad switching yard primarily for railroad service in the
district;
Theater, including a drive-in or outdoor theater;
Tobacco products, processing, storage and treatment;
Truck or transfer terminal, freight;
Wholesale houses and distributors.
58
Art. 17, § 3 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 17, § 4
Section 3. Height, area and bulk regulations.
Height, area and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of article
22, and in addition the following regulations shall apply:
(1) There shall be a side yard not less than ten (1 0) feet in width on the side of
a lot adjoining a residence district;
(2) There shall be a rear yard not less than ten (1 0) feet in depth on the rear of
a lot adjoining a residence district;
(3) Whenever any building in the "M-1" Light Industrial District adjoins or
abuts upon a residential district, such building shall not exceed two (2)
stories nor thirty-five (35) feet in height, unless it is set back one foot from
all required yard lines for each one foot of additional height above thirtyfive
feet.
Section 4. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
Supp.No.1
59
Art. 18, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE
ARTICLE 18. "M-2" HEAVY INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
Art. 18, § 2
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the "M-2" Heavy Industrial
District. This district provides for industrial operations of all types, except that
certain potentially hazardous industries are permitted only after public hearing
and review, to assure protection of the public interest and surrounding property
and persons.
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Any manufacturing, processing, storing or distributing use permitted in the
"M -1" Light Industrial District;
2. Dwellings for resident watchmen and caretakers employed on the
premises;
3. Accessory farm dwellings, on a farm often (10) acres or more;
4. Farm, truck garden, orchard, or nursery for growing or propagation of
plants, trees and shrubs, including temporary stands for seasonal sales of
products raised on the premises; but not including the raising for sale of
birds, bees, rabbits, or other animals, fish or other creatures to such an
extent as to be objectionable to surrounding residences by reason of odor,
dust, noise, or other factors; and provided no retail or wholesale business
office or store is permanently maintained on the premises;
5. The following uses and any similar industrial uses which are not likely to
create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare,
or other objectionable influences than the minimum amount normally
resulting from other uses permitted; and manufacture, compounding,
processing, packaging, or treatment of the following products or similar
products:
Supp.No.1
60
Art. 18, § 2 APPENDIX A-ZONING
Chemicals, petroleum, coal and allied products.
Adhesives;
Alcohol;
Bleaching products;
Bluing;
Calcimine;
Candle;
Art. 18, § 2
Cleaning and polishing preparations (nonsoap) dressings and blackings;
Dye-stuff;
Essential oils;
Exterminating agents and poisons;
Fertilizer (nonorganic)
Fuel briquettes;
Glue and size (vegetable);
Ink manufacture from primary raw materials (including colo:rs and pigments);
Soap and soap products.
Clay, stone and glass products.
Abrasive wheels, stones, paper, cloth and related products;
Asbestos products;
Brick, fire brick and clay products;
Concrete central mixing and proportioning plant;
Glass and glass products;
Graphite and graphite products;
Monument and architectural stone;
Pottery and porcelain products (coal-fired);
Refractories (other than coal-fired); ·
Sand-lime products;
Wallboard and plaster, building, insulation and composition flooring.
Food and beverage.
Casein;
Cider and vinegar;
Distilleries (alcoholic), breweries and alcoholic spirits (nonindustrial);
Flour, feed, and grain milling and storage;
Molasses;
Oils, shortenings, and fats (edible) and storage;
Pickles, vegetable relish and sauces;
Rice cleaning and polishing;
Sauerkraut;
Sugar refining;
Rubber tire and tube;
Shell grinding;
Storage batter (wet cell).
61
Art. 18, § 2
Unclassified uses.
PETERSBURG CODE Art. 18, § 3
Accessory advertising device giving the name of the industry or advertising
products manufactured on the premises;
Bag cleaning;
Coal pocket;
Railroad switching and classification yard, roundhouse, repair and overhaul
shops;
Oils, vegetable and animal (nonedible ), and storage;
Paint, lacquer, shellac, and varnish (including colors and pigments, thinners
and removers);
Roofing materials, building paper and felt (including asphalt and
composition);
Salt tanning materials and allied products;
Tar products.
Section 3. Objectionable uses.
The following uses, or manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or
treatment of the following products, having accompanying hazards, such as fire,
explosion, noise, vibration, dust or the emission of smoke, odor, or toxic gases
may, if no in conflict with any law or ordinance in the City of Petersburg or State
of Virginia, be located in the "M-2" Heavy Industrial District, only after the
location and nature of such use shall have been approved by the city council after
public hearing. The planning commission shall review the plans and statements
and shall not permit such buildings, structures, or uses until there has been shown
that the public health, safety, morals and general welfare will be properly
protected, and that necessary safeguards will be provided for the protection of
surrounding property and persons. The planning commission, in reviewing the
plans and statements, shall consult with other agencies created for the promotion
of public health and safety:
Supp.No.1
62
Art. 18, § 3 APPENDIX A-ZONING
Metal and metal products.
Boat manufacture (over five (5) tons);
Boiler manufacture (other than welded);
Brass and bronze foundries;
Forge plant, pneumatic, drop and forging hammering;
Foundries;
Galvanizing or plating (hot dip);
Lead oxide;
Locomotive and railroad car building and repair;
Motor testing (internal combustion motors);
Ore dumps;
Shipyards;
Structural iron and steel fabrication;
Wire rope and cable.
Textiles, fibers and bedding.
Bleachery;
Cotton wadding and linter;
Hair and felt products, washing, curing, dyeing;
Jute, hemp and sisal products;
Linoleum and other surface floor covering (except wood);
Nylon;
Oilcloth, oil-treated products and artificial leather;
Rayon;
Shoddy;
Wool pulling or scouring.
Wood and paper products.
Charcoal and pulverizing;
Excelsior;
Paper and paperboard (from paper machine only);
Sawmill (including cooperage stock mill);
Wallboard;
Wood preserving treatment.
Unclassified industries.
Leather tanning and curing;
Art. 18, § 3
Rubber (natural or synthetic), gutta percha, chicle and balata processing.
Supp. No.1
63
Art. 18, § 3 PETERSBURG CODE
Chemicals, petroleum, coal and allied products.
Acids and derivatives;
Acetylene, generation and storage;
Ammonia;
Caustic soda;
Cellulose and cellulose storage;
Chlorine;
Coke oven products (including fuel gas);
Creosote;
Art. 18, § 3
Distillation, manufacture or refining of coal, tar asphalt, wood and bones;
Explosives (including ammunition and fireworks) and explosives storage;
Fertilizer (organic);
Fish oils and meal;
Glue, gelatin (animal);
Hydrogen and oxygen;
Lamp black, carbon black and bone black;
Nitrating of cotton or other materials;
Nitrates (manufactured or natural) of an explosive nature, storage;
Petroleum, gasoline and lubricating oil;
Plastic materials and synthetic resins;
Potash;
Pyroxylin;
Rendering and storage of dead animals, offal, garbage or waste products;
Turpentine and resin.
Clay, stone and glass products.
Brick and firebrick refractories and clay produc~s (coal-fired);
Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris;
Minerals and earths: quarrying, extracting, grinding, crushing and processing.
Food and beverage.
Fat rendering;
Fish curing;
Slaughtering of animals;
Starch manufacture.
Supp.No.l
64
Art. 18, § 3 APPENDIX A-ZONING
Metals and metal products.
Aluminum powder and paint manufacture;
Blast furnace, cupolas;
Blooming mill;
Art. 18, § 4
Metal and metal ores, reduction, refining, smelting and alloying;
Scrap metal reduction;
Steel works and rolling mill (ferrous).
Wood and paper products.
Match manufacture;
Wood pulp and fiber, reduction and processing.
Unclassified industries and uses.
Cotton ginning;
Cotton seed oil refining;
Hair, hides and raw fur, curing, tanning, dressing, dyeing and storage;
Shell dredging;
Stockyard.
Section 4. Height, area and bulk regulations.
Height, area and bulk requirements shall be as set forth in the chart of article
22, and in addition the following regulations shall apply:
(1) There shall be a side yard not less than twenty-five (25) feet in width on
the side of a lot adjoining a residence district;
(2) There shall be a rear yard not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth on
the rear of a lot adjoining a residence district;
(3) Grain elevators, gas holders, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers and other
similar structures may exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) feet in
height, but whenever any building or structure in the "M-2" Heavy
Industrial District adjoins or abuts upon a residence district, such building
or structure shall not exceed :fifty (50) feet in height, unless set back one
foot from all required yard lines for each foot of additional height above
fifty (50) feet.
Supp.No.2
65
Art. 18, § 5 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 18, § 5
Section 5. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations.
66
Art. 18.1, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 18.1, § 2
ARTICLE 18.1. "MXD-1" MIXED USE DISTRICT
Section 1. Purpose.
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations for the "MXD-1" Mixed Use
District.
The purpose of this district is to permit a diversity of compatible uses which
may include a mixture of residential, retail, shopkeeper and commercial uses
which may include a mixture of residential, retail, shopkeeper and commercial
office uses.
There regulations are intended to:
(a) Encourage the preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of structures of
historic or architectural merit in the district;
(b) Encourage economic revitalization of the area in general and those
properties with combined residential-commercial characteristics;
(c) Encourage compatibility of existing and future land uses. (Ord. No. 82-
111, 12-7-82)
Section 2. Use regulations.
Within the "MXD-1" Mixed Use District, the permitted uses are as follows:
(a) Residential:
(1) Single-family and two-family residences;
(2) Residential townhouses.
(3) Redevelopment and adaptive reuse of existing structures, originally
Designed for ground level commercial use and upper floor residential
use, to multiple-family dwelling designed to be operated as a unit by
an individual, partnership, corporation or cooperative. Such
redevelopment/adaptive reuse shall not exceed four (4) dwelling units.
Off-street parking regulations as per Article 19 of this Zoning
ordinance shall apply. (11-0rd-06)
Supp. No.2
67
Art. 18.1, § 2 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 18.1, § 3
(b) Retail, shopkeeper, commercial office:
(1) Business and professional offices;
(2) Retail shops offering the following or similar sales and services:
a. Food products (maximum size 2~500 square feet);
b. Apothecary shop;
c. Drugstore (maximum size 2,500 square feet);
d. florist;
e. Card and gift shop;
f. Crafts and hobby shop (including instruction classes);
g. Bookstore;
h. Jewelry store, clock and watch repair shop;
1. Antique furniture store;
J. Bicycle repair shop;
k. Leather goods shop (not including tanning);
I. Sporting goods store; ·
m. Restaurant, tea rooms, cafes, delicatessens (not including drive-in
establishments);
n. Artist's studio;
o. Auto parts sales;
p. Carpentry and cabinet shop (no outside storage);
q. Plumbing and heating shop (no outside storage);
r. Small appliance repair (no outside storage);
(3) Entertainment, cultural and recreational uses (including theatres, art
galleries, libraries, museums, private clubs~ lodges, amusement centers
and other recreational facilities);
( 4) Church or other places of worship;
( 5) Banking offices and other financial institutions;
(6) Parking areas and lots (greater than ten (10) spaces must be screened);
(7) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental and clearly
subordinate to uses permitted in this district. (Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Section 3. Prohibited uses.
All other uses not specified in Section 2 of this article are not permitted in the
"MXD-1" Mixed Use District, said uses to include, but are not limited to, the
following or similar uses:
Supp.No.2
68
Art. 18.1, § 3 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 18.1, § 6
(1) Animal hospital or veterinarian;
(2) Commercial car wash;
(3) Chemical manufacturing, storage and distribution;
( 4) Auto body repair and painting;
(5) Automobile service station;
(6) Material salvage;
(7) Outdoor advertising or billboard structures;
(8) Rendering facility;
(9) Automobile, truck and motorcycle sales and service. (Ord. No. 82-111,
12-7-82)
Section 4. Other district requirements.
(a) Dwelling structures, existing as of the adoption date of this ordinance,
which may be used for retail, shopkeeper or commercial office purposes shall
maintain a valid certificate of residential occupancy for a portion of the structure.
(Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Section 5. Height, area and bulk regulations.
(a) For single- and two-family residents [residences] and townhouses for sale,
refer to Article 22 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) For commercial and shopkeeper uses, there shall be a height limitation of
two and one-half (2 ~) stories not greater than thirty-five (35) feet above grade;
minimum lot area the same as "R-5" and a maximum bulk not greater than
seventy-five (75) per cent ofthe lot. (Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Section 6. Yards.
(a) Front yards -No front yards shall be required (Article 25, Section 33,
Paragraph 5).
(b) Side yards and rear yards- For residential dwellings, townhouses for sale,
commercial, retail and shopkeeper uses, refer to Article 22 of the Zoning
Ordinance. (Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Supp. No.2
69
Art. 18.1, § 7 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 18.1, § 8
Section 7. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 22, Height, area and bulk regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations
Article 25, Supplementary height, area, and bulk regulations;
Article 35, Historic zoning regulations. (Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Section 8. Screening.
(a) For commercial, retail and shopkeeper uses:
Where a side or rear lot line abuts a residential property, there shall be a
continuous evergreen vegetative or opaque structural fence or screen not less
than six ( 6) feet in height erected along such lot line, but not within fifteen
(15) feet of any street line (Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7 -82)
Supp. No.2
70
Art. 18.2, § 1 PE1ERSBURG CODE Art. 18.2, § 2
ARTICLE 18.2. "MXD-2" MIXED USE DISTRICT
Section 1. Purpose.
The regulations set forth in this article, or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article, are the regulations for the "MXD-2" Mixed Use
District.
The purpose of this district is to permit a mixture of diverse land uses such as
residential, retail, shopkeeper, commercial office and light industrial to co-exist in
a compatible environment.
Those regulations are intended to:
(a) Encourage preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of residential and
commercial structures;
(b) Encourage stability in commercial activity through economic
revitalization of the area;
(c) Encourage compatibility of existing and future land uses. (Ord. No. 82-
111, 12-7-82)
Section 2. Use regulations.
A building or premises shall be used for the following purpose:
(a) Residential:
(1) Single-family and two-family residences;
(2) Residential townhouses;
(b) Retail, shopkeeper, commercial office:
(1) Same as those in the "MXD-1" Mixed Use District.
(c) Light industrial:
(1) Any use permitted in the "MXD-1" Mixed Use District;
(2) The uses listed below arid those uses with similar characteristics
which do not create any more offensive levels of noise, vibration,
dust, ·heat, smoke, odor, glare or other objectional functions are
permitted in the "MSD-2" Mixed Use District. In general, these
uses may involve light manufacturing, processing, wholesale,
storage and distribution and service industries;
(3) Auto assembly (custom orders only);
( 4) Tool, die, gauge and machine (2,500 square feet maximum);
71
Art. 18.2, § 2 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 18.2, § 3
(5) Tools and hardware products;
(6) Hand forged ironwork;
(7) Wholesale houses and distributors;
(8) Small engine manufacturing and repair;
(9) Bedding manufacturing, retailing, and wholesaling;
(1 0) Handknitting;
(11) Weaving;
(12) Printing;
(13) Contractors, building and painting (no open storage yards);
(14) Greenhouse, commercial;
(15) Leather goods manufacturing (no tanning);
(16) Auto parts manufacturing, retailing and wholesaling;
(17) Furniture upholstering;
(18) Baskets and hampers manufacturing;
(19) Handcrafted furniture manufacturing;
(20) Furniture refinishing (in enclosed building);
(21) Handcrafted clay, stone, glass, pottery, porcelain;
(22) Railroad activities as specified in Article 5, Section 2, paragraph
(8);
(23) Laundry and laundromats;
(24) Feed and seed, retail and wholesale;
(25) Bakery (2,500 square feet maximum);
(26) Cosmetics, manufacturing (2,500 square feet maximum);
(27) Ice manufacturing (2,500 square feet maximum);
(28) Public utilities;
(29) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental and clearing
[clearly] subordinate to permitted uses in this district. (Ord. No.
82-111, 12-7-82)
Supp.No.2
72
Art. 18.2, § 3 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 18.2, § 3
Section 3. Prohibited uses.
The following uses and those of similar characteristics are not permitted in
this district: ·
(1) Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants, and related industrial and
household chemical compounds manufacturing;
(2) Concrete products manufacturing;
(3) Fish, shrimp, oyster and other seafood processing, packing and
storing and curing;
( 4) Malt products manufacturing;
( 5) Meat products, packing and processing and slaughtering;
( 6) Poultry packing and slaughtering;
(7) Concrete and metal culvert manufacturing;
(8) Firearms manufacturing;
(9) Electrolytic plating;
(1 0) Sheet metal products manufacturing;
(11) Silverware and plateware manufacturing;
(12) Box and crate manufacturing;
(13) Planing and millwork;
(14) Trailer, carriage and wagon manufacturing;
(15) Animal pound or hospital or veterinarian;
(16) Commercial anima], poultry and bird raising;
(17) Building materials such as cement, lime, sand, gravel and lumber
storage and sales;
(18) Bus garage and repair shop;
(19) Circus;
(20) Coal and coke storage sales;
(21) Fur finishing;
(22) Kennels;
(23) Livery stables and riding academy;
(24) Plastic fabrications;
(25) Produce and storage warehouse;
(26) Freight truck and transfer terminal;
(27) Chemical manufacturing, storing and distribution as principal use;
(28) Material salvage operations;
(29) Outdoor advertising or billboard structures;
(30) Rendering facility. (Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Supp.No.2
73
Art.l82, §4 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 18.2, § 4
Section 4. Other district requirements.
(a) Dwelling structures, existing as of the adoption date of this ordinance,
which may be used for light industrial purposes or for those uses enumerated in
Section 2, paragraph (b) of the "MXD-1" Mixed Use District shall maintain a
valid certificate of residential occupancy for a portion of the structure. (Ord. No.
82-111, 12-7-82)
Section 5. Height, area and bulk requirements.
(a) For residential dwellings, townhouses for sale, commercial retail and
shopkeeper uses, refer to section 5, article 18B [18.1], "MXD-1" Mixed Use
District.
(b) For permitted light industrial uses, there shall be a height limitation of two
and one-half (2 ~) stories not greater than seventy-five (75) percent of the lot
area. (Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Section 6. Yards.
(a) Front yards - No front yard shall be required (Article 25, Section 33,
Paragraph 5).
(b) Side yards and rear yards- For residential dwellings, townhouses for sale,
commercial, retail and shopkeeper uses, refer to Article 22 of the Zoning
Ordinance.
For permitted light industrial uses- No side yards shall be required except that
where a side lot line abuts or is situated across an alley from a residential
dwelling, there shall be side yard of not less than five (5) feet in width. No rear
yard shall be required except that where a rear yard lot line abuts or is situated
across an alley from a residential dwelling there shall be a rear yard of not less
than twenty (20) feet in depth. (Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Supp.No.2
74
Art. 182, § 7 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 18.2, § 8
Section 7. Reference to additional regulations.
The regulations contained in this article are supplemented or modified by
regulations contained in other articles of this ordinance, especially the following:
Article 19, Off-street parking regulations;
Article 20, Off-street loading regulations;
Article 22, Height, area and bulk regulations;
Article 23, Supplementary use regulations;
Article 25, Supplementary height, area and bulk regulations;
Article 35, Historic zoning regulations.
(Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Section 8. Screening.
For light industrial uses- Where a side or rear lot line abuts a residential
property there shall be a continuous evergreen vegetative or opaque structural
fence or screen not less than sis ( 6) feet in height erected along such a lot line, but
not within fifteen (15) feet of any street line. (Ord. No. 82-111, 12-7-82)
Supp.No. 8
75
Art. 19, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 19, § 3
ARTICLE 19. OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS*
Section 1. Off-street parking requirements.
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, all structures and land uses
constructed, enlarged, erected or extended shall provide off-street parking spaces
in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 89-88, 9-5-89)
Section 2. Location of off-street parking.
Location of off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the same lot with
the structure or land use served; except that where an increase in the number of
spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use, or where such spaces are
provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or
establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained in areas within
two hundred (200) feet of the building served.
In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot
with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly
provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such
purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved
as to form by the city attorney, and shall be filed with the application for a
building permit. (Ord. No. 89-88, 9-5-89)
Section 3. Design standards.
All off-street parking lots shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other
impermeable surface to protect against pot holes, erosion and dust unless an
alternative surface is allowed by the city engineer to control stormwater runoff.
All parking lots shall be bordered by a curb of asphalt, concrete or other material
acceptable to the city engineer. Entrances and exits for all parking facilities shall
comply with existing ordinances of the city. (Ord. No. 89-88, 9-5-89
*Editor's note-Ord. No. 89-88, adopted Sept 5, 1989, amended Art 19, § § 1-4, with new provisions, pertaining to
similar subject matter, designated as Art 19, § § 1-8; said former article bore no history notes.
Supp.No. 8
76
Art. 19, § 4 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 19, § 4
Section 4. General.
(1) All parking lots, regardless of the number of spaces, must have individual
spaces marked. Such spaces shall be laid out on the parking surface with paint or
plastic stripping which shall provide a permanent delineation between spaces.
Spaces should be arranged so that any maneuvering directly incidental to entering
or leaving a parking space shall not be on any public street, alley or walkway.
(2) The parking requirements in this article do not limit requirements which
may be imposed with special uses (article 23) or special use exception (article 27).
(3) The parking requirements in this article apply to all districts except the B-
3, Central Commercial Distric~, where no special requirements are imposed.
( 4) The parking requirements in this article do not limit other requirements in
this ordinance for parking contained in district regulations, particularly in the B-1,
Shopping Center District, where special requirements may be imposed.
(5) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be
construed to be the next highest whole number.
( 6) In the case of mixed uses, uses with different parking requirements
occupying the same building or premises or in the case of joint use of a building
or a premises by more than one use having the same parking requirements, the
parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various
uses computed separately.
(7) Whenever a building or use constructed after the date of this ordinance is
changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling
units, seating capacity or other wise to create a need for an increase of ten (1 0)
percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be
provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. (Ord. No. 89-88, 9-5-89
Supp.No. 8
77
Art. 19, § 4 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 19, § 6
Section 5. Parking space requirements.
Each individual space must total one hundred eighty (180) square feet using
either 9' x 20' or 10' x 18' dimensions. Compact car spaces may account for up
to twenty (20) percent of the total available spaces and shall be so marked.
Compact car spaces shall have a minimum size of 7 Y2' x 15'. Handicapped
parking spaces shall conform to a minimum size of 13' x 19' and must be marked
so. Any lot having at least ten (10) spaces must have one (1) handicapped space.
Additional handicapped spaces will be determined using the ratio of one (1)
handicapped space per fifty (50) spaces in the lot. (Ord. No. 89-88, 9-5-89)
Section 6. Minimum parking spaces.
The following uses shall comply with the minimum parking requirements
designated therefore:
(1) Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, kennels, animal pounds and
shelters: At least one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of
floor area.
(2) Auto sales and services to include new and used car dealers: One (1)
space per every two hundred (200) square feet of floor area plus space
to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in connection
therewith.
(3) Automobile service stations: One (1) space per every one hundred
twenty-five (125) square feet of gross floor area.
( 4) Banks, credit unions, savings and loans and other financial
institutions: Eight (8) spaces for first one thousand (1,000) square feet
of floor area plus one (1) space per every one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of additional floor area.
(5) Bowling alleys: Five (5) spaces for each alley.
(6) Child-care centers and child-care education centers: One (1) space
per every three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor space.
Supp. No.8
78
Art. 19, § 6 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 19, § 6
(7) Convenience stores or quick-service food stores: One (1) space per
every one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet of gross floor area
(8) Institutions and libraries, museums and art galleries: Not less than
ten (10) spaces and one (1) additional space for every three hundred
(300) square feet of gross floor space except as listed below:
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(a) Convalescent homes or nursing homes: One (1) space for every
six ( 6) beds plus one (1) space per each employee, including staff
doctors;
(b) Churches or civic associations or assembly rooms: One (1) space
for every four (4) seats;
(c) Homes for the aged, disabled and handicapped: One (1) space per
every three patient beds plus one (1) space per each staff doctor,
employee or doctor on main shift;
(d) Hospitals: At least 2.5 spaces per each patient bed;
(e) Theaters: One (1) space for every four (4) fixed seats.
Fast-food restaurants: One (1) space per sixty (60) square feet of
floor area
Hotels: One (1) space per each guestroom plus one employee space
for every ten (10) guestrooms plus spaces for eating and assembly
rooms as required for those uses in this ordinance.
Medical, optical and dental offices and clinics: One (1) space for each
doctor and employee and three (3) spaees for each examining room
and dentist's chair.
Mortuaries and funeral homes: One (1) space per every seventy-five
(75) square feet of gross floor area plus one (1) space per each
employee working on main shift.
Motels: One (1) space per each guestroom plus one (1) employee
space per every ten (1 0) guestrooms plus spaces for eating and
assembly rooms as required for those uses in this ordinance.
Nightclubs, bars and taverns: One (1) space per one hundred (100)
square feet of floor area.
Supp.No. 8
79
Art. 19, § 6 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 19, § 7
(I5) Personal services, including beauty and barbershops, accountant and
tax services, attorney offices and any other comparable services that
cannot be classified as retail, with medical, dental or optical offices
and clinics excluded: Two (2) spaces for each chair (barber or beauty
shop) or one (I) space for every two hundred (200) square feet of floor
space.
(I6) Private clubs, social centers, athletic clubs and commercial recreation
facilities other than bowling alleys: One (I) space per every two
hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
(I7) Retail establishments, repair, plumbing and heating establishments
and service establishments, excluding personal services defined
hereinabove: One (I) space for every two hundred (200) square feet
of net floor with one (I) extra space for every four hundred ( 400)
square feet of floor space associated with storage, assembly and repair
of goods.
(I8) Residential:
(a) Single-family: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit;
(b) Townhouse: Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit;
(c) Multifamily (including two-family dwelling(s): One (I) space per
each one-bedroom unit; two (2) spaces per every two- or more
bedroom dwelling units;
(d) Multifamily elderly: One (I) space for every two (2) dwelling
units;
(e) Boarding: One (I) space for each rental room and two (2) spaces
for principal dwelling.
(I9) Restaurants except fast-food restaurants but including those accessory
to hotels and motels: One (I) space per one hundred (I 00) square feet
of gross floor area.
(20) Manufacturing and industrial plants, including processing, packaging,
fabricating, research or testing labs, warehouseing, printing or
publishing: At least one (I) space per employee or maximum working
shift. (Ord. No. 89-88, 9-5-89)
Section 7. Similar uses.
For any use not specifically listed herein, the requirements of the most similar
listed use shall apply unless otherwise specified. (Ord. No. 89-88, 9-5-89)
Supp.No. 8
80
Art. 19, § 8 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 19, § 9
Section 8. Buffer required wher~ adjoining property is residential.
Where a side or rear lot line abuts property used or zoned for residential
purposes, there shall be installed and maintained a continuous evergreen
vegetative screen or opaque structural fence not less than six (6) feet in height
planted or erected along such lot line. (Ord. No. 89-88, 9-5-89)
Section 9. Off Street Shared Parking Regulations.
Shared parking. In the B-2, B-3 and PUD district, fifty percent of the number
of off-street parking spaces required under section 6 of Article 19 for dwelling
units may be supplied by shared off-street parking spaces located on private
property provided for nondwelling uses that are not routinely open, used or
operated between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and before 7:30 A.M. on any day.
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 19, Section 2, the required spaces for
dwelling units may be located onsite or offsite, but if located offsite, in no event a
distance greater than five hundred (500) feet measured from the end of the
building closest to the off-site parcel to the individual parking space located on an
offsite parcel supplying the required spaces. If a portion of an individual parking
space is within the five hundred (500) feet distance, such parking space may be
included as an off-site parking space for purposes of this section. In any case
where the required off-street parking spaces are supplied by shared off-street
parking spaces pursuant to this section, a written agreement shall be properly
drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city
attorney, and shall be filed with the application for a building permit.
81
Art. 20, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 20, § 1
ARTICLE 20. OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, when any building or structure'
is hereafter erected or structurally altered to the extent of increasing the floor area
by fifty (50) percent or more, or any building is hereafter converted, for the uses
listed in column 1 of the chart below, when such buildings contain the floor areas
specified in column 2, accessory off-street loading spaces shall be provided as
required in column 3 or as required in subsequent sections of this article:
Column 1
Use or Uses
(Category)
Retail stote, department store,
eating and ~g
establishment, funeral home or
mortuary, wholesale house,
warehouse, repair, general
service, manufacturing or
industrial establishment
Hotel, hospital or similar
institutions or places of public
assembly
Office or office building
(Ord. No. 89-89, 9-5-89)
Column2
Floor Areas
(Square Feet)
5,000- 15,000
15,001 -25,000
25,001 - 50,000
Each
50,000 or over 50,000
5,000- 10,000
10,001-50,000
50,001-100,000
Each
100,000 over 100,000
10,000-50,000
50,001- 100,000
Each
100,000 over 100,000
Section 2. Interpretation of the chart.
Column3
Loading Spaces
(Requirement)
One
Two
Three
One additional
One
Two
Three
One additional
One
Two
One additional
(1) The loading space requirements apply to all districts except the "B-1,"
Shopping Center District, where special requirements may be imposed, or "B-3,"
Central Commercial District.
(2) The loading requirements in this article do. not limit special requirements
which may be imposed in connection with special use permits (article 23) or
special use exceptions (article 27). (Ord. No. 89-8~, 9-5-89)
Section 3. Mixed uses in one building.
Where a building is used for more than one use or for different uses, and
where floor area for each use for which loading spaces is required is below the
minimum for required loading spaces, the number of required loading spaces will
be calculated using the aggregate floor area in the structure and the use for which
the most spaces are required. (Ord. No. 89-89, 9-5-89)
82
Art. 20, § 4 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 20, § 4
Section 4. Design standards.
(1) A loading space, as defined in article 3, section 2, shall have minimum
dimensions of twelve (12) by thirty-five (35) feet and a minimum vertical
clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
(2) Loading spaces for a funeral home may be reduced in size to ten (10) by
twenty-five (25) feet and vertical clearance reduced to eight (8) feet.
(3) All spaces shall be provided and maintained with an all weather surface.
( 4) Where loading spaces are illuminated, all sources of illumination shall be
so shielded or directed as to prevent any direct reflection toward adjacent
premises used or zoned for residential purposes.
(5) All loading spaces shall be visually screened from any adjacent premises
used or zoned for residential purposes. All such screening shall be sufficiently
dense or opaque to screen the loading space(s) from such adjacent properties.
(Ord. No. 89-89) 9-5-89)
Supp.No. 8
83
Art. 21, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 21, § 3.1
ARTICLE 21. SIGN REGULATIONS*
Section 1. Short title.
The regulations contained in this article may be cited as the "Sign Ordinance."
(Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Section 2. Purpose and intent.
Section 2.1. The purpose of this article is to set forth regulations that shall
govern the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and use of all signs,
together with their appurtenant and auxiliary devices. ·
Section 2.2. The intent of these regulations is to permit and regulate all signs,
except as otherwise provided herein, in such a manner as to protect property
values, promote neighborhood character and stability, ensure safety on the streets
by minimizing obstruction of vision or confusion of those utilizing the streets,
promote clarity in the transmission of sign information, and to facilitate the
creation of an attractive and harmonious community. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Section 3. Permit required.
A sign permit shall be required to erect, structurally alter, relocate or replace
any sign within the city, except as otherwise provided herein. A separate permit
shall be required for each sign. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Section 3.1. Application.
A. ·Prior to the erection, installation, placement, or alteration of any sign, a permit
application shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. Each application for
such permit shall be accompanied by plans showing the dimensions of the sign,
the area, and height above grade level; the proposed location of the sign,
including proper sight lines, rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks, buildings, and
*Editor's note- Ordinance No. 10-0rd-10, adopted March 2, 2010, amended App. A, Art 21, to read as herein
setout, revising Art 21, Ordinance No. 91-23, adopted March 19, 1991. Former App. A, Art 21, relative to sign
regulations, derived from the original zoning ordinance adopted April 20, 1971. As amended by Ord. No. 89-55, adopted
June 6, 1989.
Supp. No.9
84
Art. 21, § 3.1 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 21, § 4
existing signs on the premises; the methods of illumination or lighting; the
method of fastening such sign; and the name and address of the sign owner and of
the sign erector, including written permission of the owner, lessee, or his
authorized agent of the building or land on which the sign is to be erected or
placed. Except as required by the Building Official, it shall not be necessary for
the applicant to submit drawings or renderings from a licensed professional
engineer, or to submit a survey from a licenses surveyor, as part of the
application.
B. A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was
issued has not been completed within a period of six (6) months after the date of
issuance of the permit, and there shall be no refund of any fee required by this
article. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Section 4. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, and not withstanding other proV1s1ons
elsewhere in this Ordinance, certain terms and words pertaining to signs are
hereby defined as follows:
(1) Historic Area. Historic area means an area designated by ordinance as
containing buildings or places in which historic events occurred, or which have
special public value because of notable architectural or other features relating to
the cultural or artistic heritage of the community of such significance as to
warrant conservation and preservation.
(2) Nonconforming Sign Structure. A nonconforming sign structure shall be
any lawfully erected sign structure that fails to meet current ordinance standards.
(3) Sign. A sign is any structure, or part thereof, or any device attached to,
painted on, or represented on a building, fence, or other structure, upon which is
displayed or included any letter, word, numeral, picture, illustration or decoration,
emblem, symbol or trademark, flag, banner, or pennant, or other device, figure, or
character used as, or which is in the nature of, an announcement, direction,
advertisement or other attention-directing device, and which is visible beyond the
boundaries of the parcel of land on which the same is located. A sign shall not
include:
(1) A similar structure or device located within a building, except illuminated
signs within show windows:
(2) Official court or public notices; or
(3) The painted or posted message on a properly permitted general advertising
sign structure.
85
Art. 21, § 4 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 21, § 4
(4) Sign, Abandoned Any accessory or business sign which no longer
identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or
activity located, conducted, or sold on the premises upon which such sign is
located, which use has been discontinued for a continuous period of two years.
(5) Sign, Accessory or Business. A sign directing attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered on the . same
premises upon which the sign is located and not included as exemptions in section
5 of this article.
(6) Sign, Billboard A general advertising sign owned or operated by a person
engaged in the business of outdoor advertising licensed by the Department of
Transportation under Section 33.1-361 of the Code ofVirginia.
(7) Sign, changeable message. Any changeable message sign that is
illuminated, stationary and constant and does no change more than once every
eight seconds shall be permitted, including a billboard sign which contains
electronic messaging as expressly authorized by the code of Virginia in Section
33.1-369.
(8) Sign, Surface Area. The surface area of a sign shall be computed as
including the entire area within a circle, semicircle, triangle, rectangle,
parallelogram, or trapezoid enclosing all elements of the matter displayed,
excluding frames and columns or uprights on which the sign is placed. Only one
(1) side of a double-faced sign, ~hose sign faces are parallel and are at no point
more than two (2) feet from one another, shall be included in the computation of
total sign area; for all other signs with more than one (1) face, each side shall be
included in the computation of total sign area.
(9) Sign, flashing. Any sign displaying flashing or intermittent lights,
changing in degrees of intensity, which constitutes a public safety or traffic
hazard in the judgment of the City's traffic engineer.
(1 0) Sign, freestanding or ground A non-movable sign supported by a fence,
retaining wall, or by upright structural members or braces on or in the ground and
not attached to a building.
(11) Sign, general advertising. Any sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment not conducted, sold, or offered on the same
premises upon which such sign is located, except a wall sign that is determined to
be historic by the Architectural Review Board. General Advertising Sign includes
a "Billboard Sign" as defmed in this Artiqle, however, any general advertising or
billboard sign owned or operated by the City shall not be subject to the provision
of this Ordinance.
86
Art. 21, § 4 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 21, § 4
(12) Sign, Height. The vertical distance from the average street grade of the
real property, upon which the sign is located, at the required minimum front
setback line for signs, whichever allows for the greater height, to the highest point
of the sign.
(13) Sign, illuminated. Any sign designed to give forth artificial light, or
designed to reflect light from one or more sources of artificial light erected to
provide light for the sign.
(14) Sign, Portable. Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground nor to a
building, which is designed or constructed in such manner that it can be moved or
relocated without involving any structural or support changes (including a sign
attached to or displayed on a vehicle that is used for the express purpose of
advertising a business establishment, product or service when the vehicle is
parked so as to attract the attention of motoring or pedestrian traffic).
(15) Sign, Projecting. Any sign which is attached to and projects more than
twelve (12) inches from the face of a wall of a building.
(16) Sign, Roof Any sign painted, erected, or constructed upon or above the
roof of a building or structure, or part thereof; any sign that projects above the
intersection of the roof decking and wall face; or any sign that extends above the
eave or parapet shall be deemed to be a roof sign.
(17) Sign, Temporary. A sign which advertises community or civic projects
or special events on a temporary basis. Temporary signs for community or civic
projects or special events shall be permitted only for events of public interest, e.g.
fairs, carnivals, community gatherings, or other similar events.
(18) Sign, Wall. A sign attached to or painted on or otherwise inscribed on the
outside wall of a building and supported throughout its length by such wall or
building and not extending more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall.
(Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
(19) Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on
the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including,
but not limited to: advertising signs; billboard signs, main buildings, outbuildings,
fences, walls, lamp posts, light fixtures and posterboards.
(20) Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a
building or structure, including, but not limited to, bearing walls or partitions,
columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior
walls, provided that in order to be a structural alteration, the alteration shall meet
the criteria otherwise provided in the Uniform Statewide Building Code.
87
Section 5. EXEMPTIONS.
The following signs are exempted from the permit requirements of this article
provided that they comply with all other regulations of this article; however,
nothing in this section shall be construed as providing an exemption from any
requirement of the city's building code:
Section 5.1. One (1) identification sign not exceeding one (1) square foot in
area and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants
or premises, or hours of operation.
Section 5.2. Signs identifying municipal or governmental buildings or buildings
used for religious purposes, when erected upon the building or land upon which
such building is located, provided that such signs shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) square feet in area.
Section 5.3. Public signs of a noncommercial nature and in the interest of,
erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of his public
duty, such as directional signs, regulatory signs, warning signs, and informational
Signs.
Section 5.4. Temporary real estate signs which advertise the sale, rental or lease
of the premises on which displayed, provided that advertisement display area does
not exceed six ( 6) square feet in residential districts or sixteen (16) square feet in
commercial or industrial districts. Such signs shall not be illuminated and, if
freestanding, shall not be more than six ( 6) feet in height.
Section 5.5. Signs warning the public against trespassing, dangerous animals,
swimming or the like, provided such signs do not exceed three (3) square feet in
area per sign.
Section 5.6. One (1) sign, not more than one (1) square foot in area and not
illuminated, identifying a home occupation in any and all zoning districts.
Section 5. 7. Not more than three (3) construction signs, when placed at the
construction site. Such signs shall not be illuminated, shall not exceed sixteen
(16) square feet in area for each sign, and shall be removed within ten (10) days
following the completion of construction.
Section 5.8. Signs designating entrances, exits or conditions of use for parking
lots. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area for each sign.
Section 5.9. Commemorative plaques and historic markers recognized by the
City.
Supp.No. 9
88
Art. 21, § 5 APPENDIX A- ZONING Art. 21, § 5
Section 5.10. Yard or garage sale signs displayed on the premises of such sale,
provided that such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet. No such sign is
permitted elsewhere and if so displayed or placed, may be removed by the city.
The cost of such removal shall be charged to the occupant of the property on
which the yard or garage sale is conducted.
Section 5.11. Temporary agricultural or seasonal signs that promote the sale of
agricultural produce and that do not exceed (12) square feet per sign on the
premises on which such signs are displayed, provided such signs are removed at
the end of the sales season.
Section 5.12. Political campaign signs, including posters, banners, writings,
pictures, paintings, lights, models, displays, emblems, notices, illustrations,
insignias, symbols, and any other such advertising devices, the purpose of which
is to announce a referendum or the nomination or election of individuals seeking
an elected public office, provided that the total area of such signs shall not exceed
six (6) square feet in a residential zone and thirty-two (32) square feet in a
commercial or industrial zone. These signs shall be confined with private
property and shall not encroach into the visibility triangle at street intersections.
In those situations where a final election follows a primary election, those
candidates who won in the primary election may continue to display their signs
during the interim period and up to ten (10 days after the final election, at which
time all political campaign signs shall be removed. Persons responsible jointly
and severally for the maintenance and removal of political campaign signs are:
(a) The candidate, spokesman or campaign committee;
(b) The owner of the premises on which the sign is located;
(c) The person erecting the sign; or
(d) The person causing erection of the sign. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Supp.No. 9
89
Art. 21, § 6 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 21, § 6
Section 6. PROIDBITED SIGNS.
The following signs shall be prohibited in all districts:
Section 6.1. Signs which by reason of their location, position, size, shape,
color, design or means of illumination may be construed as or confused with, or
may interfere with, obstruct or obscure the view of all or any portion of a traffic
control sign, signal, or device.
Section 6.2. Signs which imitate an official sign or signal or which contain the
words "stop," "go," "slow," ''yield," "caution," "danger," ''warning" or similar
words which ~ply any official warning or command or which may imply the
need for special actions on the part of any vehicle operator or pedestrian.
Section 6.3. Any flashing sign.
Section 6.4. Signs which contain or consist of pennants, ribbons, streamers,
spinners, strings of light bulbs, or other similar moving devices. Pennants, flags,
banners, when not part of any sign, even if attached to the poles or other
supporting elements of the sign face, however, are allowed in the B-2, General
Commercial, and B-3, Central Commercial Districts, provided such devices are
connected to a rope or wire that is attached securely at both ends or attached
directly to a supporting pole; otherwise such devices, when not part of any sign,
are prohibited in any district. ·
Section 6.5. Any sign or means of sign illumination which causes glare into or
upon any building other than the building to which the sign may be related.
Section 6.5. Any sign affixed to, hung, placed or painted on any other sign,
cliff, tree, public utility pole, radio or television or similar tower, provided, that
this prohibition shall not affect official traffic, parking or informational signs
placed on utility poles by the city government.
Section 6.7. All portable or nonstructural signs.
Section 6.8. Roof signs.
Supp.No. 9
90
Art. 21, § 6 APPENDIX A -ZONING Art. 21, § 7
Section 6.9. Signs advertising activities which are illegal under federal, state,
or city laws or regulations.
Section 6.10. General advertising signs. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Section 7. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
The following regulations apply generally to all signs and are in addition to
the regulations contained elsewhere in this article:
Section 7.1. Structural and safety features and electrical systems shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. All
signs requiring permits shall be inspected by the Zoning Administrator for
compliance with all the requirements of this Article and by the building official
for compliance with the requirements of the Uniform Statewide Building Code.
Section 7.2. The Zoning Administrator, upon application as required in this
article, may issue temporary permits for the following signs and displays for a
_period not to exceed thirty (30) days, when in the administrator's opinion, the use
of such signs and displays would be in the public interest and would not result in
damage to private property including signs advertising a special civic or cultural
event such as a fair or exposition, play, concert or meeting, sponsored by a
governmental, civic or charitable organization.
Supp.No. 9
91
Art. 21, § 7 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 21, § 8
·Section 73. Special sales promotion displays in a district where such sales are
permitted, including displays incidental to the opening of a new business.
Section 7.4. No signs shall project over public right-of way without the express
written permission of the city manager, except for permitted flat signs which may
so project not more than six (6) inches.
Section 7.5. The face or copy of abandoned signs may remain in place for not
more than ninety (90) days from the date of vacancy by the tenant or owner
previously occupying the premises on which the sign is located.
(Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Section 8. LIABll.JTY INSURANCE.
No sign shall be h\mg, kept in place, maintained or erected over any public
right-of-way including streets, alleys or sidewalks within the city unless the owner
or tenant of the building or structure to which such sign is, or may be, attached
shall have secured and deposited with the city manager a policy of insurance
against public liability and property damage, issued by some solvent insurance
company licensed and duly authorized to execute such policies within the state, or
a proper certificate of such insurance company showing that such owner or tenant
has obtained such policy, insuring the city against liability for bodily injuries,
including death, in an amount not to exceed the sum of two hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for injury to any one (1) person, or the sum of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injuries arising out of any one (1)
accident, and against liability for property damage in an amount not to exceed the
sum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in any one (1) accident,
which such liability arises out of the erection, maintenance or presence of any
such sign, or on account of any damages or injuries caused thereby. Such policy
or insurance shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the policy to
give ten (1 0) days written notice to the city manager before cancellation thereof.
In lieu of such policy of insurance, the owner or tenant of such building or other
structure shall be permitted to enter into a bond with surety satisfactory to the city
manager, and in a form approved by the city attorney, payable to the city, with
conditions therein similar to the conditions hereinbefore provided with respect to
such policies of insurance.
(Ord. No.·91-23, 3-19-91)
Supp. No.9
92
Art. 21, § 9 APPENDIX A-ZON1NG Art. 21, § 10
Section 9. PERMITTED SIGNS BY WNING DISTRICT.
The regulations set forth in this section pertain to the various types and
specifications for signs expressly permitted in each designated zoning district,
except for billboard signs which are addressed in Section 10.14 of this Article.
Section 9.1. In District R-B, regulations shall be established in accordance with
Article 13, Section 2.
Section 9.2. The maximum advertising display area for accessory or business
signs in the Mixed Use Districts (MSD) shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square
feet.
Section 9.3. In District B-1, regulations shall be established in accordance with
Article 14, Section 6.
Section 9.4. The maximum advertising display area for accessory or business
signs in District B-2 shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
Section 9.5. The maximum advertising display area for accessory or business
signs in District B-3 shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet.
Section 9.6. In Districts M-1 and M-2, sign area shall not exceed in the
aggregate three (3) square feet in area per linear foot of building frontage, such
frontage shall be measured as the longest horizontal dimension of the building and
which does not pass through or between any adjacent elements of same, provided,
however, no such sign or signs shall exceed an aggregate total of three hundred
fifty (350) square feet in area.
Section 9. 7. No part of any freestanding or projecting sign shall be higher than
twenty-five (25) feet from grade. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Section 10. INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Supp. No.9
93
Art. 21, § 11 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 21, § 12
Section 11. SIGNS PERMITTED IN LOCAL IDSTORIC DISTRICTS.
Before any sign shall be painted, erected, or constructed in local-designated
historical areas, a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the
architectural review board, in accordance with the provisions of article 35 of this
appendix. Notwithstanding the sign regulations established herein, the
architectural review board, in approving a sign, may further regulate such sign
with respect to area, height, placement, materials, color, lighting, graphics,
lettering or architectural styling, provided that area and height limitations
established herein are not exceeded. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Section 12. MAINTENANCE.
Section 12.1. All signs, including those exempt from the permit requirements of
this article, together with all of their supports, braces, connections, anchors, and
electrical equipment shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times.
All materials used in the sign shall be kept in good condition, free of holes,
rotting, peeling paint or other forms of decay. If the sign is illuminated, all
lighting shall be maintained in working order and meet the standards and
requirements of the Building Code. Billboard signs shall be maintained in
accordance with section 10.14.6 of this Ordinance.
Section 12.2. Whenever a sign fails to meet the maintenance requirements, as
specified in this section, or becomes structurally unsafe, or endangers the public
safety, the zoning administrator or the building inspector shall order that such sign
be properly maintained, repaired, made safe, or removed. Such order shall be
complied with within (10) days of receipt thereof by the person, firm or
corporation owning or using the sign, or the owner of the building or premises on
which such sign is affixed or erected.
Section 12.3. The ground area around any freestanding sign shall be kept free
and clean of weeds, trash and other debris. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
Section 13. NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
No sign lawfully erected or placed before the effective date of Ordinance No.
91-23 which does not conform to the provisions of this Article, and no sign
lawfully erected or placed before the effective date of any amendment to such
Ordinance which does not conform to the provisions of such amendment, shall be
enlarged, structurally altered, or reconstructed in any manner, except for billboard
signs as otherwise provided herein. No nonconforming sign shall be moved on
the same lot, however, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance
ipcluding Article 3, nonconforming billboard signs shall be governed by Section
10.14 ofthis Article. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91 & Ord. No. 10-0rd-10, 3-02-10)
Supp. No.9
94
Art. 21, § 14 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 21, § 14
Section 14. BILLBOARD SIGNS.
For the purpose of Section 10.14, the following terms and words pertaining to
billboard signs supplement the definitions in Section 10.4:
Section 15. REMOVAL OF SIGNS.
Except as otherwise provided herein for Billboard Signs, the zoning
administrator may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in
violation of this article. Upon determination of such violation, the zoning
administrator may give thirty (30) days' written violation notice, by certified mail,
to the owner of such sign, or of the building, structure or premises upon which
such sign is located if the owner of the sign is not identified, to remove the sign or
to bring it into compliance with applicable regulations. IF the owner or person
notified of the violation fails to remove or alter the sign to comply with the
applicable requirements of this article within the thirty (30) days, the zoning
administrator shall cause such sign to be removed or brought into compliance at
the cost of the owner or person notified of the violation. Removal of sign shall
mean the dismantling and removal from premises of all signs, embellishments,
and structures designed specifically to support such sign. This process described
herein also is applicable to abandoned signs.
Supp. No.9
95
Art. 21, § 14 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 22, § 1
The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other applicable
enforcement provisions of this article. (Ord. No. 91-23, 3-19-91)
ARTICLE 22. HEIGHT, AREA AND BULK
REQUIREMENTS
Section 1. [Requirements for various districts.]
Height, area and bulk requirements for the various districts shall be as
indicated in the chart below, together with other height, area and bulk
requirements contained in this ordinance.
Supp. No.9
96
Article District
4A "A", Agricultural
District
5 "R-1A", Single-
Family Residence
6 "R-1", Single-Family
Residence
7 "R-2", Single-Family
Residence
7A "RMH", Residential
Mobile Home
8 "R-3", Two-Family
Residence
9 "R-4", Multiple
Dwelling District
10 "R-5", Multiple
Dwelling District
11 "R-6",
12 "RTH", Residential
TownHouse
13 ''RB", Office
Aoartrnent District
14 "B-1", Shopping
Center District
15 "B·2", General
Business
16 "B-3", Central
Business District
17 "M·1", Light
Industrial District
18 "M-2", Heavy
Industrial District
18.1 "MXD·1",Mixed
Use District
18.2 "MXD-2", Mixed
Use District
Article 22. Height, Area and Bulk Requirements
District Maximum Height stories Minimum Lot Depth Feet Rear Yard Minimum Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width 
Ag 45 3 35 10% of total - 30 8 acres 8 acres -
R-1A 35 2.5 35 20 30 15,000 15,000 100
R-1 35 2.5 35 15 30 8,000 8,000 75
R-2 35 2.5 35 12 25 5,000 5,000 50 
R-5 45 3 35 12 25 1,000 5,000 50
R-3 35 2.5 35 12 25 3,000 5,000 50 
R-4 40 3 35 12 25 3,000 5,000 50
RMH 15 1 15 15 15 5,000 5,000 40
150 See special regulations as contained in Article 11 Same as "R-5" 5,000
35 See special regulations as contained in Article 12 Same as "R-5" 5,000
Same asR-5
See special regulations as contained in Article 11
45 3 None For Dwellings:5 2 12 25 Same as "R-5" 5,000
None except as required in Article 15
90 8 None None except as required in Article 16 None None
75 6 None None except as required in Article 17 None None
75 6 None None except as required in Article 18 None None
35 2~ Refer to Article 18.1, Sections 5,6, 7
35 2~ Refer to Article 18.2, Sections 5,6, 7
Minimum
Width of
Lot In Feet
100
75
50
40
50
60
50
60
75
50
50
15
50
None
None
None
* Room Count: All rooms m a dwelling umt except those used exclustvely for kitchen, bath or uti.l.i ty purposes. Any floor space exceeding seventy (70) square feet m
area and enclosed by partitions or walls having cased openings, or doors of any type shall be deemed a room.
97
(TillS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY)
98
Art. 23, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING
ARTICLE 23. SUPPLEMENTARY USE
REGULATIONS-SPECIAL USES
Section 1. [Procedure for obtaining special use permit.]
Art. 23, § 3
Recognizing that certain uses may be desirable when located in the
community, but that these uses may be incompatible with other uses permitted in
a district, certain special uses listed in section 4, below, when found to be in the
interest of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community,
may be permitted in any district from which they are prohibited. Before the
location or establishment thereof, or before any change of use of the premises
existing at the time of the effective date of the regulations, or permitted as herein
provided, is made, preliminary plans in sufficient detail, and a statement as to the
proposed use of the buildings, structures and premises, shall be submitted to the
planning commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing as provided in
article 28, and shall review such plans and statements and shall, after a careful
study thereof and of the effect that such buildings, structures or uses will have
upon the surrounding territory, submit a recommendation to the city council
within thirty (30) days following said hearing. Following receipt of the
commission's report, the city council may permit such buildings, structures or
uses, where requested; provided, that the public health, safety, morals, and general
welfare will not be adversely affected, that ample off-street parking facilities will
be provided, and that necessary safeguards will be provided for the protection of
surrounding property, persons, and neighborhood values.
Section 2. [Qualification of nonconforming use as special use.]
Any special use listed in section 4, below, existing at the effective date of
these regulations, shall be considered a nonconforming use, unless it has qualified
as provided above, ·and has been approved as a "special use" by the city council.
Section 3. [Additions or alterations to special uses.]
When [such changes are] found to be in the interest of the public health,
safety, morals, and general welfare, the board of zoning appeals is hereby
authorized to approve any and all additions or structural alterations to special uses
after they have qualified and have been approved by the city council.
Supp.No. 5
99
Art. 23, § 3 PETERSBURG CODE Art.23, §4
Section 4. Special uses enumerated.
The following special uses may be approved by the council, as provided in
this article:
(1) Airports and landing fields;
(2) Circus or carnival grounds, temporary for a specified period;
(3) Drive-in theater;
(4) Fairgrounds;
(5) Public utilities or public service uses, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereto,
including limited off-street parking adjoining, or adjacent to, the property when
located in a residence district; provided no business involving the repair, servicing or
sale, or display of vehicles shall be conducted on such parking area; and no
structures, including signs, will be erected on the parking area; and no charge will be
made for parking within the premises; and the parking will be set back from the
street in keeping with the existing front and side yard regulations of the residence
district;
(6) Public or government buildings;
(7) Hospitals or sanitariums;
(8) Cemetery;
(9) Sports arena or stadium;
(10) Race track;
( 11) Radio or television tower or broadcasting station;
(12) Child care centers in residential district.
(13) Bed and breakfast inn in R-3, R-4, R-5, and RB districts meeting the following
requirements:
Supp. No.5
(a) Permitted capacity of two (2) persons per sleeping room, not to exceed a
maximum of twenty (20) persons per structure;
(b) One-half (1/2) off-street parking space per sleeping room;
(c) Resident-manager on premises;
(d) Permitted sign area not to exceed two (2) square feet;
(e) Other requirements as deemed necessary to provide for the
protection of surrounding property, persons, and neighborhood
values.
100
(14) Operations involving shredding, cutting or otherwise processing of
used or discarded tires, or operations involving the storage,
distribution, or sale of used tires or discarded tires if more than two
hundred (200) such tires are located on site, even if such operation
is ancillary to the main use of the site. Notwithstanding any other
regulations within this article, these uses may only be permitted in
M-1 and M-2 zoning districts.
(15) Nightclub in B-2 and M-1 zoning district only.
(16) Boarding, rooming, or lodging houses such to be permitted only in R-5
and B-2 zoning districts.
(17) Convalescent and nursing homes such to be permitted only in R-5 and
B-2 zoning districts.
(18) Adult book store, adult entertainment establishment, adult motion
picture theater and adult video store such to be permitted only in the
B-2 zoning district.
(19) Vehicle rebuilder, such to ·be allowed only in the M-1 and M-2 zoning
districts.
(20) Vehicle removal operator, vehicle storage lot, or vehicle tow lot, such
to be permitted within the m-1 and M-2 zoning districts only.
(21) Auto body shop and vehicle painting operations not accessory to a
new-vehicle dealership such to be·permitted only in the B-2, M-1, and
M-2 zoning districts only.
(22) Stand-alone used vehicle sales not associated with a new-vehicle
dealership or not located upon the same parcel as such new-vehicle
dealership, if located upon parcels of less than one acre in area, such to
be permitted within the B-2 and M-1 zoning districts only.
(23) Stand-alone vehicle repair, to include general automobile repair shops,
truck repair shops, transmission repair shops, engine repair shops, car
washes or car washing and detailing operations, and similar facilities,
such to be permitted within the B-2 and M-1 zoning districts only.
101
(24) Small engine repair shop to be allowed within the B-2 and M-1 zoning
districts only.
(25) Tractor-trailer service station, to be allowed within the B-2, M-1, and
M-2 zoning districts only.
(26) Automobile service stations, to be permitted within the B-2, M-1, and
M-2 zoning districts only.
(27) Boat, semi-trailer truck, or recreational vehicle dealerships, to be
allowed in the B-2 and M-1 zoning districts only.
(28) Contractor storage yards such to be permitted within the m-1 and M-2
zoning districts only.
(29) Mulching or composting facilities or yards such to be permitted within
the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts only.
(30) Mini-storage facilities or self-storage facilities such uses ·permitted
within the B-2, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts only.
(31) Homeless shelter.
(32) Private Jails, halfway houses, or private prisons, whether for-profit or
non-profit, such to be permitted within the B-2 zoning district only.
(33) Hotels and motels providing fewer than forty-five (45) guest rooms,
such to be permitted within the B-1, B-2, B-3, and MXD-2 Districts
only.
(34) Mobile home sales or the sales, storage, or display of modular housing
units or mobile homes, such to be permitted within the M-1 District
only.
102
Art. 23, § 4.1 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 23, § 4.1
Sec. 4.1. Special Use Permits for Communication Towers; criteria and
procedures.
(1) Definitions.
a. Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for radio, telephone or
television communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves.
b. Co-locate. To locate on an existing structure with another user of
that structure. For this purpose, structure includes but is not
limited to existing telecommunication towers, power or telephone
poles, light poles, water towers, buildings, or similar structures.
c. Communication Tower. A free-standing structure more than six
feet in height, or a structure erected on a building and extending
more than ten feet above the roof line thereof on which are
mounted antennas, receivers, transmitters or other devices for the
receipt or transmission of broadcast of cable television,
microwave, radio, telephone, open video, PCS (personal
communication system) or other communication signals. For
purposes of this section, single use, non-commercial antennas shall
be excluded from this definition and shall be limited in accordance
with other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
2) Special Use Permit Requirement. Notwithstanding Section 4 of Article
23, or any other provision of this zoning ordinance, no
communications tower shall be erected on any property in any
zoning district until a Special Use Permit has been issued for such
tower. No such permit shall be required to co-locate an antenna on
an existing structure so long as the addition of said antenna shall
not add more than ten (10) feet to the height of said structure and
shall not require additional lighting pursuant to FAA or other
applicable requirements.
Supp.No. 9
103
ten feet above the roof line thereof on which are mo:unted antennas,
receivers, transmitters or other devices for the receipt or
transmission of broadcast of cable television, microwave, radio,
telephone, open video, PCS (personal communication system) or
other communication signals. For purposes of this section, single
use, non-commercial antennas shall be excluded from this
definition and shall be limited in accordance with other applicable
provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Special Use Permit Requirement. Notwithstanding Section 4 of Article
23, or any other provision of this zoning ordinance, no communications
tower shall be erected on any property in any zoning district until a
Special Use Permit has been issued for such tower. No such permit shall
be required to co-locate an antenna on an existing structure so long as the
addition of said antenna shall not add more than ten (1 0) feet to the height
of said structure and shall not require additional lighting pursuant to FAA
or other applicable requirements.
(3) Criteria. In evaluating an application for a Special Use Permit for a
telecommunications tower the Planning commission shall apply criteria set
forth in the document titled "Guidelines for Use by the Petersburg
Planning Commission for the Siting of Telecommunications Towers
Through the Special Use Permit Process." Said document is incorporated
by reference into this ordinance. In addition, the Planning Commission
and the City Council shall examine and apply the following criteria:
a. The availability and technical and economic feasibility of using
existing communications towers in the city or neighboring
localities to co-locate the communications facilities required by the
applicant.
b. If the proposed tower is freestanding, the feasibility of using an
alternate location on top of an existing multi-store structure.
c. The visual and economic impact of the proposed tower on
adjoining and nearby residential and commercial properties.
d. The proximity of the proposed location to designated historic
structures or districts, within the guidelines of Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
(4) Site Plan Required. A site plan to scale shall be filed with the application
for a Special Use Permit. The application, including the site plan, shall be
submitted to the Clerk of Council. Said site plan shall be signed and
sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and
dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning
topography, radio frequency,
104
Tower height requirements, tower type, guy anchors (when used),
buildings, scaled elevations and other supporting drawings, calculations
and documentation of other accessory uses; vehicular access, parking,
fencing and screening, landscaping, zoning, ownership, and use of
adjoining properties and any other information deemed appropriate by the
Director of Planning. In addition, applicant shall provide actual
photographs of the site which include a simulated photographic image of
the proposed tower in its proposed setting. ·
(5) Insurance and Bond. Any Special Use Permit granted under this section
shall be conditioned on the applicant's providing (a) evidence of casualty
and liability insurance to protect adjacent property owners, the City, and
other parties in the event of collapse, and (b) a bond in an amount
sufficient to guarantee the safe and efficient removal of the
communications tower in the event its use for communications purposes is
discontinued for a continuous period of one year.
(6) Non-discrimination among providers; access to service. It is the intent of
City Council that all types of communications service be made available
to citizens of the City, and that competition among providers of such
services be encouraged. In applying the provisions of this section, the
Planning Commission and City Council shall not unreasonably
discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent communications
services. No action under this section shall prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services or any other type of
communications service.
(7) Prompt consideration. All requests for Special Use Permits under this
section shall be acted upon within a reasonable time after they are filed
with the Clerk of Council, taking into account the nature and scope of the
requests. In the case of any application for a communications tower to
provide "personal wireless services" as defined in federal law, the
Planning Commission shall conduct its public hearing at the first possible
meeting that the request can be heard by the Planning Commission after
the application is received by the Clerk of Council, and shall promptly
forward its recommendation to the City Council which will take action
thereon.
Failure of the Planning Commission to act on an application for a
telecommunications facility within ninety days of its submission to the
Commission shall be deemed recommendation for approval of the
application by the Commission unless the City Council has authorized an
extension of time for consideration or the applicant has agreed to an
extension of time. The City Council may extend the time for action by the
Planning Commission for no more than sixty additional days. If the
Commission has not acted on the application by the end of the extension,
or by the end of such longer period as may be agreed to by the applicant,
the application is deemed recommended for
105
Approval by the Commission. Except as may otherwise be required by
State or Federal law, the time limitations contained in this subsection shall
be the sole controlling limitations relating to Planning Commission
consideration of requests for permits for communication towers.
(8) Explanation of denial. If the City Council denies an application for a
permit under this section, it shall furnish the applicant a written
explanation of its reasons, citing specific evidence in its or the Planning
Commission's written records, and including measures, if any, which the
applicant may take in order to make the proposed communications tower
location acceptable to the City Council.
Section 5. [Restrictions upon accessory buildings, cellars and basements.]
No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of
the main use building has been actually commenced.
No accessory building shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also
being used. No cellar or basement shall be used as a dwelling prior to substantial
completion of the dwelling of which it is a part.
106
APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 24, § 2
ARTICLE 24. NONCONFORMING USES
Section 1. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this article is to regulate nonconforming uses in a manner
consistent with sound planning and zoning principles, and in conformity with
state law. The general intent is that over time, nonconforming uses will be
discontinued in favor of uses conforming to the zoning ordinance and the zoning
map.
Section 2. Term Defined.
The term "nonconforming use" shall mean any use, lot, building or structure
that was lawful on the date of enactment of the zoning ordinance, or amendment
thereto, which has been continued although otherwise unlawful by such
enactment or amendment. Any use, lot, building, or structure that was lawful on
the date of enactment of the zoning ordinance, or amendment thereto, shall remain
lawful and shall not be a "nonconforming use."
Section 3. Termination of Nonconforming Uses.
1. A nonconforming use may continue as it existed when it became
nonconforming, provided that it may not be changed, replaced,
relocated, expanded in any manner, nor structurally altered, except as
provided for in this article.
2. If any nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of two years, or
for a period of less than two years if authorized by Virginia law, it
shall lose its nonconforming status and any further use shall conform
to the provisions of the zoning ordinance.
3. For the purposes of this article, cessation of a nonconforming use for
the aforesaid period shall be conclusively presumed to establish
discontinuance. The possession of a business license to conduct
business upon a property shall not itself constitute proof of business
activities on the premises.
4. Operation of only an accessory or incidental use to the principal
nonconforming use during the two-year period shall not have the effect
of continuing the principal nonconforming use.
Supp.No.l
107
Art. 24, § 4 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 24, § 8
Section 4. Destruction of a Nonconforming Use.
No building which has been damaged, by any cause whatsoever, to the extent
of more than fifty (50%) percent of the fair market value of the building
immediately prior to damage, shall be restored except in conformity with the
regulations of this ordinance, and all rights as a nonconforming use are
terminated. IF a building is damaged by less than fifty (50%) percent of the fair
market value, it may be repaired or reconstructed and used as before the time of
damage, provided that such repairs or reconstruction be substantially completed
within twelve (12) months of the date of such damage.
Section 5. Intermittent Use.
The casual, intermittent, temporary, or illegal use of land or buildings shall
not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use, and the
existence of a nonconforming use on part of a lot or tract shall not be construed to
establish a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract.
Section 6. Existence of a Nonconforming Use.
Whether a nonconforming use exists shall be a question of fact and shall be
decided by the Board of Zoning Appeals, after public notice and hearing, and in
accordance with the rules of the board.
Section 7. Nonconforming Uses Not Validated.
A nonconforming use in violation of a provision of the ordinance which this
ordinance amends or repeals shall not be validated by the adoption of this
ordinance.
Section 8. Permitted Changes of Nonconforming Uses.
A nonconforming use may be changed, altered, repaired, restored, replaced,
relocated, or expanded only in accordance with the provisions of this article and
subject to the appropriate approvals (including, among others, verification of the
nonconforming use by the Zoning Administrator, site plan approval, and building
permit approval) otherwise required by law.
1. A nonconforming use may change to a conforming use.
Supp.No.l
108
2. A nonconforming building or structure may be repaired, provided such
repair constitutes only routine maintenance necessary to keep the structure
in the same general condition it was in when it originally became
nonconforming.
3. A one-family residential structure which is nonconforming with respect to
rear yard area or front, rear, or side yard setback requirements, but which
otherwise conforms to the use requirements of the district in which it is
located, may be expanded so long as additional nonconformities are not
introduced. New or expanded residential accessory uses may be permitted
subject to the provisions of the zoning ordinance, provided that all new or
expanded accessory structures and uses shall meet all current zoning
requirements, including height, yard requirements, and setbacks, for the
zoning district in which located. In no case shall a nonconforming singlefamily
dwelling be modified to accommodate additional dwelling units.
109
(THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY)
110
Art. 25, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING
ARTICLE 25. SUPPLEMENTARY HEIGHT,
AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS
Section 1. [Purpose.]
Art. 25, § 3
The regulations set forth in this section [article] qualify or supplement the
district regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance.
Section 2. Modification of height regulations.
(1) The height regulations as prescribed in this ordinance shall not apply to:
Belfries;
Chimneys;
Church spires;
Conveyors;
Cooling towers;
Elevator bulkheads;
Fire towers;
Flagpoles;
Monuments;
Ornamental towers and spires;
Smokestacks;
Stage towers or scenery lofts;
Water towers;
Tanks.
(2) Public, semipublic, or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or
schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding
sixty (60) feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not
exceeding seventy-five (75) feet, when the required side and rear yards are each
increased by at least one foot for each one foot of additional building height above
the height regulation for the district in which the building is located.
(3) Manufacturing buildings located in the "M-2" Heavy Industrial district, on
land parcels at or exceeding one hundred fifty (150) acres and used for gravity
assisted processing, may erect to a height not exceeding one hundred seventy-five
(175) feet, when such buildings are set back from any other contiguous zonig
district by at least one foot for each one foot of additional building height above
the height regulations for the "M-2" Industrial District.
Section 3. Modification of area regulations.
3.1. Yards generally.
Ill
(1) Whenever a lot abuts upon a public alley, one-half of the alley width may
be considered as a portion of the required yard only.
(2) Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, except as authorized
by this article; and ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, window air
conditioning units, chimneys, cornices and ornamental features, which
may project to a distance not to exceed twenty-four (24) inches into a
required yard.
(3) Within a residence or office-apartment district, the least dimension of a
yard upon which the principal entrances or exists of a multiple dwelling
face shall be twenty (20) feet.
( 4) Where a lot is used for a commercial or industrial purpose more than one
main building may be located on the lot, but only when such buildings
conform to all open space requirements around the lot for the district in
which the lot is located.
(5) A bathroom not exceeding fifty (50) ·square feet in area may be
constructed on the rear of an existing dwelling which does not have these
sanitary facilities, provided the addition is at least ten (1 0) feet from the
rear lot line and conforms to the side line requirements.
(6) On residential lots having a width ofless than fifty (50) feet and on record
prior to November 20, 1947, there shall be a side yard on each side of a
building having a width of not less than ten (1 0) per cent of the average
width of the lot; provided, however, that such side yard shall not be less
than three (3) feet.
Supp. No.1
112
Art. 25, § 3 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 25, § 3
(7) For housing projects involving the construction of several multiple-group
dwellings on the same lot or parcel of land, in order to permit a more
flexible placing of the buildings on the land and more desirable grouping
of open spaces and such accessory facilities as recreation and parking
areas, the following yard requirements shall apply:
(a) Front, side and rear yard requirements along the boundaries of the
lot shall be in accordance with requirements previously
established;
(b) Within the lot, minimum distances between main buildings, except
Residential Town House Districts, shall be as follows:
Supp.No.l
1. When buildings are front to front, not less than fifty (50)
feet.
2. When buildings are front to rear, not less than sixty (60)
feet.
3. When buildings are front to side, not less than fifty (50)
feet.
4. When buildings are side to side, rear to side, or rear to rear,
not less than twenty (20) feet for one story buildings and
not less than thirty (30) feet when one or both of the
buildings are more than one story.
113
Art. 25, § 3.2 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 25, § 3
3.2 Accessory buildings and structures.
(1) Except as herein provided, no accessory building shall project beyond a
required yard line along any street.
(2) Filling station pumps and pump islands may occupy the required yards;
provided, however, that they are not less than fifteen (15) feet from the
street lines.
(3) One directional or name sign or sign advertising products sold on the
premises may occupy required yards in a district where such sign is
permitted by the use regulations of this ordinance; provided such sign is of
not more than thirty (30) square feet in area, does not contain flashing,
moving, or intermittent illumination; and provided the requirements of
other city ordinances are complied with.
(4) An ornamental fence or wall not more than three and one -half (3 Ya) feet
in height may project into or enclose any required front or side yard to a
depth from the street line equal to the required depth of the front yard.
Ornamental fences or walls may project into or enclose other required
yards, provided such fences and walls do not exceed a height of seven (7)
feet.
(5) Accessory, open and uncovered swimming pools and home barbecue grills
may occupy a required rear yard, provided they are not located closer than
five (5) feet to the rear lot line not closer than three· (3) feet to a side lot
line.
( 6) Accessory buildings which are not a part of the main building, although
connected by an open breezeway, may be con structed in a rear yard;
provided, such accessory building does not occupy more than twenty-five
(25) per cent of the area of the required rear yard; and provided, it is not
located closer than eight (8) feet to the rear lot line nor closer than three
(3) feet to a side lot line.·
Supp.No.l
114
Art. 25, § 3.3 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 25, § 3.3
3.3 Front yards.
(1) Where and official line has been established by the adopted major arterial
plan, for the future widening or opening of a street upon which a lot abuts,
then the depth of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official
line to the nearest line of the building.
(2) On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on each street.
(3) Where a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, there
shall be a front yard of fifteen (15) feet on the side street; provided,
however, that the buildable width of a lot of record at the time of passage
of this ordinance shall not be reduced to less than thirty-two (32) feet.
( 4) Open unenclosed porches, platforms or paved terraces, open or covered by
a roof or canopy, and which do not extend above the level of the first floor
of the building, may extend or project into the front yard not more than six
(6) feet.
(5) Where twenty-five (25) per cent or more of the street frontage, or where
twenty-five (25) per cent or more of the street frontage within four
hundred ( 400) feet, of the property in question is improved with buildings
that have a front yard (with variation of six (6) feet or less) that is greater
or less than the required front yard in the district, no building shall project
beyond the average front yard so established; provided, however, that a
depth of front yard of more than fifty (50) per cent in excess of the depth
of the required front yard in the district in which the lot is located shall not
be required. Where forty ( 40) per cent or more of the street frontage is
improved with buildings that have no front yard, no front yard shall be
required for the remainder of the street frontage.
(6) All buildings hereinafter erected, or structurally altered so as to change the
character of use of such building, shall observe the following setback
requirements or the setbacks or front yard requirements set forth elsewhere
in this ordinance, whichever is greater:
Supp. No.1
115
Art. 25, § 3.3 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 25, § 3.3
(a) Except as otherwise provided below, on Washington Street, the
minimum setback shall be forty ( 40) feet, and on Sycamore Street
south of Halifax Street, the minimum setback shall be forty-five
( 45) feet. (On Crater Road, between Graham Road and South
Boulevard, the minimum setback on the west side shall be forty
( 40) feet and on the east side shall be ninety (90) feet for dwellings
and sixty (60) feet for all other buildings.) On all other streets
thirty (30) feet in width and less than sixty (60) feet in width the
minimum setback shall be thirty (30) feet. The term "center line of
the street" as used below, shall mean the center line which existed
November 20, 1947.
(a-1) The minimum setback along U.S. Rout 301 (South Crater Road)
from the Norfolk and Western Railway underpass south of Morton
Avenue and to the Prince George County Line shall be one
hundred (100) feet. The minimum setback along U.S. Route 460
(County Drive) from the Norfolk and Western Railway overpass,
at the old corporate limits, to the Prince George County Line shall
be one hundred (1 00) feet. The minimum setback along State
Route 604 (Halifax Road) from its intersection with Boydton Plank
Road south to the overpass over Interstate 85 shall be one hundred
(1 00) feet; along the west side of Halifax Road from Interstate 85
south to Vaughan Road the minimum setback shall be one hundred
forty-five (145) feet; along Halifax Road from Vaughan Road
south to the Dinwiddie County Line the minimum setback shall be
one hundred (1 00) feet. The minimum setback along State Route
142 (Boydton Plank Road) from its intersection with Halifax Road
west to the Dinwiddie County Line shall be one hundred (1 00)
feet. The minimum setback along State Route 632 (Wagner Road)
from U.S. Route 301 east to U.S. Route 460 shall be one hundred
(100) feet. The minimum setback along State Route 608 (Johnson
Road) from the Norfolk and Western Railway ov~rpass, at the old
corporate limits, south to the Dinwiddie County Line south of
Flank Road shall be one hundred (1 00) feet. The minimum
setback along State Route 109 (Hickory Hill Road) from U.S. 460
east to Fort Lee shall be one hundred (1 00) feet.
Supp. No.1
116
Art. 25, § 3.3 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 25, § 3.3
The minimum setback along State Route 629 (Rives Road) from
U.S. Route 301 east to the Prince George County Line shall be one
hundred (100) feet. The minimum setback along State Route 613
(Squirrel Level Road) from Boydton Plank Road southwest to the
Dinwiddie County Line shall be one hundred (100) feet. The
minimum setback along Dupuy Road from Spring Street
Southwest to Boydton Plank Road shall be eighty (80) feet. The
minimum setback along State Route 613 (young's Road) from
Brick House Run south to Boydton Plank Road shall be eighty (80)
feet. The minimum setback along Flank Road from U.S. Route
301 west to State Route 604(Halifax Road) shall be one hundred
fifty (150) feet. The minimum setback along Defense Road from
Banister Road west to State Route 142 (Boydton Plank Road) shall
be one hundred fifty (150) feet. The term "center line of the
street," as used below in subsection (b), when referring to this
paragraph shall mean the center line which existed January 1,
1972. Where there are two (2) center lines on a road, the center
line referred to is a line running half way between and parallel to
the two (2) existing center lines.
(b) The minimum setback required herein shall be the minimum
horizontal distance from the center line of the street to the main
building, or any projection thereof. Where an existing building has
less setback than provided herein, any building hereafter erected or
structurally altered within twenty (20) feet of said existing building
may observe the setback line established by the existing building
provided that provision be made in the structure for the removal of
that portion which extends beyond the setback line established
herein, without damage to the balance of the structure, and that the
owner of the building to be erected or structurally altered enter into
agreement with the City of Petersburg, relieving the city of damage
for the removal of that portion of the structure extending beyond
the required setback line, when at such time the city acquires title
to this portion of the property for street widening.
Supp.No.l
117
j
Art. 25, § 3.3 APPENDIX A- ZONING Art. 25, § 3.4
(c) No setback of any building shall be required on the south side of
East Tabb Street, between North Sycamore Street and Monroe
Street.
(d) Where the minimum setback required herein would require a front
yard, the depth of which is greater than ten (1 0) per cent of the
average depth of a lot of record prior to November 20, 1947, or
require a front yard on the side having the greater, and the front
yard is not required by the district regulations, ati application for a
building permit, conforming to the provisions herein, shall be
denied by the building inspector for a period of sixty (60) days.
The building inspector shall immediately notify the council of such
application for a permit, and unless the building inspector be
notified by the clerk of the council within sixty (60) days of date of
the application for permit, of the city's intention to purchase the
land occupied by the setback required herein, the building
inspector shall grant the permit.
3.4. Side yards.
(1) Where dwelling units are erected above business and industrial structures
in business and industrial districts, no side yards are required, except such
side yard as may be required in the district regulations for a business or
industrial building on the side of a lot adjoining a dwelling district.
(2) For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or a
multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
(3) The minimum width of side yards for schools, libraries, churches,
community houses and other public and semipublic buildings in residence
districts shall be twenty-five (25) feet, except where a side yard is adjacent
to a business, commercial or industrial district, in which case the width of
that yard shall be as required in the chart of article 22, for the district in
which ~e building is located.
Supp. No.8
118
Art. 25, § 3.5 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 26, § 1
3.5. Rear yards. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways and
balconies opening upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and
flues, may project into the required rear yard for a distance of not more than five
(5) feet, but only where the same are so placed as not to obstruct light and
ventilation.
3 .6. Lot area. Where a lot was of record prior to the application of zoning
regulations and restrictions to the premises, and if such lot does not conform to
the requirements of such regulations and restrictions as to the width of lots or lot
area per family, the provisions of such lot area per family and lot width
regulations and restrictions shall not prevent the owner of such lot from erecting a
one-family dwelling or making other improvements on the lot; provided such
improvements conform in all other respects to the applicable zoning regulations
and restrictions. However, this section will not apply if the lot or lots in question
were contiguous to another lot or lots of record owned by the same person at the
time the more restrictive regulations became in force. (Ord. No. 88-48, 5-17-88)
Supp. No.8
119
Art. 26, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 26, § 2
ARTICLE 26. "PUD" PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
DISTRICT*
Section 1. Purpose.
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in this ordinance
when referred to in this article are the regulations for the Planned Unit
Development District. Single-use zoning often has tended to constrain
imaginative design for new community projects. The Planned Unit Development
District, by offering developers the opportunity to overcome traditional zoning
limitations, is intended to encourage innovative design approaches to large-scale
subdivisions and commercial development. The purpose of this article is to
establish procedures and standards for planned unit developments in order to
achieve the following objectives:
(1) Promote the use of land planning and design techniques that will result in
the efficient, economical, and convenient arrangement of differing land
uses, including residential and commercial, and their supporting
infrastructure;
(2) Encourage flexibility in design to retain natural land features, including
but not limited to floodplains, steep slopes and unique geological
formations as well as historical and archeological areas;
(3) Provide the reservation of land for public or private community facilities,
including open space for scenic and recreational use; and
( 4) Encourage the creation of a variety of residential uses and compatible
neighborhood arrangements that give the home occupant greater choice in
. the selection of types of environment and housing units.
(Ord. No. 89-103, 10-3-89)
Section 2. Def"mition.
A planned unit development is herein defined as a complete development
scheme. This scheme should include development programs and plans for all
land and structural improvements within the planned area and should be in accord
with the comprehensive plan and other such guidelines and objective as may be
established by the city council. Such development may be permitted on tracts of
at least ten (1 0) acres which are under unified ownership or control.
*Editor's note- Ord. No. 89-103, adopted October 3, 1989, amended Art. 26, § § 1-6, to read as herein set out with
similar provisions in §§ 1-9; § 3 of said former Art 26 was amended by Ord. No. 85-105, adopted Oct 1, 1985; the
remaining sections (1 and 2, and 4-6) bore no history notes.
Supp. No.8
120
Art 26, § 2 PETERSBURG CODE Art.26, §4
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, an application for a planned
unit development on a tract of land less than ten (1 0) acres may be filed, and a
public hearing shall be held thereon as hereinafter provided, but no
recommendation for approval of such an application shall be given by the
planning commission unless the commission shall find, upon a showing by the
land-owner, that the minimum number of acres required should be
waived because a planned unit development is in the public interest and that one
or more of the following conditions exist:
(1) Because of unusual features of the property itself or of the neighborhood
in which it is located, a substantial deviation from the regulations
otherwise applicable is necessary or appropriate in order to conserve a
physical or topographic feature of importance to the city;
(2) The property or its neighborhood possesses an historical character, that is
of importance to the community, which will be preserved and protected by
a planned unit development; or
(3) The property is adjacent to or across the street from property which has
been developed or redeveloped under the Planned Unit Development
District, and a planned unit development will contribute to the
maintenance of the amenities and values of the neighboring property.
(Ord. No. 89-103, 10-3-89)
Section 3. Application.
In areas where a planned unit development is contemplated, the owner or
owners shall file an application for inclusion of the area within a PUD zone. Such
applications should be filed with the planning commission accompanied by a fee
as established by the city council. Such applications shall be accepted for
consideration under the following conditions:
(1) The area proposed shall be in unified ownership or control and the
application filed jointly by all of the owners of the properties included in
the plan;
(2) The plan should consider and work toward the implementation of the
purposes of the planned unit development zoning district established in
this article.
(Ord. No. 89-103, 10-3-89)
Section 4. Data to accompany application.
Together with the application for zoning reclassification of the area and
evidence of unified control of the proposed development unit, the following
information shall be submitted in triplicate:
121
Art. 26, § 4 APPENDIX A- ZONING Art. 26, § 4
(1) A map or maps showing the proposed development in relation to its
surrounding area depicting relative size and location of streets, utilities,
schools and commercial facilities expected to serve the area;
(2) A summary and report covering soil conditions, drainage, topography,
location and character of surface water and other such information as may
be required to determine if the site is suitable for unit development without
hazards to occupants or adjoining properties;
(3) An overall preliminary development plan which shall show:
a. Proposed major vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems;
b. Proposed land uses of each lot or tract within the development;
c. Proposed reservations for parks, parkways, playgrounds, school sites
and other community facilities, including open spaces;
d. Relationship to existing land uses in the surrounding areas;
e. Proposed landscaping which shall be intended to provide shading,
screening, erosion and sedimentation control and a sense of privacy
and separation between uses;
f. Proposed numbers and size of parking spaces, parking lot surfaces and
landscaping of parking lots as required by article 19 of the zoning
ordinance; and
g. Proposed locations and dimensions of commercial signage.
(4) A development schedule of the project if planned in stages.
All maps should be four-hundred-foot scale or less to the inch. illustrations at
this stage may be in generalized form; nothing herein contained shall be deemed
to forbid or discourage informal consultations between the developer and the staff
of the planning department prior to the filing of an application provided that no
statement or representation by a member of the staff shall be binding upon the
planning commission or city council. (Ord. No. 89-103, 10-3-89)
Supp. No.8
122
Art. 26, § 5 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 26, § 5
Section 5. Planning commission consideration.
Upon receipt of an application for a planned unit development meeting the
foregoing requirements, the planning commission shall take the same under
consideration after review and recommendations by other city departments. The
commission shall consider the general plan of the development using as its guide
the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance and other such guides and objectives as
established by city council.
Upon review of the tentative plan, the comnnss10n shall advertise the
proposed planned unit development for public hearing in accordance with the
provisions of article 28 of the zoning ordinance.
The commission may recommend approval of the final plan as submitted or,
before taking action, may recommend that the applicant modify, alter adjust or
amend the plan.
The planning commission may designate divisible geographic sections of the
entire parcel to be developed as a planned unit development and shall, in such
case, specify reasonable periods within which development of each such section .
must be commenced and may permit in each section deviations from the number
of dwelling units per acre established for the entire planned unit development
provided such deviation shall be adjusted for in other sections of the development
so that the number of dwelling units per acre authorized for the entire planed unit
development is not affected. The period of the entire development and the
commencement date for each section thereof may be modified from time to time
by the planning commission upon the showing of good cause by the developer.
The developer shall make such easements, covenants and other arrangements as
may be determined by the planning commission to be reasonably required to
assure performance in accordance with the plan and to protect the public interest
in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion. (Ord. No. 89-103,
10-3-89)
Supp. No.8
123
Art.26, § 6 APPENDIX A -ZONING Art. 26, § 7
Section 6. Final consideration.
The planned unit proposal shall be presented to the city council in accordance
with article 28 of the zoning ordinance. If the planned unit development is
approved by the city council, the developer before beginning development shall
submit final plans phase by phase to the city planning department for staff review
and approval. Department approval shall be based on substantial compliance with
the comprehensive plan, guides, objective and other such standards as may be
established by city council. No building permits or certificates of occupancy shall
be issued until final approval of the development plans is given by the department
of planning. No structure or use other than those indicated on final approval plans
shall be permitted. (Ord. No .. 89-103, 10-3-89)
Section 7. Amendment.
An approved plan of development for a planned unit development may be
amended in concept or in minor details by application by the owner, owners or an
authorized representative of same:
(1) Where the proposed change is not clearly in keeping with the concept of
the plan of development as approved by city council, such change or
amendment shall be approved only in the manner of approval of the
original plan of development. Any changes to housing type, density,
allowed land uses, open space area, type of community facilities, method
of management of common land and facilities, location of any of the
elements or overall design layout shall be considered to be changes in
concept.
(2) Where the proposed change is one of minor detail, the planning director
may approve an amendment to the plan of development, upon being
presented a written request clearly stating the nature and reason for the
proposed change, including any necessary graphic representations.
Changes in the location or design of structures, but not number and height,
street utilities, parking, community facilities and landscaping shall be
considered to be changes of minor detail. (Ord. No. 89-103, 10-3-89)
Supp. No.8
124
Art. 26, § 8 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 26, § 9
Section 8. Abandonment.
A development plan or section thereof, after being given final approval, shall
be declared abandoned after the applicant or his successors notify the city council
in writing of said abandonment or in the event the applicant or his successors fail
to commence the planned unit development within two (2) years after final
approval has been granted. The applicant or his successor, however, may be
granted by city council upon recommendation by the planning commission a
single extension of two (2) year in which to commence construction provided the
applicant or his successor submits a written request and demonstrates good cause
for such extension. Upon termination of an approved plan of development, the
remaining undeveloped property shall automatically revert to the original zoning,
and the planning commission shall determine if the zoning classification of the
developed portion of the planned unit development shall be revised to reflect any
changes broughtbytheproposeddevelopment. (Ord. No. 89-103, 10-3-89)
Section 9. Exemption of currently approved PUD.
This ordinance shall become effective immediately provided, however, that
any currently approved planned unit developed shall be governed by the terms of
the city's planned unit development ordinance in effect prior to the passage of this
article. (Ord. No. 89-103, 10-3-89)
ARTICLE 26A. CONDITIONAL ZONING
Section 1. Declaration of policy.
It is the policy of the city in accordance with the provisions of Article 2 to
provide for the orderly development of land, for all purposes, through zoning and
other land development regulation. Frequently, where competing and
incompatible uses conflict, traditional zoning methods and procedures are
inadequate. In these cases, more flexible and adaptable zoning methods are
needed to permit differing land uses, and at the same time to recognize effects of
change. It is the purpose of this article to provide a more flexible and adaptable
zoning method to cope with situations found in such zones through conditional
zoning, whereby a zoning reclassification may be allowed subject to certain
conditions proffered by the zoning applicant for the protection of the community
that are not generally applicable to land similarly
Supp.No. 8
125
Art. 26A, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 26A, §2
ARTICLE 26A. CONDITIONAL ZONING
Section 1. Declaration of policy.
It is the policy of the city in accordance with the provisions of Article 2 to
provide for the orderly development of land, for all purposes, through zoning and
other land development regulation. Frequently, where competing and
incompatible uses conflict, traditional zoning methods and procedures are
inadequate. In these cases, more flexible and adaptable zoning methods are
needed to permit differing land uses, and at the same time to recognize effects of
change. It is the purpose of this article to provide a more flexible and adaptable
zoning method to cope with situations found in such zones through conditional
zoning, whereby a zoning reclassification may be allowed subject to certain
conditions proffered by the zoning applicant for the protection of the community
that are not generally applicable to land similarly zoned. The provisions of this
article shall not be used for the purpose of discrimination in housing and shall
conform to the 1950 Code of Virginia, as amended, Section 15.1-491.1. (Ord.
No. 86-90, § 2, 10-7-86)
Section 2. Conditions as part of rezoning or amendment to zoning map.
Any applicant may proffer in writing any reasonable conditions, prior to a
public hearing before the city council, in addition to the regulations provided for
within the rezoning district by this chapter, as part of a rezoning or amendment to
the zoning map; provided that:
(1) The rezoning itself must give rise for the need for the conditions;
(2) Such conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning;
(3) Such conditions shall not include a cash contribution to the city;
( 4) Such conditions shall not include mandatory dedication of real or personal
property for open space, parks, schools, fire departments or other public
facilities not otherwise provided for;
( 5) Such conditions shall no include payment for or construction of off-site
improvements except those provided for in City Codes;
(6) No conditions shall be proffered that are not related to the physical
development or physical operation of the property; and
(7) All such conditions shall be in conformity with the general plan as defined
in proffers.
126
Art. 26A, § 2 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 26A, § 3
A draft of all of the applicant's proffers shall be submitted as part of the
application in a format established by the zoning administrator. The city council
reserves the right to reject or amend any proffer prior to making a decision on the
map amendment to the zoning ordinance.
Prior to final action by the city council, the proffers shall be completed and
signed by the applicant and shall be binding on the applicant once the application
is approved. (Ord. No. 86-90, § 2, 10-7-86)
Section 3. Enforcement and guarantees.
The zoning administrator shall be vested with all necessary authority on
behalf of the city council to administer and enforce conditions attached to a
rezoning or amendment to the zoning map, including:
(1) The ordering in writing of the remedy of any noncompliance with such
conditions;
(2) The bringing of legal action to ensure compliance with such conditions,
including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding;
and
(3) Requiring a guarantee, satisfactory to the city council, in an amount
sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical
improvements required by the conditions, or a contract for the
construction of such improvements and the contractor's guarantee, in like
amount and so conditioned, which guarantee shall be reduced or released
by the city, upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that construction
of such improvements and the contractor's guarantee, in like amount and
so conditioned, which guarantee may be reduced or released by the city,
upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that construction of such
improvements has bee completed in whole or in part.
Failure to meet all conditions shall constitute cause to deny the issuance of
any of the required use, occupancy or building permits. (Ord. No. 86-90, § 2, 10-
7-86)
Supp.No. 8
127
Art. 26A, § 4 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 26, § 6
Section 4. Zoning map to show conditions; conditional zoning index.
The zoning map shall show by an appropriate symbol, the existence of
conditions attaching to the zoning on the map. The zoning administrator shall
keep and make available for public inspection a conditional zoning index. The
index shall provide ready access to the ordinance creating conditions, in addition
to the regulations provided for in a particular zoning district or zone. (Ord. No.
86-90, § 2, 10-7-86)
Section 5. Petition for review of decision.
Any zoning applicant who is aggrieved by the decision of the zoning
administrator pursuant to the provisions of Article 27 may petition the board of
zoning appeals for the review of the decision of the zoning administrator. (Ord.
No. 86-90, § 2, 10-7-86)
Section 6. Amendments and variations of conditions.
There shall be no amendment or variation of conditions created pursuant to
the provisions of Article 26A until after a public hearing before the city council
advertised pursuant to the provisions of Article 28. (Ord. No. 86-90, § 2, 10-7 -86)
128
Art. 27, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 27, § 2
ARTICLE 27. THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Section 1. Organization.
(1) In accordance. with the provisions of the Code of Virginia, the board of
zoning appeals heretofore established for the City of Petersburg, is hereby
continued. The word "board" when used in this chapter [appendix] shall be
construed to mean the board of zoning appeals.
(2) The board shall consist of five (5) residents of the City of Petersburg,
appointed by the judge of Hustings Court of Petersburg. Their terms of office
shall be for five ( 5) years each, except that original appointments shall be made
for such terms that the term of one member shall expire each year. The secretary
of the board shall notify the court at least thirty (30) days in advance of the
expiration of any term of office, and shall also notify the court promptly if any
vacancy occurs~ Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of the term. Members may be reappointed to succeed themselves.
Members of the board shall hold no other public office in the city, except that one
may be a member of the city planning commission. A member whose term
expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed and qualifies.
Section 2. Rules, meetings and records.
(1) All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the action of the board, and the vote of
each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact; and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public
record.
(2) All actions of the board shall be by resolution. The concurring vote of
three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reserve [reverse] any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the building inspector, or to decide in
favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass, under this
ordinance, or to effect any variation in the requirements of this ordinance.
(3) The board may call on the city departments for assistance in the
performance of its duties; and it shall be the duty of such departments to render
such assistance to the board as may reasonably be required.
Supp.No. 8
129
(THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY)
. 130
Art. 27, § 2 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 27, § 3
Section 3. Appeals and hearings.
(1) An application to the board of zoning appeals, in cases in which it has
original jurisdiction under the provisions of this ordinance, may be made by any
property owner, or tenant, or by any public officer, department, board or bureau.
Such application shall be filed with the building inspector, who shall transmit the
same, together with all the plans, specifications and other papers pertaining to the
application, to the board of zoning appeals.
(2) An appeal to the board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City of
Petersburg, affected by any ruling of the building inspector or of any other
administrative officer administering any portion of this ordinance. Such appeal
shall be taken within a reasonable time, as prescribed by the rules of the board, by
filing, with the building inspector and with the board, a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to
the board such notice of appeal, together with all the plans and papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(3) No such variance shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as
required by article 28.
Section 4. Powers and duties.
The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative officer,. in the administration or
enforcement of this article or of any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto;
Supp. No.I
131
Art.27, §4 PETERSBURG CODE Art.27, § 4
(2) To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms
of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, when, owing
to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in
unnecessary hardship; provided, that the spirit of the ordinance shall be
observed and substantial justice done, as follows:
When a property owner can show that his property was acquired in good
faith, and where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size
or shape, of a specified piece of property at the time of the effective date
of the ordinance, or where, by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of
property, or of the use or development of property immediately adjacent
thereto, the strict application of the terms of the ordinance would
effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property; or
where the board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the
granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship
approaching confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege or
convenience sought by the applicant; provided that all variances shall be
in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of the ordinance.
No such variances shall be authorized by the board unless it finds:
(a) That the strict application of the ordinance would produce undue
hardship;
·(b) That such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the
same zoning district and the same vicinity;
(c) That the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property and that the character of the district will
. not be changed by the granting of the variance.
Supp.No.l
132
Art. 27, § 4 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art.27, §4
No variance shall be authorized, unless the board finds that the condition
or situation of the property concerned, or the intended use of the property,
is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable
the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to
the ordinance.
In authorizing a variance, the board may impose such conditions regarding
the location, character, and other features of the proposed structure or use,
as it may deem necessary in the public interest; and may require a
guarantee or bond to insure that the conditions imposed are being and will
continue to be complied with.
(3) To hear and decide appeals from the decision of the building inspector, or
applications for such special exceptions as may be authorized in the
ordinance. The board may imposed such conditions relating to the use for
which a permit is granted as it may deem necessary in the public interest,
and my require a guarantee or bond to insure that the conditions imposed
are being, and will continue to be, complied with.
No such special exception may be granted except after notice and hearing
as provided in article 28.
( 4) To hear and decide applications for interpretation of the district map,
where there is any uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary.
After notice to the owners of the property affected by any such question,
and after public hearing with notice as required by article 28, the board
may interpret the map in such way as to carry out the intent and purpose of
the ordinance, for the particular section or district in question. The board
shall not have the power, however, to rezone property, or substantially to
change the locations of district boundaries as established by ordinance.
Supp.No.l
133
Art.27, § 5 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 27, § 5
Section 5. Special use exceptions.
In order to provide for adjustment in the relative locations of uses and
buildings of the same or of different classifications; to promote the usefulness of
this ordinance as an instrument for fact finding, interpretation, application and
adjustment; and to supply the necessary elasticity to its efficient operation; special
use exceptions are permitted by the terms of this ordinance. The following
buildings and uses are permitted as special exceptions if the board of zoning
appeals finds that, in its opinion, as a matter of fact, such exceptions will not
substantially affect adversely the uses of adjacent and neighboring property
permitted by this ordinance:
(1) A transitional use between a business or industrial district and a
dwelling district, where the side of a lot in a single-family residence
district or a two-family residence district abuts upon a lot zoned for
business or industrial purposes as follows:
(a) On a lot in a single-family residence district which sides upon a lot
zoned for business or industrial purposes, the board may permit a
two-family dwelling;
(b) On a lot in the "R-3" Two-Family Residence District which sides
upon a lot zoned for business or industrial purposes, the board may
permit a multiple-family dwelling of not more than four (4)
dwelling units;
(2) Where a use district boundary line crosses a lot, a use of either
classification on the whole lot;
(3) Garage for more than four (4) cars, and covering more than nine
hundred (900) square feet, in a residence district;
( 4) Commercial greenhouses and nurseries, provided that any structure
shall not be less than one hundred (1 00) feet from all property lines;
(5) The extraction of earth products, such as rock, gravel and sand;
(6) The temporary and conditional permits, for a two (2) year period, for
the following uses:
Supp.No.l
1. Dog kennels, when accessory to a residential use, within the "A"
Agricultural District, for up to ten (10) dogs, and within the "RIA"
and R-1" Single-Family Residence Districts only for kennels
of four ( 4) to ten (1 0) dogs, on parcels of one or more acres in area,
and with other conditions which may be imposed by the Board;
134
Art. 27, § 5 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art.27, § 5
2. Cat kennels, when accessory to a residential use, for the keeping or
harboring of five (5) to twenty (20) cats;
3. Riding stables and private stables;
4. Rifle or pistol range, trap or skeet shooting;
5. Miniature golf courses and driving ranges;
6. Raising for sale, of birds, bees, rabbits and other animals, fish and
other creatures, when accessory to a residential use;
(7) The conditional use permit for a single mobile home under the
provisions set forth in article 4-A, of the zoning ordinance;
(8) An off-street parking area in a residence district, where such facility
would relieve traffic congestion on the streets, and where said parking
lot conforms to the following specifications:
Supp. No.1
1. The land devoted to parking to be located adjacent to, and within
two hundred (200) feet of, a commercial or industrial district;
2. Walls, fences or planting shall be provided in a manner to afford
protection for, and be in harmony with, surrounding residential
property;
3. The same front yard depth restrictions shall be required as are
required in the zoning district in which the parking area is located;
4. All driveways and the area used for the parking of vehicles shall be
surfaced with a hard durable, dustproof material, and be properly
drained;
135
5. The area shall be used exclusively for parking of motor vehicles
belonging to invitees of the owner or lessees of said lot.
6. The approval of all plans and specifications for the improvement,
surfacing, drainage, entrances and exits, or lights, for said parking
area, shall be obtained from the director of public works;
7. The area shall conform to such other requirements as the board, in
the exercise of sound discretion, may require for the protection of
surrounding property, persons, and neighborhood values;
(9) Privately or commercially operated recreational lake, swimming pool,
and tennis courts;
(1 0) Off-street parking areas, adjacent to, or at a reasonable distance from,
the premises on which parking areas are required by the parking
regulations of this ordinance, where practical di:fficulties, including the
acquisition of property, or undue hardships are encountered in locating
such parking areas on the premises, and where the purpose of this
ordinance to relieve congestion in the streets would best be served by
permitting such parking off the premises;
(11) To waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in any
district, whenever the character or use of the building is such as to
make unnecessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities, or
where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon
the use of the lot;
(12) Repealed (Ordinance 95-95);
(13) Additions or structural alterations to special uses, after they have been
approved by the planning commission;
(14) To determine, in cases of uncertainty, the classification as to district,
of any use not specifically named in this ordinance; provided,
however, such use shall be in keeping with uses specifically named in
the district regulations;
(15) In any "M-2" Heavy Industrial District, those uses which the board is
required to pass by article 18, section 3, of this ordinance;
(16) An exception to the area limitation in the sign regulations stated in
article 21, section 5, subsection (2) of this ordinance, as those
regulations pertain to churches or other institutions of religious nature.
(17) Family day care homes in residential districts.
136
Art. 27, § 5 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 27, § 6
(18) One-chair beauty/barber shops, with the following conditions:
(a) Operating hours limited to forty (40) per week, Monday through
Saturday;
(b) No exterior alterations to the residence;
(c) Not transferable upon sale or vacation;
(d) Approval from the health department;
(e) Services by appointment only;
(t) No advertising of business with signs; and
(g) Only members of the resident family may be employees.
Section 6. Special yard and height exceptions.
The following special yard exceptions, limited as to location and especially in
locations described below in this section, are permitted by this ordinance, if the
board of zoning appeals finds, that in its opinion, as a matter of fact, such
exception will not substantially affect adversely the uses of adjacent and
neighboring property permitted by this ordinance, and provided such exceptions
are approved by the board:
(1) An exception in the yard regulations on a lot where, on the adjacent lot
there is a front, side or rear yard that does not conform with such yard
regulations;
(2) A yard exception on a comer lot, or lots opposite or adjoining
permanent ope~ spaces, including parks and playgrounds;
(3) An exception in the depth of rear yard, on a lot in a block where there
are nonconforming rear yard conditions;
(4) An exception where there are irregularities in depths of existing front
yards on a street frontage, on the side of a street between two (2)
intersecting streets, so that any one of the existing depths shall, for a
building hereafter constructed or extended, be the required minimum
front yard depth;
137
Art. 27, § 6 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 27, § 7
Section 7. Variances.
The board of zoning appeals shall have the power to grant the following
vanances:
(1) A variation in the yard requirements in any district, so as to relieve
practical difficulties or particular hardships in cases when, and where,
by reason of exceptional narrow3ness, shallowness, or shape of a
specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of this
ordinance, or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or
other extraordinary or exceptional situations or conditions of such
piece of property, the strict application of the provisions of this
ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties
to, or exceptional hardship upon, the owner of such property. Such
grant or variance shall comply, as nearly as possible, in ever respect
with the spirit, intent and purpose of the zoning plan; it being the
purpose of this provision top authorize the granting of variation only
for reasons of demonstrable or exceptional hardship, as distinguished
from variations sought by applicants for purposes or reasons of
convenience, profit, or caprice;
(2) In authorizing a variance, the board may make such modification in
the requirements of this ordinance as it may deem necessary to secure
an appropriate development of a lot, and may impose such conditions
regarding the locations, character and other features of the proposed
building, structure or use as it may deem necessary in the interest of
furthering the purposes of this ordinance and the public interest.
No such variance in the provisions or requirements of this ordinance
shall be authorized by the board unless the board finds, beyond
reasonable doubt, that all the following facts and conditions exist:
138
Art. 27, § 7 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 27, § 7
1. That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applying to the property in question, as to the intended
use of the property, that do not apply generally to other properties
or class of uses in the same zoning districts;
2. That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the
same zoning district and in the vicinity;
3. That the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property, and will not materially impair the
purpose of this ordinance or the public interest.
No grant of a variance shall be authorized unless the board specifically
finds that the condition or situation of the specific piece of property, or
the intended use of said property, for which the variance is sought, one
or the other or in combination, is not of so general or recurrent a nature
as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general
regulation for such conditions or situations;
(3) In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as ought to be made.
Supp.No.3
139
(THIS PAGE LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY)
140
Art. 27, § 7 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 27, § 8
Section 8. Conditional permits.
Where in this ordinance special exceptions are permitted provided they are
approved by the board of zoning appeals, where the board is authorized to decide
appeals or approve certain uses, and where the board is authorized to approve
variances, such approval, decision or authorization shall be limited by such
conditions as the case may require, including, if necessary, any of the following
specifications:
(1) No outside advertising structures, except professional signs;
(2) Limitation of signs as to size, type, color, location or illumination;
(3) Limitation of outdoor advertising;
( 4) Amount, direction, and location of outdoor lighting;
(5) Amount and location of off-street parking and loading space;
(6) Cleaning or painting;
(7) Gable roof, or other type;
(8) Connected or disconnected with other buildings;
(9) Exits, doors, and windows;
(10) Paving, shrubbery, or ornamental or screening fence or wall;
( 11) Time of day or night for operating;
Supp. No.1
141
Art. 27, § 8 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 27, § 9
(12) No store front;
(13) No structural changes;
(14) Control or eJimination of smoke, dust, gas, noise or vibratiop. caused
by operations;
(15) Such other conditions as are necessary.
Section 9. Lapse of special exception or variance.
After the board has approved a special exception or granted a variance, the
special exception or variance so approved or granted shall lapse after the
expiration of one year if no substantial construction or change of use has taken
place in accordance with the plans for which such special exception or variance
was granted, and the provisions of this ordinance shall thereafter govern .
. Supp. No.1
142
Art. 28, §I APPENDIX A -ZONING Art. 28, § 4
ARTICLE 28. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Section 1. [Initiation by motion or council, recommendation by planning
commission, or petition of property owner.]
The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or change by
ordinance, the boundaries of the districts, or the regulations herein established. A
proposed change of district or text may be initiated by the city council, on its own
motion, or in recommendation by the planning commission, or by petition of
property owner addressed to the city council. All petitions shall be in writing and
shall specify:
(1) The nature and extent of the change desired;
(2) Reasons for seeking the change;
(3) The names and addresses of the owner or owners of all property
abutting, and immediately across the street from, the property whose
zoning is proposed to be changed; provided, however, that if the
petition involves a change of more than twenty-five (25) parcels of
land, the provisions of this subsection shall not be required. The
petition, and all data pertaining thereto, shall be filed in the office of
the clerk at least five (5) days prior to a regular meeting of council.
Section 2. [Planning commission hearing, changes and report; failure to
report.]
Before taking any action on any proposed amendment, supplement, or change,
the city council shall submit the same to the planning commission for its
recommendations and report. The planning commission shall hold at lease one
public hearing on such proposed amendments, and may make appropriate changes
in the proposed amendments, as a result of such hearing. Upon the completion of
its work, the planning commission shall present the proposed amendment to the
city council, together with its recommendation and any appropriate explanatory
materials deemed necessary by the planning commission. The failure of the
planning commission to report, within ninety (90) days after the first meeting of
the commission after the proposed amendment has been referred to the
commission, shall be deemed approval.
Section 3. [Public hearing, notice required for each proposal; greater than
majority vote required for amendment.]
Before approving and adopting any amendment to this ordinance, the city
council shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, after which the city council
may make appropriate changes or corrections in the proposed amendment;
provided, that no additional land may be zoned to a different classification than
143
was contained in the public notice required by this section, without an additional
public hearing, after notice as required by this section. An affirmative vote of at
least a majority of the members of the city council shall be required to amend any
provision of this ordinance.
Section 4. [Notice to be published; signs to be posted, maintained.]
The planning commission shall not recommend, nor shall the city council
adopt, any amendment to this ordinance until notice of intention to do so has been
published once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper published, or
having general circulation, in the city. Such notice shall specify the time and
place of hearing at which persons affected may appear and present their views,
not less than five (5) days nor more than twenty-one (21) days after final
publication.
Supp. No.1
144
Art. 28, § 4 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 29, § 1
When a petition for a change in a district classification is filed with the city,
the petitioner shall, within five (5) days of that same date, post a sign on each lot
included in the petition, stating that a request has been filed with the council for a
zoning change, and state the requested classification. Such signs shall be
furnished by the building inspector, and shall be located so as to be visible from
the street. If the petitioner requests that an entire subdivision of ten (1 0) or more
lots be changed, two (2) signs posted adjacent to each street in the subdivision
shall be deemed to be sufficient. Signs on each property shall not be deemed
necessary to adopt a new zoning district map for the city.
It shall be the duty of the petitioner or petitioners to maintain, or to replace,
the signs if they are obliterated or destroyed, until such time as the council has
disposed of the petition.
Section 5. [Notice to be delivered by certified or registered mail to affected
property owners, agents, or tenants.]
Except upon application of a property owner or his agent, when a proposed
amendment of this ordinance involves a change in the zoning classification of
twenty-five (25) or less parcels of land, than in addition to the advertising as
required in the preceding paragraph, written notice shall be given at least five (5)
days before the hearing to the owner or owners, their agent, or the occupant, of
each parcel involved, and to the owners, their agent, or occupant, of all abutting
property and property immediately across the street or road from the property
affected. Notice sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of
such owner, as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books, shall be
deemed adequate compliance with this requirement.
Supp. No.1
145
Art. 29, §I APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 30, § 5
ARTICLE 29. NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY
Section 1. [Automatic temporary zoning.]
All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Petersburg, Virginia, shall be
automatically classified as "R-IA" Single-Family Residence District, until such
territory is permanently zoned by the city council of the City of Petersburg. The
city council shall, as soon as practicable after annexation, undertake to establish
permanent zoning of the said territory, in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance.
ARTICLE 30. CERTIFICATE OF
OCCUPANCY
Section 1. [Vacant land.]
No vacant land shall be occupied or used, except for agricultural uses, until a
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector.
Section 2. [Premises.]
No premises shall be used, and no buildings hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall be used, occupied, or changed in use, until a certificate of occupancy
and compliance shall have been issued by the building inspector, stating that the
building or proposed use of a building or premises complies with the building
laws and the provisions of these regulations.
Section 3. [Coincident with application for building permit.]
Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with
the application for a building permit, and shall be issued within ten (1 0) days after
the erection or structural alteration of such buildings shall have been completed in
conformity with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates
shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector.
Section 4. [Prerequisite for excavation permit.]
No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application
has been made for certificate of occupancy and compliance.
Section 5. [Required for nonconforming use.]
A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming uses.
Application for a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed,
within twelve (12) months from the effective date of this ordinance, with the
building inspector.
146
Art. 31, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE
ARTICLE 31. PERMITS, PLATS, AND
FILING FEES
Section 1. Permits.
Art. 31, § 2
No building shall be erected, constructed, altered, moved, converted,
extended, or enlarged without the owner or owners having obtained a building
permit therefore from the building inspector; such permit shall require conformity
with the provisions of this ordinance. When issued, such permit shall be valid for
a period of six (6) months.
No building permit by the building inspector, lawfully issued prior to the
effective date of this ordinance or of any amendment hereto, and which permit by
its own terms and provisions is in full force and effect at said date, shall be
invalidated by the passage of this ordinance or any such amendment; but shall
remain a valid and subsisting permit subject only to its own terms and provisions,
and ordinances, rules, and regulations appertaining thereto and in effect at the
time of the issuance of said permit; provided, that all such permits shall expire not
later than sixty (60) days from the effective date of this ordinance, unless actual
construction shall have theretofore begun and continued, pursuant to the terms of
said permit.
Section 2. Plats.
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a drawing or
plat, in duplicate, or as required by the building inspector, showing, with
dimensions, the lot lines,· the building or buildings, the location of buildings on
the lot, and other such information as ·may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of these regulations, including, if necessary, a boundary survey and a
staking of the lot by a competent surveyor, and complete construction plans. The
drawings shall contain suitable notations indicating the proposed use of all land
and buildings. A careful record of the original copy of such applications and plats
shall be kept in the offices of the building inspector, and a duplicate copy shall be
kept at the building at all times during construction.
Section 3. [Filing Fees]
(1) All persons, firms, or corporations appealing to the board of zoning
appeals, necessitating the publication of notices in the newspaper, shall be
required to pay, in advance, fifty dollars ($50.00) for expenses relative thereto.
(2) All persons, firms or corporations applying for special use permits, under
the provisions of article 23, of this ordinance, necessitation the publication of
notices in the newspaper, shall be required to pay, in advance, one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) for expenses relative thereto.
Supp.No.l
147
Art. 31, § 3 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 32, § 1
(3) All persons, firms or corporations applying for an amendment to the
zoning ordinance, or a change in the classification of the district or a portion
thereof, necessitating the publication of notices in the newspaper, shall be
required to pay, in advance, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for expenses relative
thereto.
( 4) The payment of such money in advance to the city clerk shall be deemed a
condition precedent to the consideration of such appeal, special permit or
amendment. (Ord. No. 85-105, §§II, ill, 10-1-85)
ARTICLE 32. INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE
AND CONFLICT
Section 1. [Ordinance to be minimum requirements; error or omission in
zoning map.]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they ·shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health,
convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. It is not intende4 by this
ordinance to interfere with, or abrogate or annul, any easements, covenants, or
other agreement between parties; provided, however, that where this ordinance
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height
of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other
ordinances, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the
provisions of this ordinance shall govern. If, because of error or omission in the
zoning district map, any property in the City of Petersburg is not shown as being a
zoning district, the classification of such property shall be classified "R -1" SingleFamily
Residence District, until changed by amendment.
Supp. No.5
148
Art. 33, § 1 PETERSBURG CODE
ARTICLE 33. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION
AND PENALTIES
Art. 33, § 3
Section 1. [Duty of Zoning Administrator, police and other city officers.]
It shall be the duty of th~ Zoning Administrator to enforce the provisions of
this ordinance, and to refuse to issue any permit for any building, or for the use of
any premises, which would violate any of the provisions of said ordinance. It
shall also be the duty of all officers and employees of the city, and especially of
all members of the police department, to assist the Zoning Administrator by
reporting to him any seeming violation in new construction, reconstruction, or
land uses.
Section 2. [Authority of Zoning Administrator to deal with violations.]
In any case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired or converted, or any building or land is used in violation of this
ordinance, the Zoning Administrator is authorized and directed to institute any
appropriate action to put an end to such violation.
Section 3. [Penalty.]
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
ordinance, or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or
who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan
submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
liable to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000). The owner or owners of any building or premises or part
thereof, where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall
exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation
employed in connection therewith, and who have assisted in the commission of
any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined as hereinbefore provided.
149
Art. 34, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 35, § 1
ARTICLE 34. VALIDITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE*
Section 1. [Saving clause.]
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not
affect the validity of this ordinance as whole or any part or provision thereof other
than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 2. [Previous zoning ordinances repealed.]
All zoning ordinance heretofore adopted by the city council of the City of
Petersburg, are hereby repealed.
Section 3. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be effective from and after July 1, 1971.
150
Art. 35, § PETERSBURG CODE
ARTICLE 35. PRESERVATION OF
ffiSTORICAL AREAS WITmN THE CITY
Section 1. Purpose and objectives.
Art. 35, § 3.1
The purpose and objectives of this article are to promote, within the historic
areas hereby established, the educational, cultural, business, travel, industrial and
other economic resources and the general welfare of the City of Petersburg, by
preserving and protecting the old, historic or architecturally worthy buildings,
structures, places and areas, as provided by Section 15.1-503.2 of the t"950 Code
of Virginia, as amended.
Additional purposes of this article are to stabilize and improve property value
in the historic areas, and to encourage new building and development that will be
harmonious with the existing historic features, but will not necessarily be of the
same architectural style. The purpose is to develop the historic areas, not in
vacuum, but as a vital area in which each succeeding generation may build with
the quality and sensitivity of past generations.
Section 2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Historic area. Historic area means an area containing buildings or places in
which historic events occurred, or which have special public value because of
notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of
the community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation.
Structure. Anything man-made, including, but not limited to, main buildings,
outbuildings, fences, walls, lamp posts, light fixtures, signs, signposts, billboards
and paving.
Section 3. Historic areas.
There are hereby created several areas to be known as "historic areas." The
historic areas are delineated on a map hereinafter called the "historic areas zoning
map," which is hereby made a part of this article. Additions and amendments to
this map shall be made in accordance Section 15.1-486, of the Code of Virginia,
as amended.
*Editor's note - Section 3, Effective date, of Art 34, had been designated by the city as Art 35; inasmuch as this
designation was duplicated by Art 35, Preservation of Historical Areas . . ., the effective date provisions have been
included in Art 34, at the editor's discretion.
Supp.No.6
151.
Art. 35, § 3 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 35, § 3.1
The requir~ments placed on property located within historic areas by this
article shall be co-extensive with, and in addition to, the requirements set out in
articles 1 through 34 of the Petersburg zoning ordinance.
Section 3.1. Criteria for the expansion or establishment of additional historic
zoning areas.
Expanded or additional historic zoning areas may be established to designate
and protect properties that include areas, individual structures, and archaeological
sites of historic, architectural, or cultural significance. In establishing such areas,
it must be determined that the property, structure, or area meets at least one of the
following criteria:
(1) Possesses character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage,
or cultural characteristics of the community, state, or country;
(2) Is a site of a significant local, state, or national event;
(3) Is clearly identified with a person or persons who significantly contributed
to the developme~t of the community, state, or country;
(4) Embodies the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction, or use of
indigenous materials;
(5) Is identified as the work of a master builder, designer, architect, or
landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development
of the community, state, or country;
( 6) Embodies elements of design, detailing, materials, or craftsmanship that
render it architecturally significant;
(7) Embodies design characteristics that make it structurally or architecturally
significant;
(8) Occupies a unique location or possesses singular physical characteristics
that make it an established or familiar visual feature;
(9) Provides for a landscape unit needed to control potentially adverse
influences on lands closely related to and bearing upon the character of
historic site or sites. (Ord. No. 87-08, 1-20-87)
Supp. No.6
152
Art. 35, § 3.2 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 35, § 3.2
Section 3.2. Procedure for the establishment or expansion of historic zoning
areas.
Additions and expansions to historic zoning areas may be initiated by
resolution of city council, or motion of the planning commission, or by petition of
the owner or the owner's agent. Additionally, the architectural review board may
recommend such initiation to the city council or planning commission. As a part
of the city council's consideration of the expansion of existing areas or creation of
~ditional areas, it may review reports prepared by the department of planning
and the architectural review board along with the information relevant to the
determination of the appropriateness of such proposed expansion and additions.
(Ord. No. 870-08, 1-20-87)
Section 4. Architectural review board- Creation.
For the purposes of administering the provisions of this article, there is hereby
created a board to be known as the "Architectural Review Board." This board
shall be composed of seven (7) members who have a demonstrated interest,
competence, or knowledge in historic preservation. At least one member shall be
an architect and at least two members shall have professional training or
equivalent experience in architecture, history, architectural history, archaeology
or planning. The members shall be residents or business owners in the City of
Petersburg, with the exception that the architect member does not have to reside
or own a business in the City. (Ord. No. 11-0rd-87, 9-06-11)
Section 5. Same-Terms of members; quorums; and officers.
Of the members of the architectural review board first appointed, two (2) shall
be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years, and
three (3) for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for
a term of three (3) years, respectively. A vacancy occurring in the membership of
the board for any cause shall be filled within sixty (60) days of its occurrence and,
if occurring during the term, for the unexpired portion of the term. Four (4)
members of the architectural review board present and voting shall constitute a
quorum. At the first meeting of the architectural review board, the members, by
majority vote, shall elect one of its members to serve as chairman. Thereafter, a
chairman shall be elected annually at the first meeting to be held on or after July
15\ in each year. Similarly, the members shall elect a vice-chairman and
secretary. The secretary may or may not be a member of the board. (Ord. No.
87-08, 1-20-87)
Supp. No.6
153
Art. 35, § 6 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 35, § 6
Section 6. Certificate of appropriateness; requirements before issuance of
building permit, or commencement of work not requiring a
permit.
No building permit under the provisions of the building code shall hereafter be
issued for the erectio~ construction, alteration or restoration of the exterior of any
building or structure, including signs, or part thereof, within a historic area, unless
and until the applicant shall have secured a certificate of appropriateness from the
architectural review board. No work, such as, but not limited to, painting which
does not require a building permit, but would substantially alter the exterior
appearance of any building or structure within a historic area, shall be
commenced, unless and until the applicant shall have secured a certificate of
appropriateness from the architectural review board.
These requirements shall not apply when the work proposed would not be
subject to public view from a street or other public place.
Section 7. Elements of architectural compatibility to be considered in
passing upon certificates of appropriateness.
The architectural review board shall consider the following elements of
architectural compatibility in consideration of issuance of a certificate of
approp~ateness to an applicant:
(1) General design;
(2) Character and appropriateness of design;
(3) Form;
(4) Proportion and scale;
(5) Mass;
(6) Configuration;
(7) Arrangement;
(8) Texture;
(9) Material;
Supp. No.6
154
Art. 35, § 7 APPENDIX A -ZONING Art. 35, § 9
(10) Color;
(11) The relationship of such elements to similar features of structures in
the immediate surroundings;
(12) Prevention of developments which are not in harmony with prevailing
characteristics, or which are obviously incongruous with the character
of the historic area.
Section 8. Temporary certificates of appropriateness.
The architectural review board may, at its discretion, issue a temporary
certificate of appropriateness to an applicant who does not meet the necessary
requirements of architectural compatibility, but only if the applicant meets all of
the following requirements:
(1) Strict application of this article would produce undue hardship;
(2) The proposed work would not be of such a permanent nature as to
preclude future activity which would meet compatibility compliance;
(3) No such temporary certificate shall be issued to allow the proposed work
to exist for a period longer than five (5) years.
Section 9. Applications for certificates.
An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness regarding proposed erection,
construction, alteration or restoration of any structure located within a historic
area shall submit, to the architectural review board, all relevant information
concerning the proposal and reasonably requested by the architectural review
board. Such information may include, but need not be limited to, samples of
materials and colors, photographs, prospective views, exterior elevations, plot
plans and outline specifications.
Supp.No.6
155
Art. 35, § 10 PETERSBURG CODE ART. 35, § 11
Section 10. Board actions on applications.
Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be filed in writing with
the secretary of the architectural review board. Within thirty (30) days of receipt
of an application by the secretary of the board, the board shall meet to review the
application in accordance with the applicable sections of this article.
Within thirty (30) days after the date that the board first reviews the
application, the board shall decide whether or not to issue a certificate of
appropriateness.
In any event, if no decision has been made by the architectural review board
within sixty (60) days after the secretary has received the application, and no
mutual agreement between the applicant and the architectural review board has
been made for the extension of this time period, the secretary of the board shall
submit the application to the clerk of council and council shall review the
application, in the same manner as if a decision of the architectural review board
had been appealed.
Section 11. Notification of issuance of certificate of appropriateness.
If the architectural review board approves an application, it shall record its
reasons therefore in its minutes, issue a certificate of appropriateness signed by
the secretary of the board, attach the certificate to the application, and transfer the
application, with the attached certificate, to the zoning administrator and the
building inspector. Upon receipt thereof, if applicable, the building inspector
shall issue a building permit in the usual manner.
If the architectural review board disapproves an application, it shall state its
reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of the reasons to the applicant, the
zoning administrator, and the building inspector. At any time after disapproval,
the applicant may resubmit an application, with or without amendments, which
shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this article.
Supp.No.l
156
Art. 35, § 12 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 35, § 13
Section 12. Zoning administrator and bullding inspector to enforce
provisions of this article.
The zoning administrator and the building inspector shall enforce the
provisions of this article.
Section 13. Appeals from the board to city council.
Whenever the architectural review board shall, in a final decision, deny an
applicant a certificate of appropriateness, the applicant shall have the right to
appeal to and be heard before city council, provided he files with the clerk of
council, on or before thirty (30) days after the decision of the board, a notice, in
writing, of his intention to appeal. Upon receipt of such notice, the clerk of
council shall forthwith notify the city manager, who shall schedule a public
hearing before city council at a time not to exceed thirty (30) days after receipt by
the clerk of such notice.
Opponents to the granting of certificates of appropriateness by the
architectural review board, shall have the right to appeal to and be heard before
the city council, provided there is filed with the clerk of city council, on or before
thirty (30) days after the decision of the board, a written petition indicating the
intention to appeal. The same provisions for setting a hearing date as aforesaid
shall apply.
On any such appeal, the final decision of the architectural review board shall
be stayed, pending the outcome of the appeal before council, except that the filing
of the appeal shall not stay the decision of the board if such decision denies the
right to raze, move or demolish any historic landmarks, building or structure. The
council shall conduct a full and impartial public hearing on the matter before
rendering a decision.
The same standards and considerations aforesaid in this article shall be
applied by the council as are established for the architectural review board. By
majority of those members present and voting, the council may affirm, reverse or
modify the decision of the board, in whole or in part. The decision, subject to
section 14 of this article, shall be final. If approved, a certificate of
appropriateness shall be signed and issued by the clerk of council, and processed
in the same manner as if it had been approved by the architectural review board.
Supp.No.l
157
Art. 35, § 14 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 35, § 15
Section 14. Appeal to the circuit court to review decision by the city council.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of city
council as related to this article, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board
or bureau of the city, may present to the circuit court a petition specifying grounds
on which aggrieved, within thirty (30) days after the decision is rendered by city
council.
Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ or certiorari
to review the decision of the city council, and shall prescribe therein the time
within which a return thereto must be made.
The filing of said petition shall stay the decision of the city council, pending
the outcome of the appeal to the court, except that the filing of such petition shall
not stay the decision of city council, if such decision denies the right to raze,
move or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. The court may
reverse or modify the decision of the city council, in whole or in part, if it finds
upon review, that the decision of city council is contrary to law, or that its
decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion; or it may affirm the
decision of city council.
Section 15. Demolition, razing or moving of buildings and structures within
a historic area.
The demolition, razing or moving of any building or structure located within a
historic area shall be permitted if, and only if, the owner has secured a certificate
of appropriateness. The same procedure, relevant guidelines, and appeals process,
shall apply for issuance of certificates of appropriateness for demolition, razing or
moving, as apply for the erection, construction, alteration, or restoration of
buildings or structures, as set out in this article.
Other factors that may be considered by the architectural review board, when
deciding upon applications for demolition, razing or moving of a building or a
structure, are its historic significance, architectural value, the structure's
contribution to the overall fac;ade or appearance of the historic area, or the
physical ability to restore the building or structure, considering its present
physical condition.
Supp. No. I
158
Art. 35, § 15 . PETERSBURG CODE Art. 35, § 15
The owner of a building or structure located within a historic area who has
been denied, by the architectural review board, and the city council, on appeal, a
certificate of appropriateness, to demolish, raze or move a building or structure, as
a matter of right shall be entitled to raze, move or demolish such building
provided that:
(1) The owner has, for the period of time set forth in the time schedule
hereinafter contained, and at a price reasonable related to its fair market
value, made a bona fide offer to sell such landmark, building or structure,
and the land pertaining thereto, to the City of Petersburg, or to any person,
firm, corporation, government or agency thereof, or political subdivision
or agency thereof, which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to
preserve and restore the building or structure and the land pertaining
thereto; and
(2) That no bona fide contract, binding upon all parties thereto, shall have
been executed for the sale of any such building or structure, and the land
pertaining thereto, prior to the expiration of the applicable time period set
forth in the time schedule hereinafter contained. Any appeal which may
be taken to the court from the decision of the city council, whether
instituted by the owner or by any other proper party, notwithstanding the
provisions heretofore stated relating to a stay of the decision appealed
from, shall not affect the right of the owner to make the bona fide offer to
sell, referred to above. No offer to sell shall be made·more than one year
after the final decision by the city council, but hereafter the owner may
renew his request to city council to approve the razing or demolition of the
building or structure. The time schedule for offers to sell shall be as
follows:
Three (3) months when the offering price is less than twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00);
Four (4) months when the offering price is twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) or more, but less than forty thousand dollars
($40,000.00);
Five (5) months when the offering price is forty thousand dollars
($40,000.00) or more, but less than fifty-five thousand dollars
($55,000.00);
Six (6) months when the offering price is fifty-five thousand dollars
($55,000.00) or more, but less than seventy-five thousand dollars
($75,000.00);
Supp. No.1
159
PETERSBURG CODE
Art. 35, § 15 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 35, § 17
Seven (7) months when the offering price is seventy~ five thousand dollars
($75,000.00) or more, but less than ninety thousand dollars
($90,000.00); and
Twelve (12) months when the offering price is ninety thousand dollars
($90,000.00) or more.
Section 16. Protective maintenance required.
The owner of any building or structure, which is located within a historic area,
shall keep such structure properly maintained and repaired. The degree of
maintenance and repair hereby required, is that degree sufficient to prevent all
perman~nt damage to the structural components and /or the exterior by any
foreseeable force, including but not limited to weather, fire and termites. The
board is hereby empowered to require such owner to discharge this duty. Acts
which the board may require such owner to perform, pursuant to this paragraph,
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: Exterior painting;
replacing broken window panes; securing abandoned structures by boarding up,
or otherwise; maintaining a sound roof, eaves and roof gutters; termite treatment,
if the board suspects that the structure contains termites. The board is hereby
empowered to use whatever legal processes are needed to assure that this duty is
discharged fully and properly. The building inspector and zoning administrator,
to the extent that their powers permit, shall honor requests made by the board for
the purpose of enforcing this paragraph.
Section 17. Enforcement and penalty.
It shall be unlawful, and punishable to the fullest extent permitted by the Code
of Virginia, for any person, whether on contract or otherside, to cause or
participate in the construction, demolition, moving, exterior alteration, exterior
renovation, or exterior maintenance of any structure in violation of this article.
For purposes of this paragraph, each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation of this article.
Supp. No.1
160
Art. 35, § 17 PETERSBURG CODE Art. 35, § 20
In addition, any violator of this article may be enjoined by any court having
jurisdiction, and, as a part of such equitable relief, any person found to be in
violation of this article may be required, at his own expense, to remove all
nonconforming work and material from the structure, and/or to restore the
structure to its appearance immediately prior to the time that such unauthorized
work began.
Section 18. City codes and ordinances.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the application of the
building code or other laws and ordinances applicable thereto.
Section 19. Validity.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this
ordinance [article] shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same
shall not affect the validity of this ordinance [article] as whole, or any part or
provision thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 20. Effective date.
This article shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the
public welfare requiring it~
161
Art. 36, § 1 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 36, § 5
ARTICLE 36. IDSTORIC BUILDINGS*
[Section 1. Purpose.]
Be it ordained by city council of the City of Petersburg that it hereby
empowers the architectural review board, as established by article 35, section 4,
of the zoning ordinance of the city, to certify historically and architecturally
significant buildings within said city as "Petersburg historic buildings," and to
issue official plaques to owners of such buildings. (Ord. No. 7685, 8-1-78)
[Section 2. Qualifications.]
Requirements for qualifications as "Petersburg historic buildings" are as
follows:
(1) The building must be sixty (60) years of age, or older;
(2) The exterior fa~ade of the building must be restored to the original.
Original facades may include additions or alterations made to the building,
which do not detract from it architectural significance;
(3) The building must be of architectural or historic significance, and listed
upon the survey of historic structures of the City of Petersburg. (Ord. No.
7685, 8-1-78)
[Section 3. Applications.]
The architectural review board shall receive applications from owners who
desire their buildings to be so certified. Included in such application shall be
information that the board may require in order to make a determination in
accordance with the requirements listed above. (Ord. No. 7685, 8-1-78)
*Editor's note - Ord. No. 7685, adopted Aug. 1, 1978, did not expressly amend the zoning ordinance; hence,
designation of said ordinance as Art. 36, § § 1- 5. of App. A, was at the editor's discretion.
Supp. No.1
162
Art. 36, § 4 APPENDIX A-ZONING Art. 36, § 5
[Section 4. Notification; fee; placement of plaque; revocation.]
Applicants shall be notified as to the decision of the board, by its secretary.
Those owners whose buildings are certified by the board shall cause the
certification documents to be recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court of
the city; the clerk to charge such reasonable fee as is necessary to defray the cost
of recordation. Upon evidence of recordation, and payment to the city collector
of ten dollars ($10.00), the board shall issue an official Petersburg historic
building plaque to the owner. The owner shall place this plaque upon the building
so designated, in the location and in the manner as prescribed by the board, within
thirty (30) days of receipt thereof. The plaque so issued shall remain the property
of the City of Petersburg, and, in any case where the plaque is not placed in the
manner as prescribed by the board, the board shall take action to regain
possession of the plaque. (Ord. No. 7685, 8-1-78)
[Section 5. Maintenance of building; rescission of designation.]
Owners of "Petersburg historic buildings" shall maintain the exterior fa~ade of
such buildings in the condition and appearance such variance from this condition,
the board may, by appropriate proceedings, rescind the historic building
designation, and regain possession of the plaque. (Ord. No. 7685, 8-1-78)
Supp.No.l
163