CODE OF THE CITY OF PORTSMOUTH, VIRGINIA (2006) 
____________ 
Published in 2006 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: October 24, 2006 
Effective: December 1, 2006 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
PORTSMOUTH, VIRGINIA 
JUNE 2018 
____________ 
John L. Rowe, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Elizabeth M. Psimas 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ 
William E. Moody, Jr. 
Ray A. Smith, Sr. 
Dr. Mark M. Whitaker 
Nathan J. Clark 
Lisa Lucas-Burke 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Dr. L. Pettis Patton 
City Manager 
____________ 
Solomon H. Ashby, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Debra Y. White 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Holt W. Butt III 
City Assessor 
____________ 
Vacant 
City Auditor 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1988 Code, as supplemented through January 24, 2006. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1973 Code and the 1988 Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 8 and 9, it will be designated as Chapter 8.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and William B. Eddy, Code Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to George Willson, Esq., Deputy City Attorney, Nancy Cherry, Esq., Assistant City Attorney, Debra White, City Clerk and the other members of the city staff, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Portsmouth, Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Portsmouth, Virginia. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Portsmouth, Virginia, 2006. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-92 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF PORTSMOUTH, VIRGINIA; REPEALING CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED IN THE NEW CODE; MAINTAINING IN EFFECT CERTAIN OTHER ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED IN THE NEW CODE; AND ESTABLISHING GENERAL PENALTIES FOR CODE VIOLATIONS. 
BE IT ORDAINED by the Council of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia, that: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia (2006)" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 40 and Appendix A Fee Schedule, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 24, 2006, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not repeal or otherwise affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city, nor shall such repeal affect any ordinances or resolutions of the council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the Code; nor shall it affect any right or franchise conferred by an ordinance or resolution of the council on any person or corporation; nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered; nor shall it affect any offenses or acts committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the 1st day of December, 2006; nor shall it affect any appropriation ordinance, any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes, licenses or fees, or any amendments thereto. The repeal provide in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
Section 4. 
(a)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished as provided in Code section 1-11. 
(b)  Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, such violation shall be punishable upon conviction by confinement in jail for not more than twelve months and a fine of not more than $2,500.00, either or both. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other section of this Code, no penalty shall be imposed for a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city which is greater than the penalty prescribed by the general law of the Commonwealth for a like offense. 
(d)  Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. 
(e)  The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 24, 2006 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall take effect on December 1, 2006. 
ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia on the 24th day of October 2006. 
	Teste: 
	City Clerk 
  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia, Acts 2011 , Chapter 640, approved November 23, 2010. The former Charter derived from Acts 1970, Chapter 471, approved April 4, 1970. All amendments to the Charter have been included in their proper places and are indicated by history notes following the sections amended. The original arrangement of the Charter, including article headings, section catchlines and numbering system has been retained. Words apprearing in brackets [ ] were added by the editor for clarity. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the limits of the City of Portsmouth, as they are or hereafter may be established by law, shall continue to be body politic and corporate and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with and may have a corporate seal, which it may alter at its pleasure.  
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the city shall be as described in Chapter 265, Acts of Assembly, 1858; as codified by Chapter 370, Acts of Assembly, 1894; by an order of the Circuit Court of Norfolk County entered November 21, 1908, in its Common Law Order Book 21, page 467; by an order of the Supreme Court of Appeals confirming an order of the Circuit Court of Norfolk County entered June 26, 1918, which said order of the Supreme Court of Appeals is recorded in the Circuit Court of Norfolk County in Common Law Order Book 27, page 141; by an order of the Circuit Court of the City of Portsmouth entered September 25, 1933, in its Common Law Order Book 4, page 421; by an order of the Supreme Court of Appeals confirming an order of the Circuit Court of Norfolk County entered September 27, 1946, which said order of the Supreme Court of Appeals is recorded in the Circuit Court of Norfolk County in Common Law Order Book 44, page 583; by an order of the Circuit Court of Norfolk County entered August 20, 1959, in its Common Law Order Book 58, page 185; and by an order of the Circuit Court of the City of Chesapeake entered October 2, 1967, in its Common Law Order Book 66, page 357.  
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS 
 
Sec. 2.01. - General grant. 
The City of Portsmouth shall have and it may exercise all the powers granted to cities by Article VII of the Constitution of Virginia, and Title 15.2 and other applicable titles of the Code of Virginia, as those laws may be amended from time to time. The powers thus granted are those that are explicitly granted and those that are reasonably inferred therefrom. The city shall also have the power to take other official actions not in conflict with the Constitution of Virginia or other laws of Virginia for the preservation of the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, morals and welfare of its citizens.  
Sec. 2.02. - Eminent domain. 
The powers of eminent domain set forth in Title 15.2 and Title 33.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and all amendments thereto, with necessary changes in points of detail, are hereby conferred on the city. 
In any cases in which a petition for condemnation is filed by or on behalf of the city, a true copy of the resolution or ordinance duly adopted by the city council declaring the necessity for any taking or damaging of any property within or without the city, for the purposes of the city, shall be filed with the petition and shall constitute sufficient evidence of the necessity of the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city.  
Sec. 2.03. - Sale of real property. 
The restrictions imposed by Article VII, Section 9 of the Constitution of Virginia on the sale of real property owned by the city, plus any other restrictions and authorizations imposed or conferred by the Constitution or Code of Virginia, as amended, shall apply to the city. The city may sell or convey any of its property to the Commonwealth of Virginia, any political subdivision thereof, or to the federal government, without advertisement and without receiving bids.  
Sec. 2.04. - Waterworks. 
The city shall also have the power to contract with any other political subdivision in this state for the use of its own water supply, or the water supply of such other political subdivision, in whole or in part, upon any terms as may be agreed upon. The city may contract for the sale of water, whether within or without the city limits, and collect such rates or charges for the use thereof as it may deem proper, or as may be agreed upon with any other political subdivision under the provisions hereof or any other law of this state. 
The city may establish or enlarge its waterworks, within or without the limits of the city, contract and agree with the owners, whether the same be individuals, private corporations, or public service corporations, of any land, water, water rights or easements, for the use or purchase thereof, or may have the same condemned for the location, extension and enlargement of the works, the pipes connected therewith, or any fixtures or appurtenances thereof. 
The city shall have the power to make reasonable rules and regulations and to enact ordinances with adequate penalties for protecting its water supply from pollution and for protecting from injury its waterworks, pipes, fixtures, lakes and land or anything connected therewith, and for these purposes to exercise full police powers and sanitary patrol over all of Portsmouth's lands comprised within the watershed tributary. The city shall have the power to prosecute violations of any such rules, regulations, and ordinances and to obtain injunctive relief in the courts of the city, regardless of the place of occurrence of any violation or act.  
Sec. 2.05. - Other utilities. 
The city council, in addition to other powers conferred by law, shall have the power: 
a.  To establish, acquire, enlarge, maintain and operate electric lighting and power plants and systems, gasworks and systems, motor bus and other transportation systems, either within or partly within and partly without, the city limits. 
b.  To furnish electric current, transportation and gas to consumers for domestic or commercial purposes, and charge and collect compensation therefore. 
c.  To acquire by purchase, lease, condemnation or otherwise, land, rights-of-way, and easements for the purpose of establishing, extending, maintaining and repairing such plants, systems or works, wires, poles, conduits, motor vehicles, pipes or other fixtures or appurtenances thereto. 
d.  To acquire by purchase or lease, in whole or in part, the lighting and power plants or systems, gasworks or systems, motor bus or other transportation systems, and other property and appurtenances of any person or corporation operating within the city, or in the territory contiguous thereto.  
CHAPTER 3. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Composition. 
The city council of the City of Portsmouth (hereinafter referred to as the city council or the council) shall consist of a mayor and six council members to be elected by and from the city at large.  
Sec. 3.02. - Nomination of candidates. 
a.  Candidates for the offices of mayor and members of the city council under the provisions of this Charter shall be nominated by petition. Any qualified voter of the city may be nominated as provided herein. Subject to the provisions herein, there shall be printed on the ballots to be used in any municipal election for the election of mayor and city council members the names of all candidates who have been nominated by petition and no others. A nominating petition shall conform substantially to the following requirements: 
(1)  Such petition shall state the name and place of residence of each person whose name is presented for a place upon the ballot, and shall request such person or persons to become a candidate or candidates for the office of mayor or city council. 
(2)  Such petition shall be signed by at least one hundred and twenty-five (125) qualified electors of the city and shall contain the residence address of each elector and an affidavit of any other qualified voter who witnessed said signatures. 
(3)  Each elector signing a petition may subscribe to one nomination for each of the places to be filled at the ensuing election, and no more. 
(4)  Such petition shall not be signed by any elector prior to the first Tuesday in January of the year of such election, and such petition shall be filed with the general registrar of the city not later than the time fixed for the closing of the polls on the first Tuesday in June of the year of the election. 
b.  Any person whose name has been submitted for candidacy by petition as herein provided, shall file his or her acceptance of such candidacy with the general registrar of the city not later than the time fixed for the closing of the polls on the first Tuesday in June of the year of the election, otherwise that name shall not appear on the ballot. The filing of such acceptance shall be deemed equivalent to the filing of notice of candidacy under the general election laws of the State, and no other notice of candidacy need be given by the person filing the same. 
c.  No person may be a candidate for the office of mayor and office of city council member in the same election. 
d.  Candidates for the offices of mayor and city council member shall appoint one campaign treasurer and file the name and address of said campaign treasurer with the Portsmouth Electoral Board not later than the first Tuesday of June of the year of the election. Any candidate who fails to appoint and report the appointment of a treasurer shall be deemed to have appointed him/herself treasurer. All candidates for such offices shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 9 of Title 24.2 of the Code of Virginia.  
Sec. 3.03. - Election of mayor and city council members. 
a.  On the first Tuesday in May in nineteen hundred seventy-four, and on the first Tuesday in May of every fourth year thereafter, there shall be a general election at which time the qualified voters of the city shall elect three city council members for terms of four (4) years. On the first Tuesday in May nineteen hundred seventy-six, and on the first Tuesday in May of every fourth year thereafter, there shall be a general election at which the qualified voters of the city shall elect a mayor and three (3) council members for terms of four (4) years. All terms shall begin on the first day of July next following the date of their election. 
However, beginning in 2012, the municipal election shall be held at the time of the November general election with terms to commence on January 1. No term of a mayor or member of council elected in 2008 or 2010 shall be shortened in implementing the change to the November election date. The mayor and members of council who were elected at a May general election and whose terms are to expire as of June 30 shall continue in office until their successors have been elected at the November general election and have been qualified to serve. 
b.  The candidates at any municipal election for the election of city council members, equal in number to the places to be filled, who receive the largest number of votes cast at such election shall be declared elected to the office of city council. The candidate for mayor who receives the largest number of votes at any municipal election shall be declared elected to the office of mayor. 
c.  In the event any member of city council during his or her tenure of office shall desire to be a candidate for the office of mayor, the member shall be eligible to do so without having to resign his or her office. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  The city clerk shall notify all successful candidates of the process to qualify for office immediately after their election has been certified by the proper officials. 
(Memo. of 5-15-2015)  
Sec. 3.04. - City council vacancies. 
If, for any reason, there is an insufficient number of certified elected candidates for the office of city council after any municipal election, or if a city council vacancy otherwise occurs, except for resignations to run for the office of mayor which should be filled as specified in subsection 3.03.c. above, such vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by majority vote of the remaining members of the city council, or, if the council shall fail to fill a vacancy in its membership within sixty (60) days of the occurrence of the vacancy, by appointment by a majority of the judges of the circuit court of the city. 
If any person duly elected to the city council shall fail to take the oath of office prior to the first day of January following such election, he or she shall be deemed to have declined the office, and the seat shall be deemed vacant. If any person appointed to the city council to fill an unexpired term shall fail to take the oath of office within thirty days of such appointment, he or she shall be deemed to have declined the office, and the seat shall be deemed vacant.  
Sec. 3.05. - Induction of mayor and city council members. 
The mayor and each city council member, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take the oath of office. The oath of office may be administered by the city clerk, the judge or clerk of any court, or by any other officer authorized by law.  
Sec. 3.06. - Election of mayor and vice-mayor. 
a.  The city attorney shall preside over such meeting, and any adjournment thereof, until a mayor and a vice-mayor have been elected or are present or city council has selected one of its members to preside over the meeting. 
b.  At the first regular meeting in January 2013, and at the first regular meeting in January every second year thereafter, the city council shall proceed to choose by majority vote of all the members thereof one of their number to be vice-mayor for the ensuing two years. until this business has been completed, the council shall not adjourn for a period longer than forty-eight (48) hours. 
c.  The mayor shall be elected in nineteen hundred seventy-six and every four years thereafter in the manner specified in section 3.03 herein.  
Sec. 3.07. - Election of mayor pro tempore. 
When from any cause both the mayor and the vice-mayor are absent from a meeting or are unable to preside, a mayor pro tempore shall be elected by the city council to preside during the absence or disability of the mayor and vice-mayor. The city attorney shall preside over any such meeting until a mayor pro tempore shall have been elected, which shall be the first order of business at any such meeting.  
Sec. 3.08. - Vacancies in the offices of mayor or vice-mayor. 
a.  Vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term thereof in the same manner as prescribed for vacancies in the office of city council in section 3.04 herein. In the event the mayor is appointed from the members of the council and elects to serve as such, he or she shall immediately tender resignation as a member of city council and the vacancy created thereby shall be filled as provided in section 3.04. 
b.  Vacancy in the office of the vice-mayor, for any reason, shall be filled by majority vote of all the members of the city council for the unexpired portion of the term.  
Sec. 3.09. - Duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the city council and shall have the same right to vote and speak therein as other members of city council. 
The mayor shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, the purposes of military law, and the service of civil process. In the absence or disability of the mayor, the vice-mayor shall perform the duties of mayor.  
Sec. 3.10. - City council prohibited from furnishing city anything requiring payment. 
No member of the city council shall be allowed to furnish any goods or services except services as a member of city council for which he or she received any consideration in money or otherwise, either directly or indirectly, under penalty of the forfeiture of office. Any person making under oath a charge of this nature before any judge of the Portsmouth Circuit Court shall cause the accused council member to show cause why he or she should not be removed. If such charge is sustained, the judge shall remove the person from office and order the forfeiture of the consideration involved.  
Sec. 3.11. - Noninterference in appointments or removals. 
Neither the city council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or the removal of any person from any office or employment by the city manager or by any of the manager's subordinates, or in any way take part in the appointment of or removal of officers and employees of the city except as specifically provided in this Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city solely through the city manager. Neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders either publicly or privately to any subordinate of the city manager. Any council member violating the provisions of this section or voting for a motion, resolution or ordinance in violation of this section shall be guilty of a class three misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall forfeit office as a council member.  
Sec. 3.12. - Council as continuing body. 
The city council shall be a continuing body and no measure pending before such body shall abate or be discontinued by reason of the expiration of the term of office or removal of the members of said body or any of them. Provided, however, that any measure, ordinance or resolution which is not finally adopted or approved by the city council within six (6) months of the date of its introduction or presentation to the council shall not thereafter be considered by such body unless such measure, ordinance or resolution shall again be introduced in or presented as required by law.  
Sec. 3.13. - Special meetings. 
Special meetings of the city council may be called by the mayor or any three (3) members of the council. Notice of each special meeting shall contain a statement of the specific item or items of business to be transacted, and no other business shall be transacted at such meeting except by the unanimous consent of all the members of the city council.  
Sec. 3.14. - Procedures. 
No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), imposing taxes, or authorizing the borrowing of money shall be passed except by a recorded affirmative vote of a majority of all members elected to the governing body.  
Sec. 3.15. - Ordinances subject to initiative and referendum. 
The provisions of this charter pertaining to the processes of initiative and referendum shall not apply to administrative, appropriation, financial or revenue ordinances.  
Sec. 3.16. - Balanced budget required. 
No later than June 30 of each year, the city council shall adopt a budget in which projected revenues and receipts shall be equal to proposed expenditures for the fiscal year that begins on July 1 of the year of adoption. 
( Acts 2012, ch. 198, approved 3-8-2012)  
CHAPTER 4. - CITY CLERK 
 
Sec. 4.01. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city clerk shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her professional qualifications.  
Sec. 4.02. - Powers and duties. 
The city clerk shall be the clerk of the city council, shall keep the journal of its proceedings, to include resolutions, and shall record all ordinances in a book kept for that purpose. The clerk shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the city and shall be the officer authorized to use and authenticate it. The clerk shall have such other powers and duties as are provided by law or imposed from time to time by the city council.  
Sec. 4.03. - Deputy clerks and other employees. 
The city clerk may appoint deputy clerks and other employees for whom there are authorized and funded positions. Such appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the city clerk.  
CHAPTER 5. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 5.01. - City manager. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the executive and administrative head of the city government. The city manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her professional qualifications, and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
In the event of the inability of the manager to temporarily perform the duties of office by reason of absence or disability, he or she shall designate someone to perform the duties of the office during that period. If the manager is unable to make the designation, the council shall do so. A delegation pursuant to this section shall be in writing addressed to members of the city council and filed with the city clerk.  
Sec. 5.02. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the efficient and professional administration of all affairs of the city. The manager shall have power and duty: 
a.  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by law, to appoint and manage all employees in all departments, offices, and agencies of the city. The manager may delegate this authority among the manager's appointees. For all such persons appointed by the manager, the manager shall have the power of discipline, subject to applicable law. Assistants and deputies to the manager and department heads appointed by the manager shall serve at the pleasure of the manager. 
c.  To transfer or reassign employees under the manager's control to other departments or agencies of the city, when the manager deems such action to be in the best interests of the city. 
d.  To exercise supervision and control over all departments and divisions of the city for which the manager appoints the head. 
e.  To appoint fire marshals, who shall have such authority as is provided at common law or by statute or regulation. 
f.  To attend all regular meetings of the city council, with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. He or she shall be entitled to notice of all special meetings. 
g.  To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures as the Manager may deem necessary or expedient. 
h.  To make and execute in the ordinary course of business all contracts on behalf of the city, and also such other contracts as may be authorized by the city council. 
i.  At the direction of city council, to prepare and submit an annual or biennial budget after receiving estimates made by the heads or directors of the departments and any board or commission not within a department. 
j.  To keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
k.  To perform all such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or other laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or be required by ordinance or resolution of the city council.  
CHAPTER 6. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Appointment. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her professional qualifications.  
Sec. 6.02. - Powers and duties. 
The city attorney, either personally or through his or her office, shall: 
a.  Be the chief legal advisor and counselor for the city council, the city manager, and all departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the city in all matters affecting the interests of the city. 
b.  Manage and control all the law business of the city. 
c.  Represent the city and its officials and employees in all civil proceedings affecting the interests of the city. 
d.  Institute, prosecute, defend, compromise and settle all legal proceedings necessary and proper to protect the interests of the city. 
e.  Prepare ordinances and resolutions for the city council. 
f.  Prosecute violations of the City Code, unless prosecuted by the commonwealth's attorney. 
g.  Appoint deputy and assistant city attorneys and other employees for whom there are authorized and funded positions. The deputy and assistant city attorneys shall serve at the pleasure of the city attorney. 
h.  Exercise such other powers and responsibilities as are inherent in the position or as may be authorized by law or conferred by the city council.  
CHAPTER 7. - CITY ASSESSOR 
 
Sec. 7.01. - City assessor. 
The city council shall appoint a city assessor, who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city assessor shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her professional qualifications.  
Sec. 7.02. - Powers and duties. 
The city council may prescribe the duties of the city assessor, may fix the compensation of the assessor and require that the assessor shall have no other employment than with the City of Portsmouth. All duties and powers which are prescribed for the commissioner of the revenue for the assessment of real estate pursuant to the general laws of Virginia shall devolve upon the assessor.  
Sec. 7.03. - Technical and clerical assistance. 
The assessor may appoint persons to perform such technical and clerical tasks as necessary and advisable to effectively exercise the duties and powers authorized by law, and for whom there are authorized and funded positions.  
CHAPTER 7.1. - CITY AUDITOR 
 
Sec. 7.1.01. - City auditor. 
The city council may appoint a city auditor who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city auditor shall be chosen on the basis of his or her professional qualifications. 
( Acts 2012, ch. 198, approved 3-8-2012)  
Sec. 7.1.02. - Powers and duties. 
The city council may prescribe the duties of the city auditor, may fix the compensation of the city auditor, and may require that the auditor shall have no other employment than with the City of Portsmouth. 
( Acts 2012, ch. 198, approved 3-8-2012)  
Sec. 7.1.03. - Technical and clerical assistance. 
The city auditor may appoint persons to perform such technical and clerical tasks as necessary and advisable to effectively exercise the duties and powers authorized by law, and for whom there are authorized and funded positions. 
( Acts 2012, ch. 198, approved 3-8-2012)  
CHAPTER 8. - BOARD OF EQUALIZATION OF REAL ESTATE ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 8.01. - Board of equalization of real estate assessments. 
The Circuit Court of the City of Portsmouth shall appoint a Board of Equalization of Real Estate Assessments (the board). The board shall sit for the purpose of equalizing real estate assessments in the city, to hear complaints alleging the lack of uniformity of assessments, errors in acreage of such assessments and complaints that real property is assessed at more than fair market value.  
Sec. 8.02. - Composition and terms of office. 
The board shall be composed of three (3) members. The initial members of the board shall be appointed in the following manner: one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, and one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. As the terms of the initial members expire, their successors shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. All members of the board shall meet the qualifications for such members and shall exercise their duties and powers as prescribed by the Code of Virginia, as amended.  
Sec. 8.03. - Compensation. 
The city council shall fix the compensation for members of the board.  
CHAPTER 9. - CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Constitutional officers. 
The city is committed to the continued existence of each of its constitutional officers: the attorney for the commonwealth, commissioner of the revenue, city treasurer, city sheriff, and clerk of the Portsmouth Circuit Court. Each of said offices is essential to the efficient and effective operation of city government, and each office plays a separate and distinct role in that process. Each office shall continue to exercise such powers, responsibilities, and authority, express and implied, as may be set forth in the Constitution of Virginia and the Code of Virginia.  
CHAPTER 10. - PUBLIC EDUCATION 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Composition. 
The city shall provide for public education through a city school board, a superintendent of schools, and the employees thereof. The school board and the superintendent of schools shall exercise all the powers conferred and perform all the duties imposed upon them by general law.  
Sec. 10.02. - School board. 
The school board shall be composed of nine members who shall be elected at large for terms of four years in the manner prescribed by general law. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner in which general law provided for the filling of vacancies of city council members pursuant to Article 6 (§ 24.2-226 et. seq.) of Chapter 2 of Title 24.2 of the Code of Virginia with the interim appointment to be made by a majority vote of the remaining members of the school board.  
Sec. 10.03. - School superintendent. 
The school board shall appoint a school superintendent who shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her professional qualifications.  
CHAPTER 11. - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Creation and term of office. 
There shall be a civil service commission, which shall be composed of three (3) persons appointed by the judges of the Circuit Court of the City of Portsmouth (the commission and the court, respectively). No person shall be appointed a member of the commission who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident of Portsmouth, or who holds any office or post of employment under the city, or the Commonwealth of Virginia or any political subdivision thereof, or any public service corporation owned by the city or commonwealth, other than the office of notary public, or who is an officer or member of any national, state or local committee of any political party, or an officer of such party, or who is an officer or member of a committee of a partisan political club, or an officer of such club. Such appointments shall be made without regard to race, color, religion, sex, disability, or national origin. 
The term of office of each commissioner shall be four (4) years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the court for the unexpired portion of the term. Each January, the commissioners shall elect a chair and a vice-chair for a one-year term. 
The commission shall hold meetings upon call of the chair. Meetings shall occur at least once a quarter, and at such other times as may be required. 
Any member of the commission may be removed from office by the court for incompetency, incompatibility, or dereliction of duty or malfeasance in office or for injecting, or attempting to inject, political, religious, racial or other unlawful discriminatory influence into the administration of the provisions of this chapter, or for other good cause. However, no member of the commission shall be removed until charges are provided in writing, followed by a full hearing with reasonable notice. 
The members of the commission shall devote due time and attention to the performance of their duties. The commission shall conduct its meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, except to the extent modified by the commission.  
Sec. 11.02. - Functions and duties. 
The authority, powers, and responsibilities of the commission shall apply to, and be limited to, the police department and the fire department. The members and employees of said departments may be referred to herein as the "civil service." 
a.  It shall be the duty of the commission to make suitable rules and regulations not inconsistent with applicable law and this chapter. The rules and regulations shall provide in detail the manner in which examinations may be held, and appointments, promotions, transfers, reinstatements, demotions, suspensions and discharges shall be made. The rules and regulations and any amendments thereof shall be made available for free public distribution. 
b.  All tests shall be practical, and shall consist only of subjects which will fairly determine the capacity of persons examined to perform duties of the position to which appointment is to be made, and may include tests of physical fitness and of manual skill. 
c.  The commission may make investigations concerning and report upon all matters touching the enforcement and effect of this chapter, and the rules and regulations prescribed hereunder; inspect all institutions, departments, offices, places, positions and employments affected hereby, and ascertain whether this chapter and all rules and regulations are being obeyed. Investigations may be made by the entire commission or by a single commissioner designated by the commission for such purpose. 
d.  In the course of an investigation or hearing, the commission shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, documents and accounts appertaining to the investigation. The commission may also cause the depositions of witnesses residing within or without the city to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for like depositions in civil actions. The oaths administered and the subpoenas issued hereunder shall have the same force and effect as the oaths administered by a circuit court judge; and the failure upon the part of any person so subpoenaed to comply with the provisions of this section may be enforced by equitable relief. 
e.  All hearings and investigations before the commission shall be governed by this chapter and by the rules and practices and procedures to be adopted by the commission, and in the conduct thereof the commission shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence. No informality in any proceeding or hearing, or in the manner of taking testimony before the commission, shall invalidate any order, decision, rule or regulation made, approved or confirmed by the commission. 
f.  The commission shall hear and determine appeals or complaints from a covered employee's removal, suspension, demotion, discharge, or other disciplinary action. 
g.  The commission shall provide for, formulate and hold competitive tests devised in accordance with applicable laws to determine the relative qualifications of persons who seek employment in any class or position and as a result thereof establish eligibility lists for the various classes of positions, and to provide that persons laid off because of curtailment of expenditures, reduction in force, and for like causes, head the list in the order of their seniority, to the end that they shall be the first to be reemployed. 
h.  The commission shall certify to the appointing authority, upon written request, the names of the persons on the eligibility list for the class for which one (1) or more vacant positions exist, and if there is no such list, to establish a provisional or temporary appointment list of the class. No temporary or provisional appointment shall continue for a period longer than four (4) months; nor shall any person receive more than one (1) provisional appointment or serve more than four (4) months as a provisional appointee in any fiscal year. 
i.  The commission shall keep such records as may be necessary for the proper administration of its responsibilities. 
j.  The commission shall make such reports as the city council may require; provided, however, it shall be the duty of the commission to report at least annually to the council showing its actions, the rules in force, the practical effects thereof, and any suggestions it may have for the improvement of the civil service. 
k.  The commission shall be entitled to seek equitable relief, if necessary to implement any of its powers, rights, or responsibilities as set forth hereunder. The power to seek equitable relief shall extend to, but shall not be limited to, failure of any person to honor a subpoena or a subpoena duces tecum duly issued by or on behalf of the commission; the failure to comply with a lawful direction of the commission in the conduct of an investigation, hearing, or appeal; and failure to provide the level of administrative or financial support to which the commission is entitled under this chapter. In any such proceeding, the commission shall be represented by the city attorney; but if the city attorney is unable to provide such representation for any reason, then by legal counsel retained by the commission.  
Sec. 11.03. - Annual appropriation. 
There is hereby appropriated out of the general funds an appropriation to carry out the purposes of this chapter, which appropriation shall be one-fourth of one (¼) percent of the total payroll of those included under the jurisdiction and scope of this chapter; provided, however, that if the council shall make an appropriation for the support of the commission exceeding that amount, this section shall not be operative for said year but otherwise shall be in full force and effect.  
Sec. 11.04. - Rooms, supplies, and clerical assistance. 
The city council or the city manager shall provide the commission with suitable and convenient rooms and cause the same to be furnished, heated and lighted and supplied with all office supplies and equipment necessary to carry on the business of the commission, and to provide such clerical assistance as may be necessary.  
Sec. 11.05. - Chief and deputy chiefs: standards for appointments and promotions. 
The provisions of this chapter dealing with eligibility lists and the right to appeal discipline shall not apply to any department chief or deputy department chief.  
Sec. 11.06. - Appointments to vacant positions. 
In general, all appointments to and promotions in the police and fire departments shall be made solely on merit, efficiency and fitness, which shall be ascertained by competitive and impartial means. 
a.  Whenever a position in the classified service becomes vacant, the appointing authority, if it desires to fill the vacancy, shall request from the commission the names of persons eligible for appointment thereto. The commission shall certify the names on the eligibility list for the class to which the vacant position has been allocated that are willing to accept employment. The appointing authority may then appoint a certified person to the vacant position. 
b.  Whenever request is made, or whenever a position is held by a temporary appointee and an eligibility list for the class of such position exists, the commission shall certify the names of the persons eligible for appointment to the appointing authority, who may then appoint a certified person to the position. 
c.  To enable the appointing authority to exercise a choice in the filling of positions, no appointment, employment, or promotion in any position in the classified service shall be deemed complete until after the expiration of a period of not more than one year probationary service, during which the appointing authority may terminate the employment of the person, if during the performance test thus afforded, upon observations or considerations of the performance of duty, the appointing authority deems the employee unfit or unsatisfactory for service in the department. Whereupon the appointing authority shall designate a person or persons certified for such position and such person or persons shall likewise enter upon said duties until some person is found who is deemed fit for appointment, employment or promotion for the probationary period required.  
Sec. 11.07. - Tenure of office; discharge. 
The tenure of everyone holding office, place, position or employment under the civil service provisions of this chapter, shall be only during good behavior and efficient performance of duty. Any such person may be removed, discharged, suspended without pay, or reduced in rank, or deprived of vacation privileges or other privileges for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Incompetent or inefficient performance of duty or inattention to or dereliction of duty; 
b.  Insubordination, discourteous treatment of the public or a fellow employee or any other act of omission or commission of similar nature tending directly to discredit or injure the public service or to jeopardize the effective functioning of the service, or any willful violations of the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations to be adopted hereunder; 
c.  Mental or physical unfitness for the position which the employee holds; 
d.  Any conduct which is dishonest, deceitful, immoral or declared criminal by statute or common law, regardless of whether a criminal conviction is obtained; 
e.  Drunkenness or use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or any other dangerous drug, liquid or preparation to such extent that the use thereof interferes with the efficiency or mental or physical fitness of the employee, or which precludes the employee from properly performing the functions and duties of his or her position; 
f.  Conviction of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or a pattern of misconduct as manifested by a series of convictions of misdemeanors not involving moral turpitude; 
g.  Failure to report to an appropriate superior authority administrative errors, incompetence, misconduct, inefficiency, neglect of duty, or any other form of misconduct or negligence of which the employee has knowledge; 
h.  Failure of a supervisory employee or commanding officer to take appropriate corrective action with regard to such employees under his supervision or command as may be guilty of any form of neglect of duty or misconduct where the supervisor or commanding officer knows or should have known of such derelictions; 
i.  Failure to achieve professional progress and advancement in accordance with reasonable and definitive criteria established by the civil service commission and set forth in its rules and regulations; provided, however, that such failure must be a personal failure of the employee and not one directly caused by conditions beyond the control of the employee; provided, further, that no person shall be disciplined under this rule unless and until he or she is given adequate written notice of his deficiencies and a reasonable time to correct them; and 
j.  Violation of any applicable law or regulation dealing with standards of conduct.  
Sec. 11.08. - Disciplinary procedure. 
a.  No full-time, nonprobationary employee in the civil service shall be removed, suspended, demoted or discharged except for cause, as set forth in section 11.07, stated in writing by the appointing authority. The employee may appeal such disciplinary action to the commission within ten days, unless a different and legally authorized appeal or grievance procedure is chosen by the employee. A civil service employee may select only one appeal or grievance procedure and may not change procedures once the initial election is made. The commission shall thereafter conduct a hearing and receive such testimony from witnesses and other evidence as may be relevant to the matter. Thereafter, the commission shall have general authority to affirm, reverse, or modify the disciplinary action that has been appealed, based on the evidence and the law. 
b.  All appeal hearings conducted by the commission pursuant to this section shall be open to the public, after reasonable notice to the accused of the time and place of such hearing. At any such appeal hearing the accused may appear in person and by counsel and may present a defense. The commission shall retain the power to sequester witnesses during a public appeal hearing. However, if the appellant requests that the appeal hearing be conducted in private, the commission shall have discretion to grant that request.  
Sec. 11.09. - Appeals from decisions of the civil service commission. 
An employee or appointing authority may appeal a decision of the commission involving discipline. The appeal shall be initiated by written notice filed with the commission stating the grounds for appeal. The commission shall file with the court a certified record of the proceedings, including a hearing transcript, within twenty (20) days of receipt of the appeal. The court shall then hear and review the appeal in a summary manner upon the commission's written record, plus such legal briefs and oral argument as the court deems proper. After a hearing, the court may affirm, modify or reverse the commission's decision. The court's review will be limited to whether the appointing authority's actions were in good faith and for cause, and the decision of the commission shall be affirmed unless the court concludes, based on the record and the law, that the decision was not in good faith or was not for cause.  
Sec. 11.10. - Political services disregarded and prohibited; other discriminatory actions prohibited. 
a.  No person holding any office, place, position or employment subject to the civil service is under any obligation to contribute to any political fund or to render any political service to any person or party whatsoever, and no person shall be removed, reduced in grade or salary, or otherwise prejudiced for refusing to do so. 
b.  No public officer whether elected or appointed shall discharge, promote, demote or in any manner change the official rank, employment or compensation of any person under the civil service, or promise or threaten to do so, for giving or withholding or neglecting to make any contribution of money or services, or any other valuable thing, for any political purpose. 
c.  No person shall be appointed to or promoted to, suspended from, demoted, removed or discharged from any position in the classified service, or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to employment in the civil service because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or political affiliations. 
d.  No person shall seek or attempt to use any political endorsement in connection with any appointment to a position in the classified service. No recommendation for any person who applies for office or position in the classified service, or for examination under the provisions of this chapter, except, as to character, and, in the case of former employers, as to ability, shall be considered by the commission, director, or the appointing authority in giving any examination, appointment, promotion or reinstatement under this chapter. 
e.  No person shall use, or promise to use, directly or indirectly, any official authority or influence, whether possessed or anticipated, to secure or attempt to secure for any person an appointment or advantage in appointment to a position in the classified service, or an increase in pay or other advantage in employment in any such position, for the purpose of influencing the vote or political action of any person, or for any consideration. 
f.  No person in the classified service, and no member of the commission, shall, directly or indirectly, pay or promise to pay any assessment, subscription, or contribution for any political organization or purpose, or solicit or take part in soliciting, or receive any such assessment, subscription or contribution. No person shall solicit any such assessment, subscription or contribution of any employee in the classified service. 
g.  No person in the classified service, and no member of the commission shall take any active part in the management of any political party or in any political campaign; provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or prevent any such officer or employee from exercising the rights of a citizen privately to express an opinion or from enjoying entire freedom from all interference in casting a vote, or from seeking or accepting election or appointment to public office.  
CHAPTER 12. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL 
 
Sec. 12.01. - Petition for initiative. 
a.  Any proposed ordinance, including any ordinance for the repeal or amendment of an existing ordinance, may be submitted to the city council by petition signed by electors equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the electors voting for governor in the last preceding gubernatorial election. Such petition shall contain the proposed ordinance in full. 
b.  The petition shall be substantially in the following form: 
To the council of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia: 
We, the undersigned, qualified electors of this city, respectfully petition your honorable body to ordain the following ordinance: 
Signature of Elector  Street Address  Date Signed 
c.  The execution of the petition by an elector shall be acknowledged before a notary, or it may be proved by the oath of a witness who shall swear that he or she knows the elector and that the petition was signed by the elector in the presence of the witness. The petition may be in the form of separate sheets, each sheet containing at the top thereof the petition as set forth above, and when bound together and offered for filing, shall be deemed to constitute one petition.  
Sec. 12.02. - Petition for referendum. 
a.  At any time within thirty (30) days following the adoption of an ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, a petition signed by electors equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the electors voting for governor in the last preceding gubernatorial election protesting against the enactment of such ordinance and requesting its repeal, may be presented to the city council. Such petition need not contain the text of the ordinance sought to be repealed, but it shall be sufficient to refer to it by ordinance number or code section number. 
b.  The petition shall be substantially in the following form: 
To the Council of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia: 
We, the undersigned, qualified electors of this city, respectfully petition your honorable body to repeal the following ordinance: 
Signature of Elector  Street Address  Date Signed 
c.  The execution of the petition by an elector shall be acknowledged before a notary, or it may be proved by the oath of a witness who shall swear that he or she knows the elector and that the petition was signed by the elector in the presence of the witness. The separate sheets, each sheet containing at the top thereof the petition as set forth above, and when bound together and offered for filing, shall be deemed to constitute one petition.  
Sec. 12.03. - Time of filing. 
All papers comprising a petition for initiative or referendum shall be filed with the city clerk thirty (30) days from the date of the first signature thereon, and when so filed, the clerk shall submit the same to the city council at its next regular meeting.  
Sec. 12.04. - Duty of city attorney. 
Before any ordinance proposed by petition in accordance with section 12.01 hereof shall be submitted to the city council, it shall first be approved as to form by the city attorney. If the city attorney disapproves of the proposed ordinance or amendment, the reasons therefore shall be stated in writing to the person submitting the proposal for examination.  
Sec. 12.05. - Duty of city council. 
Upon the presentation of a petition as provided in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the city council either to pass such proposed ordinance without alteration or repeal such existing ordinance within sixty (60) days after determining the sufficiency of the petition or submit the question of the adoption or repeal of the ordinance, as the case may be, to the electorate at the next general election occurring more than sixty (60) days after determining the sufficiency of the petition.  
Sec. 12.06. - Elections. 
a.  All initiative and referendum elections shall be conducted, and the result canvassed and certified by the regular election officials, as provided by the general laws of the state, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all such elections shall be governed by the general election laws. 
b.  If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the city, and the same shall not be repealed or amended, except by a vote of the electors, within two (2) years thereafter. 
c.  If a majority of the qualified electors voting on the repeal of an existing ordinance shall vote in favor of its repeal, it shall thereupon stand repealed and be of no force and effect. 
d.  Where an election has been held upon the question of the adoption or repeal of any ordinance in accordance with this chapter, then no election may be held upon a substantially similar question for two (2) years following such election, except that the council may submit the repeal, amendment or modification of any ordinance adopted under subsection b. above, to be voted upon at any general election succeeding its adoption.  
Sec. 12.07. - Publication of ordinance. 
Whenever an ordinance is required under the provisions of this chapter to be submitted for adoption or repeal to the electors of the city, the city clerk shall cause the ordinance to be published once in a daily newspaper published in or having a general circulation in the City of Portsmouth. Such publication shall occur not more than sixty (60) days nor fewer than thirty (30) days prior to the date of such election.  
Sec. 12.08. - Judicial review. 
A petition, which complies with the requirements of this chapter as to form, number of signers, and manner of execution, shall be accepted as prima facie sufficient. The circuit court of the City of Portsmouth shall have summary jurisdiction upon complaint of an elector to determine the sufficiency of the petition and the genuineness of the signatures thereon, and the qualifications of the electors signing the same, and may make such order in the matter as justice may require. Such proceedings shall be instituted within ten (10) days after presentation of the petition, and the burden of proof shall be on the complainant.  
Sec. 12.09. - Recall of elective officers. 
a.  Any elective officer of the city may be removed from office at any time after one year from the beginning of the term of office by the electors qualified to vote for a successor for such incumbent. The procedure to effect such removal shall be as hereinafter set forth. 
b.  A petition signed by electors equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the electors of the city voting for governor in the last preceding gubernatorial election, and demanding the election of a successor of the officer sought to be removed, shall be filed with the clerk of the circuit court. The petition shall contain a general statement of the grounds upon which the election of a successor is sought. Such petition may be filed at any time after one year has elapsed since the beginning of the term of the official sought to be removed. Each signer shall include the number and street of his or her residence in the city, and the date he or she signed the petition. Such petition may be in the form of separate papers, but each separate paper to which signatures are appended shall contain at the top thereof the original petition or a duplicate statement thereof, and when bound together and offered for filing, such separate papers shall be deemed to constitute one petition with respect to the election of the successor of the officer or officers named therein. One (1) of the signers of such petition shall make oath before a proper official that the statements made therein are true, as he or she believes, and upon such separate paper, the circulator of the petition to which signatures are appended shall make oath that each signature to such paper is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was signed in his or her presence. 
c.  If it appears that the petition is signed by the requisite percentage of electors, the same shall be accepted as prima facie regular and sufficient, but it shall be subject to summary review in the same manner as provided in section 12.08 of this chapter. 
d.  If the petition is sufficient, and if the officer or officers whose removal is sought do not resign within five (5) days after the sufficiency of the petition has been determined by a judge of the Circuit Court, a judge thereof shall thereupon order and fix a day for holding an election for the selection of a successor to each officer named in said petition, which election shall be held not fewer than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days from the presentation of the petition or from the making of any court order thereon. The judge shall cause publication of notice and all arrangements to be made for holding such election and the same shall be conducted and the result thereof returned and declared in all respects as in other special elections, in so far as possible. 
e.  A nomination of a candidate to succeed each officer sought to be removed shall be made without the intervention of a primary election, by filing with the clerk of the circuit court at least ten days prior to such special election, a petition proposing a person for such office, signed by the electors equal in number to at least thirty (30) percent of the electors of the city voting for governor in the last preceding gubernatorial election. 
f.  The ballots at such election shall conform to the following requirements: with respect to each officer whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: Shall (name of officer) be removed from the office (name of office) by recall? Beneath the aforesaid question shall be placed the names of the candidates to fill the vacancy. The name of the officer whose removal is sought shall not appear on the ballot as a candidate to succeed him/herself. 
g.  In any such election, if a majority of the votes cast on the question of removal be affirmative, the candidate receiving the highest number of the votes cast shall be declared elected and if more than one (1) council member is removed at such election, the candidates receiving the highest number of votes, equal in number to the number of council members removed, shall be declared elected. The officer whose removal is sought shall thereupon be deemed removed from office upon the announcement of the official canvass of the election. The successor of any officer so removed shall hold office during the unexpired term of his predecessor. In case the person or persons receiving the highest number of votes shall fail to qualify within ten (10) days after receiving notification of election, the office shall be deemed vacant. The question of the removal of any officer shall not be submitted to the electors a second time during the same term of office, until after the expiration of one (1) year from the determination of the first application for removal. The method of removal herein provided is cumulative and additional to such other methods as may be provided by law.  
CHAPTER 13. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 13.01. - Present ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
All city ordinances, rules and regulations and orders legally made by any department, board, commission or office of the city that are in force at the effective date of this charter, in so far as they or any portion thereof are not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in force until amended or repealed.  
Sec. 13.02. - Severability. 
If any provision of the charter or the applicability thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this charter and the applicability of it and of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACT 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Act 
Year 	Chapter 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
1970 	471 	1.01—12.02 	1.01—12.02 
1971 	55 	1 	2.07 
			2.09 
			6.01 
			6.06 
1972 	260 	1 	10.01, 10.02 
			10.09 
1973 	351 	1 	3.01—3.03 
			3.05, 3.06 
			3.08 
1974 	256 	1 	2.06 
			2.12 
			2.14 
			3.02—3.04 
			3.11 
			5.02 
			6.02 
			6.06 
			8.02 
			9.01 
			10.08, 10.09 
			11.01, 11.02 
			11.10 
			11.12, 11.13 
			11.15 
1975 	2 	1 	7.03 
	278 	1 	11.01 
			11.12 
1976 	1 	1 	3.03, 3.04 
1977 	119 	1 	2.15 
1982 	377 	1 	2.02:1 
1983 	333 	1 	2.02:1 
1993 	968 	1 	2.10 
			2.12, 2.13 
			3.02 
			3.06 
			4.01 
			7.01 
			11.02 
			11.10 
2011 
640 	      Dltd 	1.01—12.02 
		      Added 	1.01—13.02 
2012 
198 	      Added 	3.16 
		      Added 	7.1.01—7.1.03 
 
  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCE 
This table gives the location within this Charter of those ordinances adopted since the 1973 Code, as updated which are included herein. 
Ord. 	Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
Memo. of 	 5-15-2015 		3.03(c) 
		      Dltd 	3.03(d) 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia (2006)" and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Portsmouth City Code (2006)." 
(Code 1973, § 1-1; Code 1988, § 1-1; Ord. No. 1989-22, § 2, 3-14-1989) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions, rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intention of the council: 
Generally. The rules for the construction of statutes laid down by Code of Virginia, §§ 1-200—1-232, as the same are now or as they may be hereafter amended for the construction of the Code of Virginia and all statutes shall, so far as applicable, govern the construction of this Code. 
Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the city as it now exists and as it may be amended in the future. 
City. The term "city" shall be construed as if the term "of Portsmouth" followed it. 
Code. When the term "Code" is used without further qualification, it shall mean the "Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia (2006)." 
Code of Virginia. The term "Code of Virginia" or "Virginia Code" shall mean the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended from time to time. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain time before a proceeding shall be had, there must be that time, exclusive of the day for such proceeding, but the day on which such notice is given or such act is done may be counted as part of the time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done within a certain time after any event or proceeding, that time shall be allowed in addition to the day on which the event or proceeding occurred. 
Council or city council. Whenever the terms "the council" or "the city council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia. 
Effect of Sunday or holidays on scheduled meetings, etc. Where any meeting or proceeding is directed by an ordinance to be held or to take place on a particular day of the month, or is adjourned from day to day, if that day happens to be a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or any day on which the city offices are closed, the same shall be held, or the proceeding take place, on the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or any day on which the city offices are closed. 
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Month. The term "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month. 
Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; and a term importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
Occupant. The term "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of, or actually occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, board, commission, department or other agency, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the term "of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia." A reference to a specific officer shall also be construed as if followed by the term "or his duly authorized deputy, assistant, representative or agent," subject, however, to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1502. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple or any person in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. The term "owner" shall also mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to the property with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of the property as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, lessee or any other person having control of the property or his duly authorized agent. 
Person. The term "person" may extend and be applied to any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any public street, park, cemetery, schoolyard, public library, municipal building, museum, wharf or waterfront area owned by the city, or open space adjacent thereto. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State; commonwealth. The terms "the state," "this state," "the commonwealth" or "this commonwealth" shall mean the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and other public thoroughfares in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines; it shall be construed to include a sidewalk or a footpath. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense may include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written; in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. Unless otherwise specified, the term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1973, § 1-2; Code 1988, § 1-2; Ord. No. 1997-14, § 1, 3-11-1997) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions and rules of construction applicable to state law, Code of Virginia, § 1-200 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code. 
Where any provision of this Code imposes restrictions upon the subject matter differing from a general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction shall be deemed to be controlling. 
(Code 1973, § 1-3; Code 1988, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Headlines of sections. 
The headlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the headlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1973, § 1-5; Code 1988, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to sections of state code, Code of Virginia, § 1-217.  
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions of Code construed as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of "The Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia (1988) and ordinances adopted by the city council subsequent thereto and included herein, shall be construed as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1973, § 1-4; Code 1988, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-6. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any ordinance granting any franchise or right; 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating funds or relating to an annual budget and annual tax levy; 
(4)  Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement or any special assessment; 
(5)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; 
(6)  Any ordinance pertaining to fees, rates, charges and deposits; 
(7)  Any ordinance rezoning property or amending the zoning map; 
(8)  Any ordinance regarding cable franchises, including Ordinance No. 1989-77; 
(9)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-8. - Separability of parts of Code. 
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-8; Code 1988, § 1-8)  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code may be prepared and printed when needed and when funds therefor are available. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed or replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate headlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such headlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1988, § 1-9) 
State Law reference— Authority to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 1-10. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
At least one copy of this Code and every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall there be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Code 1988, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433.  
Sec. 1-11. - Classification of and penalties for violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $2,500.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(b)  Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, such violation shall be punishable upon conviction by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months and a fine of not more than $2,500.00, either or both. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other section of this Code, no penalty shall be imposed for a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city which is greater than the penalty prescribed by the general law of the commonwealth for a like offense. 
(d)  Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. 
(Code 1973, §§ 1-9, 21-1—21-5; Code 1988, § 1-11; Ord. No. 1990-61, § 1, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1991-14, § 1, 2-12-1991; Ord. No. 1991-60, § 1, 6-25-1991) 
Charter reference— Duty of commonwealth's attorney to prosecute ordinance violations, § 6.02. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one year, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1430; injunctive relief for continuing violations or ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432; classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11.  
Sec. 1-12. - Punishment for common law offenses. 
A common law offense, for which punishment is prescribed by statute, shall be punishable only in the mode as prescribed. 
(Code 1973, § 21-7; Code 1988, § 1-12)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Division of building inspections, § 7-32; elections, ch. 10; finance, ch. 12; department of finance, § 12-41 et seq.; municipal finance commission, § 12-141 et seq.; fire, rescue and emergency services department, § 13-31 et seq.; housing board of adjustments and appeals, § 17-41 et seq.; public library advisory board, § 19-21 et seq.; law library board, § 19-76 et seq.; parks and recreation department, § 25-26 et seq.; parks and recreation commission, § 25-46 et seq.; police department, § 27-1 et seq.; auxiliary police force, § 27-26 et seq.; retirement systems, ch. 30; board of trustees of supplemental retirement system, § 30-51 et seq.; board of trustees of fire and police retirement system, § 30-176 et seq.; board of equalization, § 35-76; wetlands board, § 39-46 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Portsmouth Risk Management and Insurance Fund. 
(a)  The Portsmouth Risk Management and Insurance Fund is hereby created for the purpose of providing a reserve source of funding for certain expenses pertaining to probable or possible losses. The fund is to provide for the protection of the assets of the city against the financial consequences of losses that are unexpected. The fund may be used to pay the expenses associated with claims management and payment of claims arising out of good faith actions of officers and employees of the city and members of commissions established by the city council within the scope of their duties on behalf of the city. The fund may also be used to pay insurance premiums and insurance pooling costs which may be obtained to provide protection from losses arising from claims covered by the fund. 
(b)  The city council shall make annual appropriations to the Portsmouth Risk Management and Insurance Fund if a contribution is determined to be necessary. The total contribution determined shall take into account limits, deductibles and aggregate levels of existing insurance policies and insurance pools, as well as reserve levels established to determine financial liability for incurred losses. Disbursements may be made from the fund to pay claims for such losses in excess of amounts budgeted, if any, in the city's operating budget, for insurance policies, insurance pool costs, claims or losses and costs associated with claims management. Any earnings from the investment of available funds in the fund shall be credited to such fund. Should it be determined that the fund balance exceeds the liabilities so reserved, the city may suspend its minimum contributions for so long as the fund balance remains above such reserve level deemed necessary. 
(c)  The city manager is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations governing the Portsmouth Risk Management and Insurance Fund and to authorize payments from such fund in accordance with the provisions of this section. The city attorney shall approve the payment of any claim and shall consult with the city council before payment is made of any claim in excess of $100,000.00. The chief financial officer shall be the custodian of all the funds created by this section and shall keep such financial records of the fund as may be necessary. In addition, the city manager shall make a quarterly report to the city council of all claims paid in excess of $50,000.00 each. 
(Code 1973, § 2-19; Code 1988, § 2-2; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Cross reference— Finance generally, ch. 12.  
Sec. 2-2. - School board risk management and insurance fund. 
(a)  The school board risk management and insurance fund is hereby created for the purpose of providing a reserve source of funding for certain expenses of the public schools. The fund is to provide protection of the assets of the public schools against the financial consequences of losses that are unexpected. The fund may be used to pay the expenses associated with claims management and payment of claims arising out of the good faith actions of officers and employees of the Portsmouth public schools. The fund may also be used to pay insurance premiums and insurance pooling costs which may be obtained to provide protection from losses arising from claims covered by the fund. 
(b)  Annually, as part of the budget process, the city council shall appropriate for the purpose of education the total amount of all funds estimated to be available for the ensuing fiscal year in the school board risk management and insurance fund. Appropriations, to the extent they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered, shall lapse at the end of the period for which they were made. 
(c)  The city manager is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with the superintendent of schools establishing rules and regulations governing the school board risk management and insurance fund and to authorize payments therefrom. The city attorney shall approve the payment of any claim and shall consult with the school board before payment is made of any claim in excess of $100,000.00. 
(Code 1973, § 2-20; Code 1988, § 2-3) 
Cross reference— Finance generally, ch. 12.  
Sec. 2-3. - Lease of city property to persons or organization which discriminate. 
The city shall not lease or grant any privilege or right of any kind to use any public property, including land, buildings or other facilities, to any person or organization which discriminates in its offering of goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, accommodations, memberships or activities on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, disability or sex. In the event such discriminatory policy or practice is discovered after execution of an agreement, the agreement shall be void. 
(Code 1973, § 1-12; Code 1988, § 2-3; Ord. No. 1988-13, § 1, 2-9-1988; Ord. No. 1993-79, § 1, 10-12-1993)  
Secs. 2-4—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, § 3.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 10. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-26. - Designation. 
The city council as a body shall be known as "The Council of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia." 
(Code 1973, § 2-29; Code 1988, § 2-26)  
Sec. 2-27. - Committees. 
There shall be no standing committees of the city council, but the council may meet in a committee of the whole whenever it is deemed desirable so to do. The mayor may from time to time appoint such special committees as may be thought necessary to which may be referred such matters as may be proper, which shall consider the same and report their findings back to the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-30; Code 1988, § 2-27)  
Sec. 2-28. - Boards and commissions. 
(a)  Appointments. Unless otherwise specifically stated or otherwise required by state or federal law, any person appointed to a board or commission by the council and mayor shall be either a resident of the city, a property or business owner within the city or shall be employed in the city. 
(b)  Procedural rules. Boards and commissions appointed by the council and mayor shall be governed by the following procedural rules: 
(1)  No business shall be transacted until a quorum of the members is present. 
(2)  No member shall abstain from voting on any matter unless prohibited by applicable provisions of the State and Local Government Virginia Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq. or under the circumstances the vote would constitute an act of impropriety. 
(3)  No matter shall be deemed approved by the members unless such matter has received the affirmative vote of a majority of the members voting and physically present at the time of voting. 
(4)  The rules of parliamentary practice set out in Robert's Rules of Order shall govern in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with this section. 
(Code 1973, § 2-65; Code 1988, § 2-28; Ord. No. 1990-129, § 1, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 2019-54 , § 1, 7-23-2019)  
Sec. 2-29. - Procedure for adoption of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  Except for those ordinances and resolutions set forth in subsection (b) of this section, ordinances and resolutions may be adopted by the council on the date of their introduction. On the final vote on any ordinance or resolution, the name of each member voting and how he voted shall be recorded. Such ordinances and resolutions shall be passed by the affirmative vote of the majority of the councilmembers present. 
(b)  No ordinance or resolution relating to any zoning matter shall be finally adopted by the council at a meeting whereat such matter was first considered. Such ordinance or resolution previously approved on first reading unanimously by city council shall be listed under the consent agenda for a second reading; provided, however, that such ordinance or resolution shall be removed from the consent agenda and considered separately upon the request of any member of the council or upon receipt of a request from members of the general public to address city council on such ordinance or resolution in accordance with the requirements of section 2-68. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-17, 11-4; Code 1988, § 2-29; Ord. No. 1991-74, § 1, 7-9-1991) 
Charter reference— Limitation on ordinances appropriating money, § 3.15; enactment of ordinances, § 3.16. 
State Law reference— Adoption of ordinances and resolutions, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1425—15.2-1429.  
Sec. 2-30. - Numbering and publication or posting of ordinances. 
(a)  All ordinances of the city shall be consecutively numbered in annual series, the number of a particular ordinance to consist of the year in which passed and the consecutive number of the ordinance. 
(b)  All ordinances passed by the city council shall be published or posted in accordance with the requirements of general law. 
(Code 1973, §§ 1-10, 1-11; Code 1988, § 2-30)  
Sec. 2-31. - Manner of amending or repealing ordinances. 
No city ordinance shall be amended, suspended or repealed, except by an ordinance, nor shall any city ordinance be revived or amended by reference to its title or chapter, but the ordinance revived, or the section amended, shall be reenacted and published at length. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6; Code 1988, § 2-31)  
Sec. 2-32. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  When an ordinance which has repealed another ordinance shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1973, § 1-7; Code 1988, § 2-32) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state statutes, Code of Virginia, §§ 1-239, 1-240.  
Sec. 2-33. - Interference with appointees of city manager. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to or his removal from any office or employment by the city manager or by any of his subordinates or in any way take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees of the city except as specifically provided in the Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders either publicly or privately to any subordinate of the city manager. Any councilman violating the provision of this section or voting for a motion, resolution or ordinance in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall cease to be a councilman. 
(Code 1973, § 2-31; Code 1988, § 2-33) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 3.12.  
Sec. 2-34. - Appointees to appointed bodies to serve at the pleasure of council. 
(a)  The term "appointed body" shall mean any board, commission, committee or other body which is created by this Code, and for which the members are appointed by city council. 
(b)  For any appointed body for which this Code or the Code of Virginia sets forth the criteria and/or the procedures for city council to remove a member, said criteria and/or procedures shall govern. 
(c)  For any appointed body for which the criteria and/or the procedures for city council to remove a member are not set forth in this Code or the Code of Virginia, members shall serve at the pleasure of the city council, and any member may be removed by the city council at its pleasure. 
(Ord. No. 2005-94, § 1, 11-8-2005)  
Secs. 2-35—2-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Freedom of information act, open meetings, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-56. - Place. 
All regular and special meetings of the city council shall be held in the Council Chambers, 6th Floor, City Hall Building, 801 Crawford Street, unless the call of a special meeting or other notice with respect to a regular meeting specifying some other place of meeting shall have been delivered to each member of the council at least 24 hours prior to the time of such meeting, but nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the continuation of any meeting to any other place. 
(Code 1973, § 2-41; Code 1988, § 2-56)  
Sec. 2-57. - Day and time of regular meetings. 
(a)  There shall be regular meetings of the city council, unless otherwise provided by special resolution, beginning at 7:00 p.m. on the second and fourth Tuesdays in each month except in the month of December when the regular meeting shall be on the second Tuesday. 
(b)  There shall be a public work session of the city council beginning at 5:00 p.m. on the Monday preceding the second Tuesday in each month. Public hearings which the council is required to hold under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200 et seq. may be held at a meeting specified in this subsection, but nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the continuation of any such public hearing to any other time or place. 
(Code 1973, § 2-42; Code 1988, § 2-57; Ord. No. 1988-17, § 1, 2-9-1988)  
Sec. 2-58. - Call and notice of special meetings. 
(a)  Call of meetings. The mayor, any three members of the city council, or the city manager may call a special meeting of the council. 
(b)  Notice. The city clerk shall cause notice in writing of all special meetings of the city council to be delivered at least 24 hours prior to the time appointed for such meetings to each member of the city council personally or at such member's usual place of business or residence. In an emergency, by written consent of a majority of all of the members of the city council, a meeting may be held with less notice, provided that the city clerk, in writing, certifies that an attempt was made to notify each member of the city council at his usual place of business and residence. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-43, 2-44; Code 1988, § 2-58) 
Charter reference— Call and notice of special meetings, § 3.14.  
Sec. 2-59. - Limitation on transaction of business at special meeting. 
No business shall be transacted at a special meeting of the city council which is not distinctly and specifically set forth in the notice of such meeting, except by consent of all members elected to the council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-45; Code 1988, § 2-59) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 3.14.  
Sec. 2-60. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of the city council shall constitute a quorum at any meeting for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1973, § 2-46; Code 1988, § 2-60) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1415.  
Sec. 2-61. - Adjournment in absence of quorum; retirement of member before adjournment. 
If a quorum is not present at the time appointed for any meeting of the city council, the city clerk shall, at the time appointed for the meeting, enter upon the record the name of the members present. A majority of those members present may immediately adjourn, but no member in attendance shall retire before adjournment without the consent of the majority of those present. 
(Code 1973, § 2-47; Code 1988, § 2-61)  
Sec. 2-62. - Absence of member after being marked present. 
After a member of city council has been entered on the minutes as present at any council meeting, he shall not excuse himself from the council chamber for a longer period than ten minutes without being denoted by the city clerk as absent. 
(Code 1973, § 2-48; Code 1988, § 2-62)  
Sec. 2-63. - Order of business. 
Council shall provide in its Rules of Order and Procedure an order of business for council meetings. The order of business shall be for the purpose of ensuring the orderly conduct of meetings, so as best to deal with all matters affecting the public interest. The Rules of Order and Procedure shall be a public document maintained by the city clerk, and shall be available for inspection and copying by any member of the public. 
(Code 1973, § 2-49; Code 1988, § 2-63; Ord. No. 1992-83, § 1, 10-27-1992; Ord. No. 1993-69, § 1, 9-14-1993; Ord. No. 1996-64, 12-17-1996)  
Sec. 2-64. - Mayor to preserve order and decide questions of order; appeals. 
The mayor shall preserve order and decide all questions of order, but any member of the city council may appeal to the council from the decision of the mayor on any question of order. 
(Code 1973, § 2-50; Code 1988, § 2-64)  
Sec. 2-65. - Sergeant at arms. 
The chief of police or a line officer of the police department designated by him shall act as sergeant at arms at all city council meetings. The sergeant at arms shall execute the council's commands, together with such process issued by its authority, as shall be directed to him by the mayor. The sergeant at arms shall, under the direction of the mayor, have charge of the council chamber and shall prevent any interruption of the business of the council by disorder within or without. 
(Code 1973, § 2-51; Code 1988, § 2-65)  
Sec. 2-66. - Members to address chair before speaking; scope of speech. 
When a member of the city council wishes to speak at a council meeting, he shall address the chair. After being recognized by the mayor, he may speak, but he shall confine his remarks to the question before the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-52; Code 1988, § 2-66)  
Sec. 2-67. - Mayor to recognize speaker. 
When two or more members of the city council ask to speak at the same time at a council meeting, the mayor shall name the person to speak. 
(Code 1973, § 2-53; Code 1988, § 2-67)  
Sec. 2-68. - Citizens addressing council. 
Council shall provide in its Rules of Order and Procedure a means by which citizens may address council. The means provided shall be for the purpose of ensuring the public of its right to address council, consistent with the need of council to conduct the public business in an open, orderly, and reasonable manner. The Rules of Order and Procedure shall be a public document maintained by the city clerk, and shall be available for inspection and copying by any member of the public. 
(Code 1973, § 2-56; Code 1988, § 2-68; Ord. No. 1992-83, § 2, 10-27-1992; Ord. No. 1993-69, § 2, 9-14-1993; Ord. No. 1996-64, 12-17-1996)  
Sec. 2-69. - When motion, proposition to be written and read; question to be stated. 
Every motion or proposition made at any meeting of the city council shall be reduced to writing if desired by the mayor or by any member of the council, and shall be delivered to the clerk's table to be there read. The question shall be stated by the chair before the same shall be debated. 
(Code 1973, § 2-57; Code 1988, § 2-69)  
Sec. 2-70. - Introduction, recording of ordinances. 
An ordinance, when introduced, shall be entered on the minutes by its title and its final disposal recorded in the minutes; but all ordinances and all amendments to ordinances shall be carefully and accurately recorded in an ordinance book by the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 2-58; Code 1988, § 2-70)  
Sec. 2-71. - Introduction of ordinance, resolution after rejection of similar one. 
After the city council shall have finally rejected an ordinance or resolution, another of substantially the same import shall not be placed on the agenda by the city clerk or entertained by the city council unless five of the members of the city council petition for the same before the expiration of three months, after which time such rejection shall have no effect thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 2-59; Code 1988, § 2-71)  
Sec. 2-72. - Withdrawal of motion, proposition. 
Any motion or proposition may be withdrawn by the mover at any time before a decision, amendment or other action of the council upon it, with leave of his second. 
(Code 1973, § 2-60; Code 1988, § 2-72)  
Sec. 2-73. - Reconsideration of question. 
When a question has been decided, it may be reconsidered on the motion of any councilmember who voted with the prevailing side. When a motion is made to reconsider any action, it shall be finally disposed of on the same day unless then formally postponed to a definite time, and if not so disposed of or postponed on the same day, the action which was the subject of the motion shall be final. 
(Code 1973, § 2-61; Code 1988, § 2-73)  
Sec. 2-74. - Voting procedure; grounds for abstention. 
(a)  On all roll call votes, each member of the city council shall announce his vote as his name is called in alphabetical order, except that the mayor or other presiding officer shall vote last. The announcement shall be by electronic voting; provided, however, if necessary the city clerk shall orally obtain the vote of each member of the council. At the request of any member present the "ayes" and "nays" on any question shall be recorded. 
(b)  No member of council shall abstain from voting on any matter unless such vote is prohibited by applicable provisions of the State and Local Government Virginia Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq. or would constitute an act of impropriety under the circumstances. In all cases of abstention, the member shall advise the chair of his intention to abstain and the specific and detailed reasons therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 2-62; Code 1988, § 2-74) 
State Law reference— Prohibited conduct, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3112.  
Sec. 2-75. - Rules of order and procedure; applicability of Robert's Rules of Order. 
The city council may adopt such rules of order and procedure as it shall deem necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of its business. Such rules of order and procedure shall govern the city council in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter or this Code, and shall be adopted by a majority vote of all the members of council. Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the city council in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the rules of the council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-63; Code 1988, § 2-75)  
Sec. 2-76. - Suspension of rules. 
No rule of the city council included within this division or adopted pursuant to section 2-75 shall be suspended without the approval of a majority of the members of council present. 
(Code 1973, § 2-64; Code 1988, § 2-76)  
Secs. 2-77—2-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Animal control officer, § 4-2; city treasurer, § 12-116 et seq.; obstructing or hindering city employees in discharge of their duty, § 24-246; giving false information to city employees conducting investigations, § 24-247; retirement systems, ch. 30; city assessor, § 35-61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Appointment. 
The city council shall appoint the city manager, city attorney, city assessor, and city clerk. All other officers and employees shall be appointed by the city manager, except when otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1988, § 2-101; Ord. No. 2009-48 , § 1, 5-26-2009) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, §§ 4.01, 5.01, 5.02, 7.01. 
Cross reference— Appointment of employees of law library, § 19-53.  
Sec. 2-102. - Term of officers appointed by council. 
Every officer required to be appointed by the council shall hold his office during the pleasure of the council or until his successor shall be appointed and qualified, unless his term is fixed by law. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2; Code 1988, § 2-102)  
Sec. 2-103. - Appointment of substitutes for officers appointed by council. 
Except where otherwise provided, if any officer of the city appointed by the council is at any time unable, by reason of sickness or other unavoidable cause, to discharge the duties of his office, he may, in writing, appoint a substitute to act for him during such inability, and he and his sureties, if any, shall be liable for the conduct of such substitute in the office. No such appointment shall be valid until ratified by the council, and when so ratified, such ratification shall be reported with the proceedings of the council, and the certificate of appointment filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 2-3; Code 1988, § 2-103)  
Sec. 2-104. - Oath—Required. 
Every officer or employee of the city required by law to take an oath shall take the oath before entering upon the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1973, § 2-5; Code 1988, § 2-104) 
State Law reference— Oath required of city officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1522.  
Sec. 2-105. - Same—Form. 
Every person required to take an oath as an officer or employee of the city shall take and subscribe the following oath: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the State of Virginia, and that I will faithfully and impartially discharge and perform all the duties incumbent on me as _______ according to the best of my ability, (so help me God)." 
(Code 1973, § 2-6; Code 1988, § 2-105) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 49-1.  
Sec. 2-106. - Effect of failure to take oath or give bond. 
Except where otherwise provided, if any person required by law to take oath or to give bond prior to taking office fails to do so within 30 days of receiving notice of his election or appointment, he shall be considered as having declined such office and the same shall be deemed vacant. 
(Code 1973, § 2-7; Code 1988, § 2-106)  
Sec. 2-107. - Residence requirements. 
(a)  All officers who are appointed by the city council shall be bona fide residents of the city or become such within six months after the effective date of their appointment unless such time period is extended by the city council. Upon failure to comply with this subsection, their employment shall immediately cease. 
(b)  For all city employees other than those covered by subsection (a) of this section, there shall be no residence requirement, except that the city manager may, in his discretion, require that any department head subject to his appointive power remain a resident of the city or become such within six months after the effective date of his appointment. 
(Code 1973, § 2-8; Code 1988, § 2-107; Ord. No. 2009-48 , § 1, 5-26-2009) 
State Law reference— Residency, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1505.  
Sec. 2-108. - Compensation. 
(a)  All city officers and employees shall be compensated for their services in accordance with the current classification and pay plan as adopted by the council. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance adopting any plan referred to in subsection (a) of this section and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 2-9; Code 1988, § 2-108)  
Sec. 2-109. - Eight-hour day required. 
Except as otherwise provided, eight hours shall constitute a legal day's work for all employees of the city government. 
(Code 1973, § 2-10; Code 1988, § 2-109)  
Sec. 2-110. - Offices to be open every day; exceptions. 
All city offices for the transaction of public business shall be kept open every day, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(Code 1973, § 2-14; Code 1988, § 2-110)  
Sec. 2-111. - Legal holidays. 
(a)  The following days shall be observed as holidays by the city on the same days of the year as observed by the Commonwealth: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Lee-Jackson Day; 
(3)  Martin Luther King, Jr. Day; 
(4)  George Washington Day; 
(5)  Memorial Day; 
(6)  Independence Day; 
(7)  Labor Day; 
(8)  Columbus Day; 
(9)  Veteran's Day; 
(10)  Thanksgiving Day; 
(11)  The day following Thanksgiving Day; 
(12)  Christmas Day; and 
(13)  Any other day or part thereof designated as a holiday by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the President of the United States, the city manager, or the city council. 
(b)  In addition to the above holidays, each full-time city employee may take a holiday on his or her birthday or within 30 days thereafter. 
(c)  Whenever a holiday shall fall on a Saturday, it shall be observed on the preceding Friday. Whenever a holiday shall fall on a Sunday, it shall be observed on the following Monday. 
(Code 1973, § 2-13; Code 1988, § 2-111; Ord. No. 1991-45, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1995-31, § 1, 3-28-1995; Ord. No. 2007-108, § 1, 12-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008; Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1, 2-23-2010)  
Sec. 2-112. - Annual leave. 
(a)  Officers and full-time regular employees of the city shall accrue annual leave in accordance with the schedule listed below. 
General Employees 
Service Months 	Hourly Amount 	Pay Period Amount 	Annual Amount 
0—60 	0.0542 	4.336 	112.736 
61—108 	0.0577 	4.616 	120.016 
109—168 	0.0658 	5.264 	136.864 
169—228 	0.0733 	5.864 	152.464 
229—999 	0.0808 	6.464 	168.064 
 
Fire Suppression Employees (27-day cycle) 
Service Months 	Hourly Amount 	Pay Period Amount 	Annual Amount 
0—60 	0.0614 	6.5084 	169.2184 
61—108 	0.0653 	6.9218 	179.9668 
109—168 	0.0745 	7.8970 	205.3220 
169—228 	0.0832 	8.8192 	229.2992 
229—999 	0.0914 	9.6884 	251.8984 
 
Annual leave earned will be credited per pay period. When an officer or employee does not work (or take accrued leave for) a full schedule during a pay period, the annual leave accrued for that period shall be calculated by multiplying the applicable hourly amount above by the number of hours the employee worked or took accrued leave during the period. Officers and employees will have an accounting of their annual leave printed on their pay check stubs. 
(b)  Annual leave may be taken at any time with the written approval of the department head concerned. During the period of December 16 through December 31, department heads shall not take annual leave except with the prior written approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  Annual leave taken shall only be charged against the normal working days of the officer or employee concerned. 
(d)  All annual leave taken must be reported to the finance department at the end of each period, and such shall be deducted from the leave account of the person taking such leave. 
(e)  The amount of annual leave which any officer or employee is granted may be accumulated and carried over from year to year; provided, however, that all accumulated unused annual leave in excess of 44 days of annual leave entitlement remaining in the leave account of the officer or employee as of December 31 of each year shall be automatically canceled on that date. 
(f)  If any officer or employee leaves the service of the city after giving reasonable notice of his intention to do so, he shall be entitled to terminal leave pay; provided, however, if he is dismissed for personal delinquency or if he resigns in the face of dismissal or other disciplinary action, he may forfeit his right to terminal leave pay. Terminal leave pay shall not exceed 44 days of annual leave entitlement or the actual number of leave days in the leave account of the officer or employee, whichever is less. 
(g)  The council shall have the right to vary the application of subsection (f) of this section in establishing conditions of employment for officers and employees appointed by the council. This provision shall be applicable to all contracts of employment heretofore or hereafter made. 
(h)  Constitutional officer and city council positions are not eligible for annual leave under this section. 
(i)  The city manager is authorized to promulgate policies and procedures governing the granting and administration of annual leave and the compensation of employees while on leave, and otherwise implementing the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 2-112; Ord. No. 1995-45, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 1-24-2017)  
Sec. 2-113. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Officers and full-time regular employees of the city other than fire suppression employees shall accrue 3.696 hours of sick leave per pay period, and fire suppression employees shall accrue 5.536 hours of sick leave per pay period. Sick leave earned will be credited per pay period. When an officer or employee does not work (or take accrued leave for) a full schedule during a pay period, the sick leave accrued for that period shall be calculated by multiplying the number of hours the employee worked or took accrued leave during the period by (i) .0462 in the case of officers and full-time regular employees other than fire suppression employees or (ii) .0692 in the case of fire suppression employees. 
(b)  No officer or employee shall be entitled to or receive compensation for sick leave unless he is employed by the city at the time he becomes sick. No officer or employee shall be entitled to any compensation for unused sick leave, either while still employed or upon termination of employment with the city. 
(c)  Constitutional officer and city council positions are not eligible for sick leave under this section. 
(d)  The city manager is authorized to promulgate policies and procedures governing the granting and administration of sick leave and the compensation of employees while on leave, and otherwise implementing the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 2-11; Code 1988, § 2-113; Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 2, 1-24-2017)  
Sec. 2-114. - Political activities restricted. 
(a)  Application of section. The provisions of this section shall apply to all pay and classification plan employees of the city, the city manager and all department heads and employees appointed by him, officers appointed by the city council, and all staff assistants in those departments (including the city clerk, city attorney, and real estate assessor). The provisions of this section shall not apply to members of boards and commissions who are not pay and classification plan employees of the city nor to members of the city council. 
(b)  Publicly addressing officers and employees during working hours prohibited; private expression of opinions protected. It shall be unlawful for any person to address groups of officers or employees of the city supporting or opposing the candidacy of any person for public office while such officers or employees are at work during a regularly assigned period of duty or otherwise engaged in carrying out the official business and functions of the city; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or prevent any officer or employee of the city from exercising his rights as a citizen to privately express his opinions on any political subject. 
(c)  Right to vote and participate in political activities protected. The restrictions of this section are designed to protect every employee's right to vote and to participate in political activities and to keep this right free from interference, solicitation or dictation by any fellow employee, supervisor, official or candidate. 
(d)  Use of status or prestige. No person to whom this section applies shall use the status or prestige of his position with the city on behalf of or in opposition to any candidate for elective office, including oneself. 
(e)  Use of city funds, supplies, equipment or uniforms. No person to whom this section applies shall use any city funds, supplies or equipment for political purposes, nor shall any such person wear his city uniform while participating in any manner in political activities. 
(f)  Holding elected office while employed by city prohibited. No person to whom this section applies may continue to serve as a city employee if the person is elected or appointed to, and thereafter assumes office, in any of the following elected positions: Mayor, Member of Portsmouth City Council, Sheriff, Commonwealth's Attorney, Treasurer, Commissioner of Revenue, Clerk of Circuit Court, Member of the Senate of Virginia, or Member of the Virginia House of Delegates. Upon assuming any such office, the person's employment shall be deemed terminated by action of law, unless the person has previously resigned. 
(g)  Enforcement of these provisions. The provisions of this section shall be enforced in concert with applicable city and departmental policies and procedures. 
(h)  Dismissal on violation. Violation of this section shall constitute a cause for immediate dismissal from city employment. 
(Code 1973, § 2-15; Code 1988, § 2-114; Ord. No. 1991-112, § 1, 12-10-1991; Ord. No. 2008-26, § 1, 4-8-2008)  
Sec. 2-115. - Demand and receipt of fee, etc., greater than that provided for official duty. 
If any officer for performing an official duty, for which a fee or compensation is allowed or provided by law, knowingly demands and receives a greater fee and compensation than is so allowed or provided, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 2-16; Code 1988, § 2-115) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 2-116. - Payroll deductions for the Southern States Police Benevolent Association, Inc. 
Upon written request of any employee, the chief financial officer shall cause to be made a payroll deduction payable to the Southern States Police Benevolent Association, Inc. in the amount authorized by the employee. Any such deduction may be terminated or modified by written authorization of the employee. 
(Ord. No. 2010-76, § 1, 9-28-2010)  
Sec. 2-117. - Criminal history and other background checks of applicants, employees, and volunteers. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city council in enacting this section to comply with the provisions of §§ 15.2-1503.1, 15.2-1505.1 and 19.2-389 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, to enable the city manager and the director of human resource management, in the interest of public welfare and safety, to require fingerprinting and to access the state and national criminal history record information regarding applicants for certain positions and volunteers, as set forth below. The director of human resource management shall determine the type and scope of the criminal history record checks and any other background checks required for the affected positions. 
(b)  The human resource management department shall require a criminal history record information investigation on all applicants for police and fire department positions. Applicants shall include those for initial hire, and those current employees who laterally transfer, promote, or demote to such a position, and volunteers. 
(c)  In addition to [subsection] (b) above, the human resources department shall require a criminal history record information investigation for finalists identified in the personnel selection and placement process for all applicants, including volunteers, for individual positions or activities identified by the city manager as affecting public welfare or safety. Applicants shall include finalists for initial hire, and those current employees who laterally transfer, promote, or demote to such a position, and volunteers. 
(d)  Current employees and volunteers. The director of human resource management may require a periodic criminal history record information investigation and other background checks, and determine their type and scope, for current employees and volunteers when authorized by federal or state law. 
(e)  Any applicant, employee, or volunteer described in this section shall, if required, submit to fingerprinting and provide personal descriptive information and any other necessary paperwork to be forwarded along with the fingerprints through the Virginia State Police Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining state and national criminal history record information regarding such applicant, employee, or volunteer. 
(f)  The criminal history information provided in accordance with this section shall be used solely to assess eligibility for public employment or service, and shall not be disseminated to any person not involved in the assessment process. 
(g)  Past criminal conduct shall not automatically disqualify applicants from employment or volunteer service and the criminal history information obtained pursuant to this section is to be considered only when it is specifically relevant to the particular employment or volunteer position sought. 
( Ord. No. 2016-06, § 1, 1-26-2016)  
Secs. 2-118—2-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CIVIL SERVICE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Civil service, § 11.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-136. - Application of system. 
All employees of the police and fire departments of the city, except the chiefs of such departments, and all employees of other departments electing to come under civil service under the Charter, shall be subject to the civil service provisions of the Charter, and all appointments to such departments shall be made under such provisions of the Charter. 
(Code 1973, § 2-76; Code 1988, § 2-136) 
Cross reference— Members of the auxiliary police force not subject to civil service system, § 27-27.  
Sec. 2-137. - Establishment and composition of commission. 
There shall be in the city a civil service commission which shall be composed of three members. 
(Code 1973, § 2-77; Code 1988, § 2-137) 
Charter reference— Civil service commission, § 11.01 et seq.  
Sec. 2-138. - Appointment, compensation, qualifications and terms of commission members. 
The members of the civil service commission shall be appointed by the judges of the circuit court of the city. The members of the civil service commission shall serve without compensation, and shall be citizens of the United States, residents of this city and be otherwise qualified as required by the Charter. The terms of office of the members of the civil service commission shall be for four years, except that the first three members of the commission shall be appointed for different terms, that is, one shall be appointed for a term of two years from December 1, 1936, one for a term of three years from December 1, 1936, and one for a term of four years from December 1, 1936. 
(Code 1973, § 2-78; Code 1988, § 2-138)  
Sec. 2-139. - Removal of commission members. 
Any member of the civil service commission may be removed from office for incompetency, incompatibility or dereliction of duty or malfeasance in office, or other good cause, as provided in the Charter; provided, however, that no member of the commission shall be removed until charges have been preferred in writing, due notice given and a full hearing had. 
(Code 1973, § 2-79; Code 1988, § 2-139)  
Sec. 2-140. - Time and attention required of commission members. 
The members of the civil service commission shall devote due time and attention to the performance of the duties imposed upon them. 
(Code 1973, § 2-80; Code 1988, § 2-140)  
Sec. 2-141. - Quorum for commission. 
Two members of the civil service commission shall constitute a quorum, and the votes of any two members of such commission concurring shall be sufficient for the decision of all matters and the transaction of all business to be decided or transacted by the commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-81; Code 1988, § 2-141)  
Sec. 2-142. - Commission powers and duties under Charter. 
The civil service commission shall have all powers and duties and be subject to all of the provisions of the Charter. 
(Code 1973, § 2-82; Code 1988, § 2-142)  
Secs. 2-143—2-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CITY MANAGER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— City manager, §§ 5.01—5.03. 
 
Sec. 2-166. - General powers and duties; absence or inability to act. 
(a)  The city manager shall have such powers and duties as are now or may hereafter be prescribed in the Charter and the laws of this state, and such other duties as may be imposed upon the city manager by the city council. 
(b)  The city manager shall establish and organize all city departments necessary to perform city governmental functions and administrative duties, and shall employ officers and employees needed to operate such departments. The city manager shall periodically advise the city council of the city's departmental organization and any changes thereto and shall maintain a list of all city departments for public information. 
(c)  In the event of the inability of the city manager to perform the duties of his office by reason of absence, vacation, sickness or other disability, the city manager shall appoint an acting city manager. The acting city manager shall have such powers and perform such duties as are prescribed for the city manager. If for any reason the city manager is unable to appoint an acting city manager, the city council shall make the appointment. 
(Code 1973, § 2-94; Code 1988, § 2-166; Ord. No. 1990-128, 12-11-1990) 
Charter reference— General powers and duties of city manager, § 5.02.  
Sec. 2-167. - Authority to offer rewards; ineligible persons; payment. 
The city manager shall be authorized, whenever it appears to him that property of the city has been damaged or defaced by parties unknown, to offer a monetary reward to any person for information sufficient to procure conviction of the person responsible for such damage in a court of appropriate jurisdiction; provided, however, that no law enforcement officer paid in whole or in part from public funds or employee of the city shall be eligible to receive such reward. All such rewards shall be paid from funds appropriated for such purpose and shall not exceed $25.00 paid to any one person for information leading to any one conviction. 
(Code 1973, § 2-95; Code 1988, § 2-167) 
Cross reference— Damaging city property generally, § 24-318.  
Secs. 2-168—2-191. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CITY CLERK[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk, §§ 4.01—4.03. 
 
Sec. 2-192. - Deputy clerk. 
(a)  The city council may appoint deputy city clerks who shall assist the city clerk in the performance of his duties and shall act under his direction and control. 
(b)  Whenever the city clerk is absent from his office, the deputy city clerk may perform the duties of the city clerk and sign whatsoever papers the clerk would be required to sign if present for duty. 
(Code 1973, § 2-114; Code 1988, § 2-192)  
Sec. 2-193. - Attendance of council meetings; recording proceedings. 
The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the city council, and record accurately its proceedings in well-bound books kept for that purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 2-108; Code 1988, § 2-193) 
Charter reference— Clerk to keep journal of council proceedings, § 4.02.  
Sec. 2-194. - Filing, preservation of records. 
The city clerk shall file and carefully preserve in his office all books, records, official bonds and all other papers which may come into his hands as city clerk; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to title deeds. 
(Code 1973, § 2-109; Code 1988, § 2-194)  
Sec. 2-195. - Indexing of books. 
All books that the city clerk is required to maintain shall be properly indexed by him as to all matters therein contained. 
(Code 1973, § 2-110; Code 1988, § 2-195)  
Sec. 2-196. - Records to be open to inspection by councilmembers, city officers, public. 
All records that the city clerk is required to maintain shall be open to the inspection of any member of the city council, any officer of the city and any member of the general public during the office hours of the city clerk. 
(Code 1973, § 2-111; Code 1988, § 2-196) 
Charter reference— Records open to public inspection, § 4.02.  
Sec. 2-197. - Failure of city officers to file reports to be reported to council. 
The city clerk shall report to the city council the failure of any officer of the city to make such reports as are now or may hereafter be required to be made by him. 
(Code 1973, § 2-112; Code 1988, § 2-197)  
Sec. 2-198. - Duties when council required to give notice. 
Whenever the city council shall be required by law to give notice before holding a public hearing or taking action on any matter presented to it or to be presented to it by any officer, board or commission of the city, the city clerk, without prior authorization by the council, shall cause such matter to be placed on the agenda for the earliest practicable regular council meeting permitted by law and shall cause the required notice thereof to be published as required by law. 
(Code 1973, § 2-113; Code 1988, § 2-198)  
Secs. 2-199—2-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CITY ATTORNEY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Department of law and city attorney, §§ 7.01—7.04. 
 
Sec. 2-221. - Duty to represent city in civil cases and proceedings before boards and commissions. 
The city attorney shall represent the interest of the city in all civil cases arising in the courts and in all proceedings before boards and commissions. 
(Code 1973, § 2-126; Code 1988, § 2-221) 
Charter reference— Duty of city attorney to represent city in civil cases, § 7.03(d).  
Sec. 2-222. - Collection and disposition of fees. 
All fees allowed the city attorney by law for acting as attorney in suits, actions and proceedings to which the city is a party shall be collected by him and paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1973, § 2-127; Code 1988, § 2-222)  
Secs. 2-223—2-345. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-346. - Established. 
There is hereby established a department of the city government known and designated as the department of social services. 
(Code 1973, § 2-222; Code 1988, § 2-346)  
Sec. 2-347. - Composition. 
The department of social services shall consist of the director of social services and such other officers and employees organized into such boards, divisions and other units as may be provided by state law or ordinance or by the orders of the city manager consistent therewith. 
(Code 1973, § 2-223; Code 1988, § 2-347)  
Secs. 2-348—2-370. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR 
 
Sec. 2-371. - Appointment; subject to direction and control of city manager. 
The director of social services shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be subject to the city manager's direction and control. 
(Code 1973, § 2-231; Code 1988, § 2-371)  
Sec. 2-372. - General powers and duties. 
The director of social services shall exercise all powers and perform all duties conferred upon and required of local boards of public welfare by state law, this Code or other city ordinance. The director of social services shall also perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 2-232; Code 1988, § 2-372)  
Sec. 2-373. - Accountable for expenditure of funds; incurring indebtedness beyond appropriation. 
The director of social services shall be responsible and accountable to the city for the proper expenditure and account of all funds appropriated by the city for the department of social services and no indebtedness shall be incurred by him beyond the amount appropriated by the city council for such purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 2-233; Code 1988, § 2-373)  
Sec. 2-374. - Reports. 
The director of social services shall make, on or before the tenth day of each month, a written report to the city manager, of the activities of the department of social services for the preceding month. The director of social services shall also furnish from time to time such additional reports and information as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 2-234; Code 1988, § 2-374)  
Sec. 2-375. - Appointment, term of employees. 
The director of social services, subject to the approval of the city manager, shall appoint such social service employees as may be necessary who shall hold office at the pleasure of the director of social services and the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 2-235; Code 1988, § 2-375)  
Secs. 2-376—2-395. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Local advisory commission, Code of Virginia, § 63.2-305. 
 
Sec. 2-396. - Definition. 
As used in this division, the word "commission" means the social services department advisory commission established by this division. 
(Code 1988, § 2-396)  
Sec. 2-397. - Established. 
There is hereby established an advisory commission to be known as the social services department advisory commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-236; Code 1988, § 2-397)  
Sec. 2-398. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by city council. The members of the commission shall be appointed for terms of four years; provided, however, that of those first appointed, three shall be appointed for two years, two for three years, and three for four years, for terms commencing on July 1, 1977. No person shall serve more than two consecutive terms. 
(b)  The director of social services shall be an ex officio member, without vote, of the commission. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-237, 2-242; Code 1988, § 2-398)  
Sec. 2-399. - Filling of vacancies; removal of members. 
All vacancies on the commission shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired portion of the term. Any member of the commission may be removed by the city council at any time. 
(Code 1973, § 2-238; Code 1988, § 2-399)  
Sec. 2-400. - Election of officers; adoption of rules, regulations and bylaws. 
The commission shall annually elect a chairman and secretary from among its members. The commission shall adopt such rules, regulations and bylaws as it shall deem necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of its business. 
(Code 1973, § 2-239; Code 1988, § 2-400)  
Sec. 2-401. - Meetings. 
The commission shall hold regular meetings at least bimonthly on such days and at such hours as may be fixed by the commission. Special meetings may be held at such other times as may be fixed by the commission or upon the call of the chairman or on the petition of at least one-half of the members. 
(Code 1973, § 2-240; Code 1988, § 2-401)  
Sec. 2-402. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  To interest itself in all matters pertaining to the social welfare of the people of the city; 
(2)  To monitor the formulation and implementation of social welfare programs in the city; 
(3)  To meet with the officer in charge of the department of social services at least four times a year for the purpose of making recommendations on policy matters concerning the department; 
(4)  To make an annual report to the city council, concurrent with the budget presentation of the department, concerning the administration of the social services department; and 
(5)  To submit to the city council, from time to time, other reports that the commission deems appropriate. 
(Code 1973, § 2-241; Code 1988, § 2-402)  
Secs. 2-403—2-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Local health departments and directors, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-30 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-421. - Operation by state board of health. 
Until otherwise provided by the city council, the department of public health shall be operated by the state board of health. 
(Code 1973, § 16-22; Code 1988, § 2-421) 
State Law reference— Contract for operation of local health department by state board of health, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-31.  
Sec. 2-422. - Appointment of director. 
The director of public health shall be appointed with the joint concurrence of the city manager and the state board of health. 
(Code 1973, § 16-23; Code 1988, § 2-422)  
Sec. 2-423. - Director designated city health officer. 
The director of public health shall be the health officer of the city and shall perform all the duties and functions of such office. 
(Code 1973, § 16-24; Code 1988, § 2-423)  
Sec. 2-424. - Duties of director as local registrar of vital records and health statistics. 
The director of public health shall be the local registrar of vital records and health statistics for the city. The director of public health shall supply forms, issue permits, require proper certificates and keep records as may be provided by state law, and shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by state law, the council or the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 16-25; Code 1988, § 2-424) 
State Law reference— Local registrars of vital records and health statistics, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-254 et seq.  
Sec. 2-425. - Right of entry of director and department officers and employees. 
The director of public health and all officers and employees of the health department of the city and their agents shall have the power and it shall be their duty to enter all lots, outhouses, dwellings, stables, wharves, warehouses and other premises for the purpose of examining such premises as to their general sanitary condition. 
(Code 1973, § 16-26; Code 1988, § 2-425)  
Sec. 2-426. - Authority to order abatement of nuisances; noncompliance. 
If, upon entering any premises pursuant to section 2-425, the director of public health or other officer or employee of the health department shall find any condition that is detrimental to the health of the inhabitants or people living or employed in such premises, he shall order the occupant, owner or his agent or other person who, under the terms of the lease or rental, is responsible for the upkeep of the same to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time. If such order is not complied with within the time specified in such notice, the occupant, the owner or his agent, or other person who under the terms of the lease or rental is charged with the duty of maintaining and keeping the premises in repair shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 16-27; Code 1988, § 2-426) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; nuisances generally, ch. 23; lien for nuisance abatement expenses incurred by city, §§ 23-4, 23-5; abatement by director of public health of nuisance resulting from failure to connect to public sewer, § 38-35.  
Secs. 2-427—2-525. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - PLANNING COMMISSION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
 
Sec. 2-526. - Created. 
There is hereby created a city planning commission, to be known as the "Planning Commission of the City of Portsmouth." 
(Code 1973, § 26-1; Code 1988, § 2-526) 
State Law reference— Duty of council to create planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-527. - Composition; appointment of members. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the city council in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
(Code 1973, § 26-2; Code 1988, § 2-527)  
Sec. 2-528. - Compensation of members. 
All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 26-3; Code 1988, § 2-529)  
Sec. 2-529. - Filling of vacancies. 
Vacancies on the planning commission shall be filled by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1973, § 26-4; Code 1988, § 2-530; Ord. No. 1988-61, § 1, 6-14-1988)  
Sec. 2-530. - Members to hold no other office. 
The members of the planning commission shall hold no office of profit under the city government. 
(Code 1973, § 26-5; Code 1988, § 2-531)  
Sec. 2-531. - Removal of members. 
The city council may remove any member of the planning commission for malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1973, § 26-6; Code 1988, § 2-532; Ord. No. 1988-61, § 1, 6-14-1988) 
State Law reference— Removal of members of planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212.  
Sec. 2-532. - Election of officers. 
The planning commission shall elect a chairman from among its citizen members, who shall hold office for a term of one year and who shall be eligible for reelection. The planning commission may elect a vice-chairman and secretary from among its members if it deems necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 26-8; Code 1988, § 2-533) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2217.  
Sec. 2-533. - General powers and functions. 
The planning commission shall have such powers and shall perform such functions and duties as are set forth for local planning commissions in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2221 toward the end and purpose of planning the orderly development of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 26-10; Code 1988, § 2-534)  
Sec. 2-534. - Meetings. 
The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. 
(Code 1973, § 26-7; Code 1988, § 2-535) 
State Law reference— Meetings of planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2214.  
Sec. 2-535. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
The planning commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1973, § 26-11; Code 1988, § 2-536) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2217.  
Sec. 2-536. - Contracting with consultants. 
The planning commission may contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants, within the amounts duly appropriated by the city council for the purpose of such commission. 
(Code 1973, § 26-12; Code 1988, § 2-537) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2217.  
Sec. 2-537. - Right of entry of members. 
The members of the planning commission and its officers and employees, in the performance of their functions and duties, may enter upon any land in the city and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 26-13; Code 1988, § 2-538)  
Sec. 2-538. - Records to be kept. 
The planning commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public record. 
(Code 1973, § 26-16; Code 1988, § 2-539) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2217.  
Sec. 2-539. - Annual report. 
The planning commission shall make an annual report to the city council concerning its activities during the year. 
(Code 1973, § 26-17; Code 1988, § 2-540) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2221.  
Sec. 2-540. - Acceptance of gifts and donations for commission. 
The city council may accept gifts and donations for planning commission purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 26-14; Code 1988, § 2-541) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2222.  
Sec. 2-541. - Public officials to furnish information to commission. 
All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission such available information as it may require for its work. 
(Code 1973, § 26-15; Code 1988, § 2-542)  
Secs. 2-542—2-565. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - MUSEUM AND FINE ARTS COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-566. - Established. 
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the museum and fine arts commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-281; Code 1988, § 2-566)  
Sec. 2-567. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
The museum and fine arts commission shall consist of 15 members who shall be appointed by the city council. Members of the museum and fine arts commission shall be appointed for terms of three years. The members of the museum and fine arts commission shall hold office during their respective terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1973, § 2-282; Code 1988, § 2-567; Ord. No. 1990-129, § 2, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-568. - Filling of vacancies. 
All vacancies on the museum and fine arts commission shall be filled by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1973, § 2-284; Code 1988, § 2-568)  
Sec. 2-569. - Removal of members. 
Any member of the museum and fine arts commission may be removed by the city council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, misfeasance or malfeasance of office. 
(Code 1973, § 2-285; Code 1988, § 2-569)  
Sec. 2-570. - Compensation of members. 
The members of the museum and fine arts commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 2-283; Code 1988, § 2-570)  
Sec. 2-571. - Selection and term of chair; creation and filling of other offices. 
The museum and fine arts commission shall choose one of its members to be chair for a one-year term, who may serve no more than two terms as chair. The museum and fine arts commission may create and fill such other offices as determined by the commission's bylaws. 
(Code 1973, § 2-293; Code 1988, § 2-572)  
Sec. 2-572. - General powers and duties. 
(a)  The museum and fine arts commission shall be the official consultant and advisor to the city government and city council on all museums and fine arts activities and programs. 
(b)  The museum and fine arts commission shall: 
(1)  Make a continuing survey and analysis of the cultural needs of the citizens of the city. 
(2)  Cooperate with other cultural groups, public and private. 
(3)  Assist and cooperate with the school board of the city in improving the cultural opportunities of students in the public schools of the city. 
(4)  Assist and cooperate, when called upon by other agencies, in developing, establishing, maintaining, preserving and publicizing places of historical, architectural and cultural significance. 
(5)  Accept grants, gifts and appropriations from whatsoever source and expend funds to enrich the cultural life of the community by the awarding of grants. 
(6)  Provide advice on accessions and deaccessions of objects at the request of the museum director. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-296, 2-297, 2-300—2-302; Code 1988, § 2-575; Ord. No. 1995-101, § 1, 10-24-1995)  
Sec. 2-573. - Adoption of bylaws, rules and regulations. 
The museum and fine arts commission shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for its guidance as may be deemed necessary and expedient. 
(Code 1973, § 2-288; Code 1988, § 2-576)  
Sec. 2-574. - Date of regular meetings. 
The museum and fine arts commission shall hold regular monthly meetings on a date to be fixed by the commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-289; Code 1988, § 2-577)  
Sec. 2-575. - Calling of special meetings. 
Special meetings of the museum and fine arts commission may be called at any time on the call of the chairman or any two members of the commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-290; Code 1988, § 2-578)  
Sec. 2-576. - Meetings to be public. 
All meetings of the museum and fine arts commission shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1973, § 2-291; Code 1988, § 2-579)  
Sec. 2-577. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of the museum and fine arts commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1973, § 2-287; Code 1988, § 2-580)  
Sec. 2-578. - Record of proceedings. 
The museum and fine arts commission shall keep a record of all of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(Code 1973, § 2-292; Code 1988, § 2-581)  
Sec. 2-579. - Reports. 
(a)  The museum and fine arts commission shall furnish an annual report to the city council by the end of each fiscal year, which shall include grant and monument fund activities. 
(b)  The museum and fine arts commission shall furnish the city manager, whenever requested by him, such information as may be desired with respect to its operation and management. 
(Code 1973, § 2-305; Code 1988, § 2-583)  
Sec. 2-580. - Review of commission actions by council. 
All actions of the museum and fine arts commission shall be subject to review by the city council, which may take such action thereon as it deems advisable. 
(Code 1973, § 2-306; Code 1988, § 2-584)  
Secs. 2-581—2-605. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - PORTSMOUTH PORT AND INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-606. - Declaration. 
The city council deems it advisable and hereby declares the necessity for the Portsmouth Port and Industrial Commission, as created by Acts 1954, Chapter 157 of the Acts of the General Assembly of Virginia, 1954, and such subsequent acts as are amendatory thereof, to transact business as authorized by such acts. 
(Code 1973, § 2-318; Code 1988, § 2-606)  
Sec. 2-607. - Terms, election, powers and duties of members. 
The members of the port and industrial commission shall be elected as provided in the acts referred to in section 2-606. The members of the port and industrial commission shall have all the powers and duties as set forth in such acts and are authorized to transact the business of the port and industrial commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-319; Code 1988, § 2-607)  
Secs. 2-608—2-655. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-76, § 1, adopted Aug. 22, 2006, amended Art. XIII, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 2-656—2-662. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. XIII, §§ 2-656—2-658, and was entitled, "Emergency Services Agency." See also the Code Comparative Table 
State Law reference— Emergency management, Code of Virginia, § 44-146.13 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-656. - Created; director, coordinator. 
In accordance with the Commonwealth Emergency Services and Disaster Law of 2000, Chapter 3.2 of Title 44 (§ 44-146.13 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, and also Section 2.15 of the Portsmouth City Charter, the emergency management agency is created. The city manager shall be director of emergency management (within this article, the "director"). A coordinator of emergency management shall be appointed by the city manager, with the consent of city council. The coordinator of emergency management (within this article, the "coordinator"), shall report to the director and shall have such powers as are set forth in this article unless restricted by the director, or as may otherwise be assigned or delegated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2006-76, § 1, 8-22-2006)  
Sec. 2-657. - General powers and duties of director. 
(a)  In collaboration with other public and private agencies within the Commonwealth, the director shall develop or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements for reciprocal assistance in case of a disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted. 
(b)  The director shall prepare or cause to be prepared and kept current one or more local or interjurisdictional emergency plans for the area, for dealing with disasters of different types and scopes. The plan or plans shall include, but not be limited to, responsibilities of all local agencies, and they shall establish a chain of command according to the National Incident Management System. Plans shall be reviewed and updated annually, with documentation. 
(c)  The Director shall have such other powers and duties as provided for in the Commonwealth Emergency Services and Disaster Law of 2000 (Code of Virginia § 44-146.13 et seq.), and any and all other applicable laws, plus all powers reasonably and necessarily implied from any express grant of authority. 
(Ord. No. 2006-76, § 1, 8-22-2006)  
Sec. 2-658. - Declaration of emergencies. 
(a)  The director may declare a local emergency. 
(b)  The director or the coordinator shall designate a command and control center. 
(c)  Prior to the declaration of a local emergency, the director shall attempt to obtain the prior formal or informal consent of city council. However, if such consent is not reasonably practical under the circumstances, then the declaration shall nevertheless be legally valid and of full legal force and authority. 
(d)  The declaration shall be in writing. It shall remain in effect for 14 days, or until confirmed, modified, extended, or cancelled by official recorded vote of city council, whichever occurs first. If city council extends the declaration, it shall state the length of the extension and the conditions and procedures under which it shall be ended, if practicable. If city council is unable to meet within 14 days, then the declaration may be renewed or extended by the director for an indefinite period of time unless and until later modified or cancelled by the director or city council. 
(e)  To the greatest extent practicable, the director or the coordinator shall maintain a written record of all official actions taken hereunder, for later review by applicable state, federal, and local agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2006-76, § 1, 8-22-2006)  
Sec. 2-659. - Emergency powers. 
When a local emergency has been declared by the director pursuant to section 2-658, or by order of the Governor, pursuant to Code of Virginia § 44-146.17: 
(a)  All departments and agencies of city government shall cooperate in full with all directives from the director or the coordinator. All independent agencies and officials within the City of Portsmouth, including without limitation the Portsmouth Public School Division, the Sheriff's Office, the Portsmouth Health Department, and the South Hampton Roads Regional Jail shall also cooperate as fully as reasonably possible and act under the overall direction of the director or the coordinator. 
(b)  The director or the coordinator may: 
(1)  Implement any applicable emergency plans and mutual aid agreements. 
(2)  Suspend all normal procurement requirements in whole or in part. 
(3)  Regulate the distribution of food, fuel, water, emergency supplies, and other resource systems and provide emergency assistance to individuals and groups as needed. 
(4)  Establish shelters as he determines necessary. If any private property is declared to be a shelter, the owner thereof shall have the right to just compensation upon conclusion of the emergency, but he may not lawfully resist or interfere with the use of said property as a shelter during the emergency. 
(5)  Commandeer and appropriate automobiles, boats, other vehicles, or other personal property if needed to protect the public. The owner of any such personal property shall have the right to just compensation upon conclusion of the emergency, but he may not lawfully resist or interfere with the taking of his property to protect the public. 
(6)  Direct any city employees to work at such hours and to perform such duties as are reasonably necessary to help protect and serve the public, and it shall be their duty to perform as directed. 
(7)  Request the assistance of the superintendent of schools, the sheriff, the director of public health, the director of the regional jail, or any other public official to make employees, officials, facilities, and equipment available to assist as needed with emergency efforts. 
(8)  Order an emergency curfew pursuant to section 2-831 et seq. 
(9)  Direct the evacuation of areas of the city. It shall be the duty of each citizen to obey any evacuation order made hereunder, unless the citizen has good cause for not doing so. There shall be no criminal sanction for a citizen who chooses not to evacuate. 
(10)  Provide support or cooperation for the Portsmouth Director of Public Health for any actions taken by that official. 
(c)  The building official or any official of the Portsmouth Department of Fire, Rescue, and Emergency Services may order the evacuation of buildings pursuant to section 13-62. Any sworn officer may order evacuation because of an explosive device. Failure to evacuate shall comprise obstruction or hindrance of a city employee in the discharge of his duty, in violation of section 24-246, and disorderly conduct, in violation of Code of Virginia § 18.2-415 and shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  The director or the coordinator shall provide all reasonable assistance to the state health commissioner in the enforcement of any order of quarantine or order of isolation issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, Title 32.1, Article 3.02 ("Quarantine and Isolation of Persons with Communicable Diseases of Public Health Threat"). 
(Ord. No. 2006-76, § 1, 8-22-2006)  
Sec. 2-660. - Emergency succession. 
If a local emergency has been declared, and the director is for any reason incapacitated, disabled, or for any other reason unable to perform his duties, his powers shall pass to a successor official, in the following order: 
(1)  The coordinator, if one has been appointed. 
(2)  The chief of the department of fire, rescue, and emergency services. 
(3)  The deputy emergency management coordinator. 
(4)  The chief of police. 
(5)  The deputy city manager for public safety. 
(6)  The deputy city manager for operations. 
(7)  The city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-76, § 1, 8-22-2006)  
Sec. 2-661. - Legal determinations. 
Any question involving the interpretation of this article shall be decided by the city attorney or, in his absence, a deputy city attorney, whose decision shall be final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 2006-76, § 1, 8-22-2006)  
Secs. 2-662—2-680. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ADVISORY COMMISSION[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.1. 
 
Sec. 2-681. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "commission" means the commission established by section 2-682. 
(Code 1988, § 2-681)  
Sec. 2-682. - Established. 
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Portsmouth Emergency Medical Service Advisory Commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-340; Code 1988, § 2-682)  
Sec. 2-683. - Composition, appointment and term of members. 
The commission shall consist of 11 members who shall be appointed by the city council for a term of three years. Of these 11 members, a minimum of six shall be appointed from representatives of the following organizations: the Portsmouth Academy of Medicine, the hospital emergency room physicians, the hospital emergency room nurses, the administrator of Maryview Hospital, the administrator of Portsmouth General Hospital, the administrator of the Naval Hospital, a community psychiatrist and the American Red Cross. In addition to those six members, at least three members shall be either residents, property or business owners within the city or shall be employed in the city. These members shall hold office during their respective terms and until their successors are appointed or they are removed under the provisions of section 2-684. 
(Code 1973, § 2-341; Code 1988, § 2-683; Ord. No. 1990-129, § 3, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-684. - Removal of members. 
The city council may remove any member of the commission at any time if it finds that the best interest of the commission would be served by such action. 
(Code 1973, § 2-343; Code 1988, § 2-684)  
Sec. 2-685. - Filling of vacancies. 
All vacancies on the commission shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Code 1973, § 2-342; Code 1988, § 2-685)  
Sec. 2-686. - Election of officers. 
The commission shall elect annually a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from among its members. 
(Code 1973, § 2-347; Code 1988, § 2-686)  
Sec. 2-687. - Function. 
The commission shall have as its function the following objectives: 
(1)  Survey emergency medical resources available to citizens and visitors of the city. 
(2)  Make recommendations regarding hospital emergency departments, ambulance services, training programs, facilities and communications systems and legislation of a related nature. 
(3)  Serve in an advisory role to the city council. 
(4)  Review and comment on federal, state and local fund requests for improvement of emergency medical service capabilities. 
(5)  Serve as a catalyst to effect cooperative arrangements for improving and best utilizing emergency medical resources in the city. 
(6)  Develop and implement a comprehensive city emergency medical service plan. 
(7)  Make an annual report to the city council concerning its activities during the year. 
(Code 1973, § 2-344; Code 1988, § 2-687)  
Sec. 2-688. - Adoption of rules, regulations and bylaws. 
The commission shall adopt such rules, regulations and bylaws as it shall deem necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of its business. 
(Code 1973, § 2-345; Code 1988, § 2-688)  
Sec. 2-689. - Meetings generally. 
The commission shall hold regular meetings at such intervals and on such days and at such hours as may be determined by the commission. Special meetings may be held at any time on the call of the chairman, or any two members of the commission. 
(Code 1973, § 2-346; Code 1988, § 2-689)  
Sec. 2-690. - Member's right to vote. 
Each member of the commission appointed pursuant to section 2-683 shall have the right to vote in exercising the functions and duties enumerated in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 2-341; Code 1988, § 2-690)  
Sec. 2-691. - Representatives from certain departments to attend meetings. 
As an adjunct to the commission, one representative of each of the following city departments will attend the commission meetings in a nonvoting capacity: One member from emergency management agency, one member from the police department, one member from the fire department, one member from the city administration, one member from the department of public health and one member from the public school administration. 
(Code 1973, § 2-341; Code 1988, § 2-691)  
Secs. 2-692—2-719. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - BEHAVIORAL HEALTHCARE SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-720. - Established. 
There is hereby established an advisory board to be known as the behavioral healthcare services advisory board. 
(Code 1988, § 2-720; Ord. No. 1998-41, § 1, 8-11-1998)  
Sec. 2-721. - Composition; appointment of the board. 
The behavioral healthcare services advisory board shall have nine members appointed by the city council. Appointments to the board shall be broadly representative of the community. Three members of the board shall be consumers of behavioral healthcare services or family members of consumers. Of those three members, at least one shall be a consumer receiving such services. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. The director of the department of behavioral healthcare services shall serve as the executive director of the board. 
(Code 1988, § 2-721; Ord. No. 1998-41, § 1, 8-11-1998)  
Sec. 2-722. - Terms of members. 
The term of office of each member of the board of behavioral healthcare services shall be for three years from July 1 of the year of appointment. The members shall hold office during their representative terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1988, § 2-722; Ord. No. 1998-41, § 1, 8-11-1998)  
Sec. 2-723. - Filling of vacancies; limitations on members of the board of directors serving successive terms. 
Vacancies on the behavioral healthcare services advisory board shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as original appointments. No person shall be eligible to serve more than two successive terms; provided, that any persons heretofore or hereafter appointed to fill vacancies may serve two additional successive terms. 
(Code 1988, § 2-723; Ord. No. 1998-41, § 1, 8-11-1998)  
Sec. 2-724. - Election of officers. 
The behavioral healthcare services advisory board shall annually elect a chair, vice-chair, and secretary from among its members. 
(Code 1988, § 2-724; Ord. No. 1998-41, § 1, 8-11-1998)  
Sec. 2-725. - Adoption of rules, regulations, and bylaws. 
The behavioral healthcare services advisory board shall adopt such rules, regulations, and bylaws as it shall deem necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of its business. 
(Code 1988, § 2-725; Ord. No. 1998-41, § 1, 8-11-1998)  
Sec. 2-726. - Removal of members of the board. 
The city council may remove any member of the behavioral healthcare services advisory board at any time if it finds that the best interest of the board would be served by such action. 
(Code 1988, § 2-726; Ord. No. 1998-41, § 1, 8-11-1998)  
Sec. 2-727. - Powers and duties. 
The behavioral healthcare services advisory board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Advise the city council regarding rules, policies, and regulations for the rendition or operation of services and facilities by the department. 
(2)  Review and evaluate the operations of the department and advise the city council of its findings. 
(3)  Review the services developed by the department and advise city council of its findings. 
(4)  Review and comment on the annual performance contract, quarterly and annual performance reports, and comprehensive state plan proposals developed by the department. The board's comments shall be attached to the performance contract, the performance reports, and the comprehensive state plan proposals prior to their submission to city council. 
(5)  Advise the city council as necessary and appropriate actions to maximize the involvement of consumers and family members of consumers in policy formulation and services evaluation. 
(6)  Advise the city manager in the selection and the annual performance evaluation of the director. 
(7)  Carry out such other duties and responsibilities as assigned by city council. 
(Code 1988, § 2-727; Ord. No. 1998-41, § 1, 8-11-1998)  
Secs. 2-728—2-789. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - COMMUNITY CRIMINAL JUSTICE BOARD[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal justice board, Code of Virginia, § 9.1-178 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-790. - Established; membership; qualifications. 
There is hereby established by the city council a board to be known as the community criminal justice board. The appointments to the board shall be made by the city council. The community criminal justice board shall not exceed 22 members and shall be composed of a judge of the general district court; a circuit court judge; a juvenile and domestic relations district court judge; the chief magistrate; a member from the city council or the city manager or a deputy city manager appointed by the city council; the chief of police; an attorney for the commonwealth; a public defender and/or an attorney who is experienced in the defense of criminal matters; the sheriff; the superintendent of the Hampton Roads Regional Jail; a local educator; a behavioral healthcare services advisory board administrator; the chief of adult probation and parole; the director of juvenile court services; the director of community corrections and pretrial services; the director of social services; and up to six citizens of the city. The community criminal justice board shall possess the powers and duties granted to it by Code of Virginia, § 9.1-178 et seq. 
(Code 1988, § 2-790; Ord. No. 1995-64, § 2, 5-23-1995; Ord. No. 1995-73, § 2, 6-13-1995; Ord. No. 2000-40, § 1, 10-10-2000; Ord. No. 2001-26, § 1, 6-12-2001; Ord. No. 2018-86 , § 1, 9-25-2018)  
Secs. 2-791—2-799. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - CLEAN COMMUNITY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-800. - Established. 
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the clean community commission. 
(Code 1988, § 2-800; Ord. No. 1997-57, § 1, 10-14-1997)  
Sec. 2-801. - Membership of commission; terms. 
The clean community commission shall be appointed by city council and shall consist of not less than nine members, who shall be citizens of the city or business or property owners in the city. The members of the clean community commission shall be appointed for terms of three years. Members of the clean community commission shall hold office during their respective terms at the pleasure of the city council and until their successors are appointed. 
(Code 1988, § 2-801; Ord. No. 1997-57, § 1, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1999-35, § 1, 11-23-1999)  
Sec. 2-802. - Purpose and duties of the commission. 
The clean community commission shall have the purpose and duty of enhancing community quality and liveability by the encouragement and promotion of programs to clean up and beautify neighborhoods throughout the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2-802; Ord. No. 1997-57, § 1, 10-14-1997)  
Sec. 2-803. - Ex officio member. 
The director of the department of public utilities or the director's designee shall be an ex officio member, without vote, of the commission and shall serve as executive coordinator and assist the commission in the performance of its duties. 
(Code 1988, § 2-803; Ord. No. 1997-57, § 1, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2020-10 , § 1, 2-11-2020)  
Secs. 2-804—2-809. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - HISTORY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-810. - Established. 
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the history commission. 
(Code 1988, § 2-810; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-811. - Composition; appointment and terms of members. 
The history commission shall consist of 13 members who shall be appointed by the city council. Members of the history commission shall be appointed for terms of three years. The members of the history commission shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1988, § 2-811; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-812. - Filling of vacancies. 
All vacancies on the history commission shall be filled by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1988, § 2-812; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-813. - Removal of members. 
Any member of the history commission may be removed by the city council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, misfeasance or malfeasance of office. 
(Code 1988, § 2-813; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-814. - Compensation of members. 
The members of the history commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1988, § 2-814; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-815. - Selection and term of chairman; creation and filling of other offices. 
The history commission shall choose annually one of its members to be chair for a term of one year and until a successor is chosen and qualified. The history commission may create and fill such other offices as it may determine are necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 2-815; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-816. - General powers and duties. 
(a)  The history commission shall be the official consultant and advisor to the city government and city council on all matters pertaining to the city's history. 
(b)  The history commission shall: 
(1)  Act as an advisor to the city council and the department of museums on matters related to the city's history and heritage. 
(2)  Assist and cooperate with public and private groups and agencies in developing, establishing, maintaining, preserving and publicizing places of historical significance. 
(3)  Assist and cooperate with the school board of the city in improving the opportunities of students in the city public schools to engage in the study of Portsmouth's history and to develop an appreciation of the city's contributions to the commonwealth and to the nation. 
(Code 1988, § 2-816; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-817. - Adoption of bylaws, rules and regulations. 
The history commission shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for its guidance as may be deemed necessary and expedient. 
(Code 1988, § 2-817; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-818. - Meetings. 
The history commission shall hold regular monthly meetings on a date to be fixed by the commission and such special meetings as it deems necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 2-818; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-819. - Reports. 
(a)  The history commission shall provide an annual report to the city council by the end of each fiscal year concerning the commission's activities. 
(b)  The history commission shall furnish the city manager or his designee, whenever requested, such information as may be desired with respect to its operation and management. 
(Code 1988, § 2-820; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-820. - Review of commission actions by council. 
All activities of the history commission shall be subject to review by the city council, which may take such actions as it deems advisable. 
(Code 1988, § 2-821; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 1-23-2001)  
Sec. 2-821. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - RESERVED[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord No. 2018-16 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted February 27, 2018, repealed art. XIX, §§ 2-822—2-824. Former art. XIX pertained to the Craney Island study commission and derived from the Code of 1988 and Ord. No. 2003-12, adopted February 25, 2003. 
 
Secs. 2-822—2-830. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - EMERGENCY CURFEW[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt curfew ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926. 
 
Sec. 2-831. - Authority to order curfew. 
Whenever an emergency has been declared in the city in a manner authorized by law, then an emergency curfew may be ordered by the city manager for the purpose of protecting public safety, public welfare, public and private property, and good order, as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 2-831; Ord. No. 2003-55, § 1, 9-23-2003) 
State Law reference— Curfew hours, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.  
Sec. 2-832. - Effective date and time; duration. 
An emergency curfew shall be effective immediately upon the city manager declaring it in writing. An emergency curfew may not remain in effect for longer than 14 days without approval by vote of city council. An emergency curfew shall in any event be confirmed, extended, modified, or ended by city council not later than the next regularly scheduled council meeting after it has been declared. An emergency curfew shall not be permanent, and it shall not extend past the time at which the applicable authority determines, in its sole discretion, that the emergency no longer exists. 
(Code 1988, § 2-832; Ord. No. 2003-55, § 1, 9-23-2003)  
Sec. 2-833. - Terms and conditions. 
An emergency curfew may contain such terms and conditions as are deemed necessary and proper to deal with the emergency at hand, including, without limitation, geographic scope within the city, curfew hours, application to businesses as well as individuals, and exceptions. 
(Code 1988, § 2-833; Ord. No. 2003-55, § 1, 9-23-2003)  
Sec. 2-834. - Required condition for violation; penalty. 
A person must be informed of an emergency curfew and given an opportunity to comply with it before being in violation. Violation of an emergency curfew shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 2-834; Ord. No. 2003-55, § 1, 9-23-2003)  
Chapter 3 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Boats and waterways, ch. 6; license tax on various amusements, §§ 20-8, 20-9, 20-13; parks and recreation, ch. 25; swimming pools, ch. 34; amusement admissions tax, § 35-371 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Hours of operation of pool rooms, billiard rooms. 
All public pool rooms, billiard rooms and establishments containing pool tables, billiard tables or like or similar devices or equipment shall be closed from 12:00 midnight every night until sunrise of the succeeding morning and no games shall be allowed therein during the hours when such rooms and establishments are required to be closed. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 3-1; Code 1988, § 3-1) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 3-2. - Minors playing, loitering in pool rooms, billiard rooms. 
(a)  No person under 18 years of age shall frequent, play in or loiter in any public pool room or billiard room; nor shall the proprietor of any public pool room or billiard room or his agent permit any minor to frequent, play in or loiter in any such place; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to include an establishment in which not more than three miniature pool tables that operate on the coin-in-the-slot-principle are exclusively kept or played; provided, further, that this subsection shall not apply in any establishment known as a family billiard center, which is defined as a licensed establishment for the playing of billiards when such place of business: 
(1)  Is not licensed under the alcoholic beverage control laws of the state, and is not operated in conjunction with any other licensed dispenser of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Is illuminated throughout its interior at a level of 40 footcandles. 
(3)  Has no partitioned or closed off areas other than those for toilet facilities, office space, or storerooms; and all playing areas and billiard tables shall be visible from a public way or street. 
(4)  Has a window or windows open to view from a public way or street, having a minimum of 100 square feet of glass area, which windows shall not be permanently covered or otherwise obstructed. 
(5)  Contains only regulation size (minimum measurements: 4½ feet by nine feet) billiard tables, which shall not be of the "coin-operated" type, and such center shall contain a minimum of ten such tables. 
(6)  Has separate restroom facilities for both sexes. 
(7)  Is located on the ground level floor of the building in which it is situated. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 3-2; Code 1988, § 3-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11; curfew for minors, § 24-3. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-432.  
Secs. 3-3—3-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL RECREATION CENTERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— License tax on amusement parks, § 20-9. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 3-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement game machine means a coin-operated machine or device which, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, shall be ready for play by the insertion of a coin, slug or token and may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement. It shall include, but not be limited to, devices such as pinball machines, foosball tables, miniature bowling alleys, miniature shuffle boards, target shoots, picture-taking machines and other amusement devices which reproduce symbolic figures and lines intended to be representative of real games or activities. 
Commercial recreation center or center means any establishment where a group of more than two amusement game machines is displayed for public patronage. 
(Code 1973, § 3-31; Code 1988, § 3-76) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 3-77. - Violations of article. 
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 3-40; Code 1988, § 3-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 3-78. - Exemptions from article. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to establishments licensed and regulated by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. 
(Code 1973, § 3-31; Code 1988, § 3-78)  
Sec. 3-79. - Admission of minors. 
No person holding a permit under this article or any of his agents or employees shall allow any person under the age of 18 years to remain in the center between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. the following morning. In addition, persons under the age of 16 years shall not be permitted to remain in the center during normal school hours. The permittee shall post signs to this effect printed in bold face letters in conspicuous places within the center. 
(Code 1973, § 3-38; Code 1988, § 3-79) 
Cross reference— Curfew for minors, § 24-3. 
State Law reference— Restrictions and curfew for minors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.  
Sec. 3-80. - Operating requirements. 
The following operating requirements shall apply to all commercial recreation centers: 
(1)  The center shall be illuminated throughout its interior at a level of 40 footcandles. 
(2)  The center shall have no partitioned or closed off areas other than those for restroom facilities, office space or storerooms. 
(3)  The center shall have separate restroom facilities for both sexes. 
(4)  The center shall be located on the ground level floor of the building in which it is situated; and shall also have a window or windows with a total of not less than 100 square feet of glass, which shall not be covered or otherwise obstructed during hours of business; provided that for hotels or multistoried shopping centers, the center may be located above the second floor level. 
(5)  The center may not be open for business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(6)  The center shall be at all times under the management and control of a person at least 18 years of age. The center shall be arranged so that the management attendant is within the room where machines are located or such that the management attendants outside the room can easily see and supervise the interior of the room. 
(7)  Adequate space shall be provided for each machine so as to allow its use without overcrowding and to prevent interference with pedestrian circulation on the rest of the premises. 
(Code 1973, § 3-39; Code 1988, § 3-80)  
Secs. 3-81—3-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 3-101. - Required. 
No person shall operate a commercial recreation center without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 3-32; Code 1988, § 3-101)  
Sec. 3-102. - Filing, contents and notice of application. 
(a)  Form and contents of application. The application for a permit to operate a commercial recreation center shall be made to the city manager upon a form supplied for that purpose. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth, and where pertinent, the relationship of the applicant to the company or corporation owning or managing the center. If a corporation, this information for the corporate officer signing the application, plus name and address of the registered agent, date of incorporation and state of incorporation, and names of officers and directors thereof. Name and address of the owner of the machines and owner of the premises if different from that of the above. 
(2)  The location of the center and the business, if any other, conducted at the location. 
(3)  Maximum number of patrons center will accommodate. 
(4)  Maximum number of machines center will accommodate and submission of necessary information in order to determine if there is sufficient space for such machines to prevent overcrowding of users or interference with pedestrian circulation on the rest of the premises. 
(5)  A certification by the applicant that all requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(6)  A list of all employees who are expected to serve in a managerial capacity in the center. Prior convictions of the applicant and managerial employees as well as any pending criminal cases involving such persons. 
(7)  A brief set of house rules which the managerial personnel shall enforce, both within the center and in the immediate area outside the center, such rules being designed to promote good order and peaceful behavior by the patron of the center. 
(8)  Authorization from each person named in the application permitting the city manager to conduct a criminal records investigation of that individual. 
(b)  Continuing responsibility to provide information. The responsibility to provide the information requested herein is regarded as continuing beyond the date of the application and the applicant is required to provide, by filing an amended application, any additional information which will augment or otherwise modify the information provided with the application. Such information shall be provided to the city manager within ten days after any change from the information previously furnished. 
(c)  Notifications. Every applicant for a permit under this division shall, not more than ten days after filing the application for such permit, post a notice of such application on the front door of the building where he proposes to operate the center, and publish a copy of such notice at least once in a newspaper published in or having a general circulation in the city. Such notice shall be upon a form supplied for this purpose and a certification of publication shall be furnished the city manager prior to final action on the application. 
(Code 1973, § 3-33; Code 1988, § 3-102)  
Sec. 3-103. - Action by city manager on application; application fee. 
Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the city manager shall immediately cause an investigation to be made concerning the qualifications of the applicant and whether the proposed center is in compliance with this article. The city manager shall grant or deny such permit, and shall notify the applicant in writing of his action within 21 days after receipt of the certification of publication required in section 3-102(c) by the city manager. If the city manager denies such permit, he shall state in writing his reasons for such action. Every application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code which shall not be refundable. 
(Code 1973, § 3-34; Code 1988, § 3-103)  
Sec. 3-104. - Grounds for denial. 
(a)  The following factors shall constitute grounds for denial of a permit for operation of a center: 
(1)  A finding by the city manager that the applicant has falsified his application in a material manner. 
(2)  A finding by the city manager that the applicant or any of his designated managerial employees has a criminal record which reveals any convictions for violation of any drug or alcoholic beverage control laws, gambling laws, sex offenses, selling or distribution of pornographic material, or any pattern of criminal misconduct as evidenced by a series of convictions. 
(3)  A finding by the city manager that the proposed use of the property shall not comply with all provisions of law or that same will adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use or will be detrimental to the public welfare or that there is an undue concentration of such complexes in the area requested. 
(4)  A finding by the city manager that there is insufficient space for the number of machines requested. 
(5)  A finding by the city manager that the applicant consistently and habitually fails to cooperate with law enforcement personnel in the exercise of their official duties. 
(6)  A finding by the city manager that the application is not properly completed as required by this article. 
(7)  A finding by the city manager that the proposed center fails to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No other matters shall be sufficient grounds for denial of an application for such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 3-35; Code 1988, § 3-104)  
Sec. 3-105. - Not assignable. 
No permit issued under this division shall be assignable to any other person. 
(Code 1973, § 3-37; Code 1988, § 3-105)  
Sec. 3-106. - Effect of cessation of business. 
When any permittee under the provisions of this division shall cease to operate the center for a period of 30 days, the permit shall be void. 
(Code 1973, § 3-37; Code 1988, § 3-106)  
Sec. 3-107. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Generally. The city manager may revoke or suspend the permit for the operation of a commercial recreation center if he finds: 
(1)  That the premises have been declared a common nuisance by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  That circumstances exist which would have justified a denial of such permit at the time of its issuance. 
(3)  That the permittee has consistently failed in some material respect to operate the center on an orderly basis in accordance with the provisions of this article or the approved house rules. 
(4)  That the permittee has failed to take prompt and vigorous action against violations of criminal statutes occurring on his premises and known to the permittee. 
(b)  Notice and hearing. A permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the city manager before such permit is revoked. The city manager shall give the permittee ten days' notice of his intention to revoke such permit. Notice shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested. The city manager shall, as part of such notice, provide the permittee with a written statement of the grounds for revocation or suspension and advise him of his right to a hearing. The hearing shall be held not less than ten days, nor more than 20 days after the giving of notice, but the permittee may waive the ten-day limitation. The permittee shall have the right to be represented by counsel at such hearing and may present evidence in his own behalf. 
(Code 1973, § 3-36; Code 1988, § 3-107)  
Secs. 3-108—3-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BODY ART 
 
Sec. 3-300. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Body art means body piercing and/or tattooing. 
Body art studio means a place in which a person offers, works, or practices as a body artist. 
Body art studio operator means a person who controls, operates, conducts, or manages a body art studio. 
Body art studio owner means a person who serves as the body art studio's proprietor and ensures the continuous presence of someone who is responsible for monitoring and managing all establishment operations and who is authorized to take actions to ensure compliance with the regulations in this article. 
Body artist means a person who practices body art. 
Body piercer means a person who performs body piercing for compensation. 
Body piercing means the act of penetrating a person's skin to make a hole into or through which an item of jewelry or some other decorative article may be inserted and/or mounted so as to be visible above the skin. Body piercing does not include the use of a mechanized, pre-sterilized ear-piercing system that penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of a person's ear or both, nor does it include any medical procedure engaged in by a state-licensed physician or a health care professional under the direct supervision of a state-licensed physician or by a registered nurse or other medical services personnel licensed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-100 et seq. in the performance of their duties. 
Body piercing studio means a place in which a person offers, works, or practices as a body piercer. 
Hazardous waste means waste or material that may present a threat of infection to humans, including without limitation: 
(1)  Blood, blood products, body fluids, body parts; and 
(2)  Absorbent materials or devices or equipment contaminated with any item listed in subsection (1) of this section. 
Health department means the Portsmouth Health District. 
Health director means the Director of the Portsmouth Health District. 
Permit holder means collectively, any person holding a permit under this chapter, whether as a body art operator or as a body artist. 
Sexually private area means for a male, the genitals, pubic area, or buttocks; for a female, the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or the breast below the aureole. 
Tattoo artist means a person who performs the work of tattooing. 
Tattoo studio means a place in which a person offers, works or practices as a tattoo artist. 
Tattooing means the process of placing any design, letter, scroll, figure, symbol or any other mark upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance resulting in the permanent coloration of a person's skin, including permanent make-up or permanent jewelry, by the use of a needle, or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin and inject or leave colored dye in the skin. The term "tattoo" shall also mean the mark, design, or coloration itself which is thus created. The term shall not include any medical procedure engaged in by a state-licensed physician or a health care professional under the direct supervision of a state-licensed physician or by a registered nurse or other medical services personnel licensed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-100 et seq. in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1988, § 3-300; Ord. No. 2005-67, § 2, 8-23-2005)  
Sec. 3-301. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  No person shall operate a body art studio without a valid permit from the health department. 
(b)  No person shall be a body artist or a body art studio owner or operator without first obtaining an applicable permit from the health department. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant has complied with all applicable health requirements of this chapter and all applicable requirements of the Virginia Board for Barbers and Cosmetology and any other state agency of competent jurisdiction. Permits from the health department shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issue and displayed in an area easily viewed by the public. 
(d)  The annual body art studio permit or renewal application for each permit holder shall include the following information: business name and address, permit number, owner name, home address, and phone number, proof of state licensure, and a list and assigned location of all body artists working in the body art studio. Body artist permits will be issued and renewed annually as a subapplication or appendix under the body art studio permit, at no additional charge. Body art studio owners or operators shall also submit building plans for review. The body art studio owner or operator shall notify the health department immediately upon any addition or termination of a body artist or body art operator. Upon closure of the body art studio, the body art studio owner shall return all applicable permits to the health department. All other information shall be updated within seven calendar days for any changes during the year. 
(e)  A new permit application must be filed for a change in business location or ownership and a new building plan review must be done for any significant structural changes, impacting facility requirements. 
(f)  The health department shall charge the fees set out in appendix A to this Code for the following: 
(1)  Issuance of a permit to operate a body art studio, per calendar year (prorated for partial years and inclusive of artist permits). 
(2)  Plan review for initial opening of a body art studio or for any changes requiring review of construction plans. 
(g)  The body art studio operator is not required to hold a body artist permit unless he also works as a body artist. However, the body art studio operator is required to receive annual training under section 3-302(b)(3) to ensure knowledge of all health, sanitation, and safety requirements under this article. 
(h)  A body art studio must be in a permanent building or portion of a building. No permits shall be issued for mobile locations. 
(Code 1988, § 3-301; Ord. No. 2005-67, § 2, 8-23-2005)  
Sec. 3-302. - Inspections; operating requirements related to health. 
(a)  Inspections. Every body art studio shall be subject to unannounced inspections by the health department, to be conducted in the reasonable discretion of the health department. All areas of the body art studio shall be accessible for inspection. Without limitation, the health department may also inspect sterilizing and cleaning equipment for proper maintenance and functioning, and it may require reasonable testing of such equipment, with documentation. 
(b)  Operating requirements. Every permit holder shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  General health and safety requirements. All tattooing-related and piercing-related procedures shall be carried out in a clean, safe and sanitary manner as approved by the health department so as to minimize the potential of disease transmission. All procedures should be performed using aseptic technique, observing universal precaution standards. There shall be no smoking, eating, or drinking in the area in which body art is performed, except for individually packaged food or drink for client's use in order to sustain optimal physical condition. 
(2)  Compliance with federal, state, and local laws generally. All areas of the body art studio shall be constructed and maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary manner in compliance with all applicable statutes, laws, regulations, codes and ordinances of the city, the commonwealth (including without limitation the state board for barbers and cosmetology), and applicable federal agencies (including without limitation the Center for Disease Control). 
(3)  Training and vaccination requirements. All permit holders shall be required to complete annual health education training in bloodborne pathogens, universal precautions, sterilization, aseptic techniques, first aid, and CPR. Training shall be as approved by the health director. Permit holders shall also provide documentation of hepatitis B vaccination (or laboratory evidence of immunity) and annual TB screening. 
(4)  Floors, walls, and ceilings. All walls, ceilings and floors shall be a light color, maintained in a condition free of dirt, body fluids or any hazardous material and shall be smooth and easily cleaned. The floors shall not be carpeted, and neither rugs nor fabrics of any kind shall be placed on the floors. Walls and ceilings shall be painted a light color and maintained in a condition free of dirt, body fluids, or any hazardous waste. Ceilings shall be kept clean and free from dust and debris. Walls, ceilings or floors shall not be generally swept or cleaned while tattooing is occurring, except that individual and visible unsanitary debris items or conditions are to be corrected at the earliest practicable opportunity. 
(5)  Work station requirements. Multiple body art booths shall be separated by walls or wall-like partitions, and each body artist shall have an assigned work area. Booths shall not be shared during work shifts. There shall be sufficient work and counter space to maintain sterile fields and to separate dirty and contaminated materials from sanitized tools, instruments, and materials. Sharps containers and foot-operated waste receptacles shall be located in every booth and in the sterilization room. Sterilization shall occur in an area adequately separated from booths, patrons, and the public. 
(6)  Animals, insects, vermin, and rodents. No animals shall be allowed, except for guide or service animals accompanying persons with disabilities; except that nonmammalian animals in enclosed glass containers, such as aquariums will be allowed in waiting areas and administrative offices. Effective measures for prevention and control of insects, vermin, and rodents shall be taken, including without limitation screened openings and automatic door closures. 
(7)  Light, ventilation and dust. Adequate light, ventilation, and dust control shall be provided. 
(8)  Toilet and hand-washing facilities. There shall be adequate toilet and hand-washing facilities with germicidal soap and hot and cold running water, connected to public water under pressure. Hand-washing facilities shall also be equipped with single-use towels or mechanical hand-drying devices. Every booth shall have a sink, preferably with foot controls. There shall be a separate room for sterilization, with a sharps container and a sink, preferably with foot controls. Facilities for personal use shall be separate and isolated from the business area in which body art is performed. Toilets and washing facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times. 
(9)  Tattoo supplies. All inks, dyes, pigments, needles and equipment used in tattooing shall be specifically manufactured for performing tattooing and shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The mixing of approved tattooing inks, dyes or pigments or their dilutions with potable water shall be permitted. Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper or plastic cups. Upon completion of the procedure, the cups and their contents shall be discarded in a proper manner and in compliance with any applicable state or federal guidelines or requirements. 
(10)  Single-use items. Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason. All materials for tattooing to be applied directly to the human skin shall be single use articles or transferred from bulk containers to single use containers. After use, all single-use needles, razors, and other sharps shall be immediately disposed of in accordance with applicable regulations. 
(11)  Cleaning and sterilization of nondisposable instruments. Reusable instruments shall be promptly soaked in a germicidal or soap solution after use, whenever practicable, to prevent drying of contaminated material. All nondisposable instruments used in connection with body art shall be sterilized before each use by rinsing, then scrubbing with appropriate soap/disinfectant in hot water and then preferably placed in an ultrasonic cleaner, prior to sterilization in a steam autoclave approved by the health department. Sterilization shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, a copy of which shall be submitted, with contact information, as part of the permit application. Establishments shall have a backup plan to be used in the event of sterilization equipment failure. 
(12)  Sterilization documentation. The body art operator shall be responsible for maintaining a log which indicates that the autoclave or other sterilizer has been checked during each cycle and has been sterilized in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. It shall include monthly tests to demonstrate monthly spore destructions tests, with satisfactory results. The log shall be maintained in a manner that is traceable to the client on which the clean instrument is next used. 
(13)  Proper storage and disposal. All cleaned and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be stored in a protective manner to prevent subsequent contamination. Sterile equipment shall not be used after the expiration date or if the package has been breached. If disposable instruments are used, those instruments shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable laws. All hazardous waste, body fluids, and medical waste of any kind shall be disposed of in accordance with the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality's Regulated Medical Waste Regulations, 9 VAC 20-120-10 et seq., as amended, or any successor regulation. 
(14)  Jewelry/ornamentation. All jewelry used in body piercing shall be made only of surgical implant grade stainless steel, solid 14K or 18K white or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, platinum, or dense and low-porosity plastic. All jewelry shall be free of nicks, scratches or irregular surfaces and shall be in a properly sterilized condition when used. 
(15)  Hand washing and gloves. The body artist shall wash his hands with liquid germicidal soap or use a sanitizing solution between customers, between tattooing or piercing different parts of the body on the same person, and whenever gloves are changed. Hands should be washed when visibly soiled. The body artist shall wear protective, disposable latex or vinyl gloves while tattooing, and shall wear a new pair of gloves for each client and when tattooing or piercing different parts of the same client. Gloves shall also be changed for any interruption of service, each time gloves become torn or perforated, or whenever the ability of the gloves to function as a barrier is compromised. 
(16)  Communicable diseases. No tattoo may be administered by any person having a communicable disease until they have provided a written statement to the department of professional and occupational regulation from a health care practitioner that the artist's condition no longer poses a threat to public health. Body artists having draining lesions on their hands or face will not be permitted to work until cleared by a health care professional. Body art should not be performed on any skin surface which manifests any evidence of unhealthy conditions such as rashes, boils, infections, or abrasions. 
(17)  Client screening and disclosure. Before performing any body art procedure, the body artist shall inform the client that the performance of a body art procedure may involve health risks if the client has any of the following conditions or medical history: 
a.  History of diabetes or other immune disorders; 
b.  History of hemophilia or other bleeding disorders; 
c.  History of skin diseases, skin lesions, keloidal scarring, or skin sensitivities to soaps, disinfectants, etc.; 
d.  History of allergies, adverse reaction to pigments or dyes, latex, or other skin sensitivities; 
e.  History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy; 
f.  Current or recent medications such as anticoagulants that thin the blood or interfere with blood clotting; and 
g.  Any other information that may affect the client's capacity to heal from body art. 
If the body artist becomes aware that the client has any of the above conditions, or if any information is disclosed which creates reasonable questions about the client's capacity to safely undergo a body art procedure; then the body artist should recommend that the client seek medical advice prior to receiving a body art procedure. 
(18)  After care instructions. Immediately after performing body art on a patron, the body artist shall provide oral and written instructions advising the patron of proper care of the affected area and shall instruct the patron to consult a physician at the first sign of infection. 
(19)  Exposure control plan. Each establishment shall be required to develop an exposure control plan for the protection of workers and patrons from bloodborne infections. This plan shall include documentation of required immunizations, notification, documentation and procedures for care of workers in the event of an exposure. This plan shall be subject to approval by the health director, and it shall not be approved unless it meets with reasonable public health standards. 
(Code 1988, § 3-302; Ord. No. 2005-67, § 2, 8-23-2005)  
Sec. 3-303. - Operating requirements related to business practices and public policy. 
(a)  No person shall work as a body artist in any location other than a body art studio. 
(b)  Each body artist shall provide each client, prior to performing body art, a legible written disclosure stating substantially as follows: 
(1)  Body art is an invasive procedure in which the skin is penetrated by a foreign object; 
(2)  If proper sterilization and antiseptic procedures are not followed by body artists, there is a risk of transmission of bloodborne pathogens and other infections, including, but not limited to, human immunodeficiency viruses and hepatitis B or C viruses; 
(3)  Body art may cause allergic reactions in persons sensitive to dyes or the metals used in ornamentation; 
(4)  Body art may involve discomfort or pain for which appropriate anesthesia cannot be legally made available by the tattoo artist unless such person holds the appropriate license from a Virginia Health Regulatory Board. 
(c)  Records for each patron, and all other written records required by this chapter, shall be maintained by the body art studio operator for a minimum period of four years. At such time as the body art studio ceases doing business or is removed from the city or has a change in ownership, copies of all such records shall be provided to the health department. The records shall be subject to inspection by the health department at any time and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, sex, age, date of birth, and type and copy of identification provided by the person receiving body art; 
(2)  Date of body art; 
(3)  Physical location and description of body art; 
(4)  Name, address and telephone number of the person performing the body art; 
(5)  For tattooing, name and address of the manufacturer of the dyes used as well as identifying information about the dye solutions and types of dyes used. For piercing, the content and type of body jewelry used. If a customer has need for this information, then the body art operator shall release it to the customer without charge; 
(6)  Sterilization log number (in client record) of all re-usable instruments used on the client; 
(7)  Consent form with signatures of the artist, client, and if applicable, parent or guardian, and a statement that the client has received a copy of applicable written care instructions, and that the client has read and understands the instructions; 
(8)  Any report of an adverse event or adverse reaction during or following body art procedure. 
(d)  No body art shall be done in any location, which, even though inside a body art studio, is visible from a public way, street, or sidewalk. 
(e)  No person shall perform body art, and no body art studio, shall be open for business earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 2:00 a.m. Provided, however, that if body art is commenced prior to 2:00 a.m., then it may be completed, even if after 2:00 a.m. In any such case, the burden shall be upon the body artist to prove that the body art was commenced at a legal time. 
(f)  There shall be no sale, offering for sale, display, or exhibit in a body art studio of any drug paraphernalia, including without limitation such items as rolling papers, rolling machines, bongs, roach clips, water pipes, crack pipes, and hookahs. 
(g)  No person shall state or imply in any advertisement or publication, written or oral and prepared or uttered for the purpose of soliciting business, that a body art studio is endorsed, regulated or approved by the city or by any of its departments or is conducted in compliance with the terms of this section. 
(h)  No tattoo artist shall tattoo, and no body piercer shall pierce, any sexually private area of a member of the opposite sex. 
(Code 1988, § 3-303; Ord. No. 2005-67, § 2, 8-23-2005)  
Sec. 3-304. - Unlawful acts and practices. 
It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To perform or administer body art without a permit, or in violation of any other requirement of this chapter. 
(2)  To be a body art studio operator of any body art studio which does not have: 
a.  Current zoning clearance under chapter 40; 
b.  A current permit from the health department; 
c.  A current business license from the city; and 
d.  A current certificate of occupancy for use as a body art studio, as applicable, issued by the building official. 
(3)  To perform or administer body art to any person less than 18 years of age, knowing or having reason to believe such person is less than 18 years of age except: (i) in the presence of the person's parent or guardian, or (ii) when done by or under the supervision of a medical doctor, registered nurse or other medical services personnel licensed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-100 et seq. in the performance of their duties. 
(4)  To perform or administer body art to any person who is under the influence of alcohol, or who is under the influence of drugs, or who is so mentally retarded, challenged, or disoriented as to be unable to make an intelligent decision, or who is acting under coercion of any type, or who for any reason is not capable of making an informed, intelligent, and voluntary decision to obtain body art. 
(5)  To perform or administer body art while under the influence of alcohol or while under the influence of drugs, or following diagnosis of a communicable disease prior to obtaining a written statement from a health care practitioner that the condition no longer poses a threat to public health. 
(6)  To perform branding, scarification, or implant any metal, plastic, or other solid device under a person's skin so that it is largely or completely concealed by the skin. 
(Code 1988, § 3-304; Ord. No. 2005-67, § 2, 8-23-2005)  
Sec. 3-305. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of section 3-302. Any first violation of section 3-302 (operating requirements related to health) shall constitute cause for revocation of the permit of any responsible party by the health director. Revocation shall be for a fixed period not to exceed two years. The health director may in lieu of revocation impose other sanctions, including without limitation suspension of permit for a fixed period of time not to exceed two years, suspension with reinstatement permit only on certain conditions, and operation under probation with or without conditions. For a second or subsequent offense, the health director may impose any of said sanctions without limit as to time and may also make the permit holder ineligible for re-licensure. 
(b)  Violations of section 3-303. Any first violation of section 3-303 (operating requirements related to business practices and public policy) shall constitute cause for revocation for up to two years of the business license of the permit holder and/or the zoning clearance of the body art studio by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee may also impose other sanctions, including without limitation suspension of business license and/or zoning clearance for a fixed period of time not to exceed two years, and operation under probation with or without conditions. For a second or subsequent offense, the city manager or his designee may impose permanent revocation. 
(c)  Violations of section 3-304. Any violation of section 3-304 (unlawful acts and practices) shall be a class 2 misdemeanor for a first offense, and a class 1 misdemeanor for any second or subsequent offense. A final conviction shall also constitute cause for the health director to impose any of the sanctions set forth in subsection (a) of this section, or for the city manager or his designee to set forth the sanctions set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Injunctive relief. In addition to, and not in lieu of, the other sanctions set forth in this section, the city shall, upon proper application, be entitled to injunctive relief to prevent any subsequent or recurring violation of any section of this chapter by any person. The city shall not be required to show the absence of an adequate remedy at law in order to be entitled to injunctive relief. 
(Code 1988, § 3-305; Ord. No. 2005-67, § 2, 8-23-2005)  
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Keeping of live animal or fowl in food establishment, § 15-77; application of traffic regulations to persons driving or riding animals, § 22-6; prohibition against keeping animals which cause unnecessary noise, § 24-255(b)(3); riding horses in parks, § 25-107; hunting or molesting wildlife in parks, § 25-109; animals not permitted within public swimming pool, § 34-68; protection from animals of trees and shrubs growing on city property, § 36-34. 
State Law reference— Comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq.; authority of city to adopt ordinances paralleling animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Words defined by statute. The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6500 as in effect on July 1, 2015, and any subsequent amendments thereto, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(b)  General definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal, or killed a companion animal; however, when a dog attacks or bites another dog, the attacking or biting dog shall not be deemed dangerous: (i) if no serious physical injury as determined by a licensed veterinarian has occurred to the other dog as a result of the attack or bite, or (ii) both dogs are owned by the same person. No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking or inflicting injury on another dog while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. 
Destructive animal means any animal that damages, destroys or attacks any building, fence, cage, enclosure, livestock, fowl, animal or any other thing not the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
Exotic animal means any live monkey (nonhuman primate), wolf-hybrid, hybrid-feline, ratite, porcine or any other warm-blooded animal or any reptile six feet or longer in length, which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of the crocodilian, including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans, and gavials. Ferrets and birds which are normally purchased through pet stores (with the exception of ratites), nonpoisonous reptiles less than six feet in length, domestic rabbits and domestic rodents which have been bred in captivity and which never have known the wild shall be excluded from this definition. 
Vicious animal means any animal that has bitten any person or an animal that repeatedly attacks or attempts to bite any person. 
Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has: (i) killed a person; (ii) inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or (iii) continued to exhibit the behavior that resulted in a previous finding by a court, as authorized by local ordinance, that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(Code 1988, § 4-16; Ord. No. 1990-57, § 2, 6-12-1990; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 1, 2-23-2016) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66.  
Sec. 4-2. - Animal control officer. 
(a)  The city manager shall appoint an animal control officer for the city. The manager may appoint such deputy animal control officers as he deems necessary to assist the animal control officer in the performance of his duties. The animal control officer and his deputies shall hold office at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(b)  The animal control officer and his deputies shall have the power to enforce this chapter, the Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6500 et seq. and all ordinances and state laws for the protection of domestic animals. The animal control officer and his deputies shall have the power to issue a summons as authorized by Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6555. 
(Code 1973, § 4-11; Code 1988, § 4-2; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 2, 2-23-2016) 
State Law reference— Duty to appoint animal control officer, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.104.  
Sec. 4-3. - City designated bird sanctuary; signs. 
(a)  The city, within its corporate limits, shall be a bird sanctuary for the protection of all birds protected by the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, adopted by the Congress of the United States. This provision shall not include starlings, English sparrows or pigeons. 
(b)  Signs stating that the city is a bird sanctuary may be erected in the city. Such signs shall be of such type and erected at such public places as may be approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 4-4; Code 1988, § 4-3)  
Sec. 4-4. - Killing, molesting birds. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to kill or injure any birds or destroy or injure the nest or eggs of any birds for which the city is a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-5, 4-51; Code 1988, § 4-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 4-5. - Livestock or poultry running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow horses, cows, goats, sheep, swine or other livestock or poultry to run at large in the city. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-6, 4-51; Code 1988, § 4-8) 
Cross reference— Animals at large in parks, § 25-108. 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit animals and fowl from running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93.  
Sec. 4-6. - Vicious or destructive animals running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal belonging to him or under his control, and known by him to be dangerous, mischievous, vicious or destructive, to run at large in the city. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the section shall be deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-3, 4-51; Code 1988, § 4-9; Ord. No. 1990-57, § 1, 6-12-1990) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit animals from running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93.  
Sec. 4-7. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Any person who: (i) overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; (ii) deprives any animal of necessary food, drink, shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; (iii) sores any equine for any purpose or administers drugs or medications to alter or mask such soring for the purpose of sale, show, or exhibition of any kind, unless such administration of drugs or medications is within the context of a veterinary client-patient relationship and solely for therapeutic purposes; (iv) willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; (v) carries or causes to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or (vi) causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle. 
(c)  The word "animal," as used in this section, shall be construed to include birds and fowl. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-1, 4-51; Code 1988, § 4-10) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; mistreatment or interference with police animals, § 24-282. 
State Law reference— Specific authority to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.94; general authority of city to prevent cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.115; cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.122.  
Sec. 4-8. - Disposal of dead animals and fowl generally. 
(a)  When the owner of any animal or grown fowl which has died knows of such death, such owner shall forthwith have its body cremated or buried and, if he fails to do so, the judge of the general district court, after notice to the owner if he can be ascertained, shall cause such dead animal or fowl to be cremated or buried by an officer or other person designated for the purpose. Such officer or other person shall be entitled to recover of the owner of every such animal so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed the amount set out in appendix A to this Code, and of the owner of every such fowl so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed the amount set out in appendix A to this Code, to be recovered in the same manner as officers' fees are recovered, free from all exemptions in favor of such owner. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the burial or cremation of the whole or portions of any animal or fowl which is to be used for food or in any commercial manner. 
(c)  This section shall also apply to dead dogs and other companion animals. 
(Code 1988, § 4-12; Ord. No. 1993-47, § 1, 6-22-1993) 
Cross reference— Collection of small dead animals by city and charge therefor, §§ 16-34(d), 16-67; large dead animals not to be collected by city, § 16-39. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-510.  
Sec. 4-9. - Standards for keeping animals and household pets; harboring stray animals. 
(a)  All animals, including household pets, shall be kept or maintained so as not to constitute a public nuisance by concentration or number, causing production of insects, excessive odor, dust, noise, or other conditions detrimental to the community health and welfare. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to fail to provide any animal with adequate space. "Adequate space" means sufficient space to allow each animal to (i) easily stand, sit, lie, turn about, and make all other normal body movements in a comfortable, normal position for the animal and (ii) interact safely with other animals in the enclosure. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to chain, stake out, or tether any animal on any premises in such a manner that the animal may go beyond its own property line unless such person has permission from the owner of the affected property. At no time shall an animal be allowed to be staked out, chained or tethered in a manner, which allows the animal to cross onto city property. 
(d)  Animals, which are staked out, chained, or tethered outside on any property, shall be 15 feet away from the property line, and at no time shall an animal be permitted to be chained, staked out or tethered outside on a balcony that is above ground level. 
(e)  When an animal is tethered, "adequate space" means a tether that permits the above actions and is appropriate to the age and size of the animal. The tether must be attached to the animal by a properly applied collar, halter, or harness configured so as to protect the animal from injury and prevent the animal or the tether from becoming entangled with other objects or animals, or from extending over an object or edge that could result in the strangulation or injury of the animal. For dogs, the tether must be at least three times the length of the dog, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, except when the dog is being walked on a leash or is attached by a tether to a lead line. When freedom of movement would endanger the animal, temporarily and appropriately restricting movement of the animal according to professionally accepted standards is considered to be provision of adequate space. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to tether a dog or to leave a dog tethered unless the dog is attended at all times. For purposes of this section, a dog is attended only if the owner is both outdoors with the dog and within 35 feet of the dog. 
(g)  Without having first reported finding a lost or stray companion or domestic animal to the city's animal control unit or Portsmouth Humane Society or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter, it shall be unlawful for any person, to allow the animal to remain on their property, harbor or keep such lost or stray animal for a period in excess of seven days. After seven days the person allowing the above actions shall be considered to be the owner/custodian of that animal and shall be responsible for that animal. 
(h)  Only the Portsmouth Humane Society or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter is authorized to keep such lost or stray animals for any period in excess of seven days. 
(Code 1988, § 4-13; Ord. No. 1989-26, § 1(4-2), 4-11-1989; Ord. No. 2012-55, § 1, 9-25-2012; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 3, 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 2017-73 , § 1, 8-22-17) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66.  
Sec. 4-10. - Keeping of dogs and cats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an accessory structure for the housing of dogs or cats on land zoned for residential use in the city that exceeds, in floor area, one-half percent of the lot area. Neither the building nor any fence-enclosed roaming area shall be located closer than 15 feet from a property line. The accessory structure, pen or enclosed roaming area shall be located only in rear yards. 
(b)  No more than five dogs above the age of six months may be kept in any one dwelling unit or premises within the city limits. 
(Code 1988, § 4-14; Ord. No. 1989-26, § 1(4-14), 4-11-1989) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.94:1.  
Sec. 4-11. - Wild, dangerous or carnivorous animals, or dangerous or poisonous reptiles or serpents. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within this city an elephant, bear, leopard, lion, tiger, panther, bobcat, wolf, raccoon, skunk, fox, opossum or any dangerous or carnivorous wild animal, or dangerous or poisonous reptiles or serpents. A "wild animal" is defined as one that is incapable of being completely domesticated and requires the exercise of art, force or skill to keep it in subjection. 
(Code 1988, § 4-15; Ord. No. 1989-26, § 1(4-13), 4-11-1989)  
Sec. 4-12. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 4-51; Code 1988, § 4-1) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Unlawful acts, penalties, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.128.  
Sec. 4-13. - Confinement of vicious or destructive animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep unconfined within the city any animal which is known by such person to be vicious or which has evidenced a disposition to attack human beings without provocation or is known to be destructive of property; provided, that such animals may be kept where there have been made adequate provisions to protect persons and/or property from such animal. An animal shall be deemed "unconfined" if such animal is not securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or run area upon the premises of such person. Such pen or run area must also have either sides six feet high or a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one foot. 
(b)  In the event that an animal control officer has probable cause to believe that a vicious or destructive animal is being harbored or cared for in violation of subsection (a) of this section, the animal control officer may seize and impound the animal pending trial. 
(c)  Pending disposition by the court of the charge of violating subsection (a) of this section, an owner or custodian may redeem his animal upon payment of accrued fees and upon a showing to the satisfaction of the animal control officer that adequate provisions for compliance with subsection (a) of this section have been implemented. An animal control officer may again impound the animal pending disposition of the original charge upon his determination that the owner or custodian has again failed to confine the animal as required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Any animal not redeemed within five days of disposition of the original charge by the court shall be disposed of other than by sale or transfer by the Portsmouth Humane Society, Inc. or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter. 
(e)  The provisions of this section permitting the keeping of such animal within the city shall not apply to those wild animals, or dangerous or poisonous reptiles or serpents whose keeping within the city is prohibited under section 4-11. 
(f)  Any person violating any of the provisions of the section shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 4-17; Ord. No. 1990-57, § 2, 6-12-1990; Ord. No. 1993-47, § 1, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 4, 2-23-2016 )  
Secs. 4-14—4-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CARE AND CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Dogs prohibited in city cemeteries, § 9-56. 
 
Sec. 4-31. - General prohibition against dogs running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dog to run at large in the city. For the purpose of this section, a dog shall be deemed to be running at large while roaming, running or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian and not under its owner's or custodian's immediate physical or voice control. Physical control shall include confinement of the animal by a fence, chain, leash or the owner's or custodian's physical presence. 
(b)  Any person convicted under this subsection for the first or second time shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 4-23; Code 1988, § 4-31; Ord. No. 1990-57, § 1, 6-12-1990) 
Cross reference— Animals at large in parks, § 25-108. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93.  
Sec. 4-32. - Impoundment when running at large. 
(a)  Required. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to catch and turn over to the Portsmouth Humane Society, Inc. or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter; for impounding any animal found off the owner's premises, in violation of section 4-31. 
(b)  Identification and return. If an animal is impounded pursuant to subsection (a) of this section it shall be the duty of the animal control officer and the Portsmouth Humane Society, Inc. or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter; to make a reasonable effort to ascertain if the animal has a tag, license, tattoo or other identification. If such identification is found, a reasonable effort shall be made to return the animal to its owner or to place the animal for adoption before humanely destroying it. 
(c)  Duration, redemption. Every animal impounded pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be penned for five days, except that any impounded animal whose owner is identified shall be held for an additional five days. Such period shall commence on the day immediately following the day the animal is initially confined in the facility of the Portsmouth Humane Society or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter. During the period of impoundment, the animal may be: (i) redeemed by the rightful owner, (ii) adopted by a resident of the city for which the pound is operated who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal, if the animal's rightful owner has surrendered all property rights in such animal and has read and signed a statement as required by subsection (e) of this section, or (iii) adopted by a resident of an adjacent political subdivision of the commonwealth, if the animal's rightful owner has surrendered all property rights in such animal and has read and signed a statement as required by subsection (e) of this section. However, any feral animal not bearing a collar, tag, tattoo, or other form of identification which, based on the written certification of a disinterested person, exhibits behavior that poses a risk of physical injury to any person confining the animal, may be euthanized after being kept for a period of not less than three days, at least one of which shall be a full business day, such period to commence on the day the animal is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. The certification of the disinterested person shall be kept with the animal as required by Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6557. For the purposes of this subsection, a disinterested person shall not include a person releasing or reporting the animal to the facility. During the period of impoundment, the animal may be redeemed by paying to the attendant at the pound the amount set out in appendix A to this Code for the first day and the amount set out in appendix A to this Code for each additional day or any part thereof to cover the actual expenses incurred in keeping the animal impounded and by exhibiting to the person in charge of the pound the receipt for the license tax required to be paid by this chapter. All such impounding fees shall be paid over to the city treasurer monthly. 
(d)  Disposal. If not redeemed within the time periods provided for in subsection (c) of this section, an animal impounded pursuant to this section shall be disposed of, other than by sale, by the Portsmouth Humane Society, Inc. or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter. 
(e)  Destruction, delivery to humane society or shelter, adoption. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate destruction, delivery to any humane society or shelter, or adoption, as provided in clauses (ii) and (iii) of subsection (c) of this section, of an animal who has been delivered voluntarily or released to a pound, animal shelter, animal control officer, or humane society by the animal's rightful owner after the rightful owner has, in writing, surrendered all property rights on such animal and has read and signed a statement: (i) certifying that no other person has a right of property in the animal, and (ii) acknowledging that the animal may be immediately euthanized, delivered to any humane society or shelter, or adopted as provided in clauses (ii) and (iii) of subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 4-24; Code 1988, § 4-32; Ord. No. 1988-108, § 1(4-24), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-63, § 1, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 1990-36, § 1, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1990-57, § 1, 6-12-1990; Ord. No. 1994-53, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 5, 2-23-2016) 
State Law reference— Impoundment and disposition of dogs running at large in violation of ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.96.  
Sec. 4-33. - Wild, exotic or poisonous animals; permit required. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate confinement means that while on the property of its owner and not under the direct supervision and control of the owner or custodian an animal shall be confined in a humane manner in a securely enclosed and locked pen/structure, a minimum of six feet in height, with a secured top, a bottom securely attached to the sides. If there is no bottom attached to the sides of the structure, the posts must be imbedded into the ground no less than one foot and designed to: (i) prevent the animal's escape by digging, climbing or jumping, (ii) prevent direct contact with any person or animal not authorized by the owner to be in direct contact, (iii) provide a minimum of 100 square feet of floor space for each adult animal depending upon the type of species. Tethering of a hybrid-canine or hybrid-feline shall not be permitted. 
Permit means a license authorizing a person to house an exotic animal within the city limits under certain provisions and limitations. 
Responsible ownership means the ownership and humane care for an animal in such a manner as to comply with all laws and ordinances regarding that particular animal, and to prevent endangerment by the animal to the public health and safety. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city limits any hybrid-canine, hybrid-feline, live monkey (nonhuman primate), ratite, porcine, or any other warm-blooded animal, reptile, or nonpoisonous reptile or serpent six feet or longer in length which can normally be found in the wild state or any other member of the crocodilian, including but not limited to alligators, crocodiles, caimans and gavials without first obtaining an inspection from an animal control officer and a permit from the city treasurer's office. 
(c)  Ferrets and birds which are normally purchased through pet stores (with the exception of ratites), nonpoisonous reptiles less than six feet in length, domestic rabbits, domestic rodents which have been bred in captivity and which have never known the wild shall be excluded from requiring a permit. 
(d)  In no case shall any exotic animal be exhibited, displayed, or kept in such a manner as to permit said animal to escape, be at large, or to otherwise come into direct physical contact with any person unless under the direct care and control of the handler, owner or custodian. 
(e)  The owner or custodian of any exotic animal shall apply to the city treasurer's office within ten working days of acquisition of said animal, within ten working days of becoming a new resident of the city, within ten working days of changing address within the city, or in case of an exhibition of said animal within the city limits. Each applicant for an exotic animal permit shall by affidavit provide the following: 
(1)  Name and street address of each owner/custodian; 
(2)  Emergency contact persons/custodians name, address and telephone number; 
(3)  Location of animal storage facility; 
(4)  Copy of state/federal permit if required; 
(5)  Common and scientific name of animal; 
(6)  Date and source of acquisition of said animal; 
(7)  The sex, age, height and/or length of each animal; 
(8)  Identifying marks, numbers or bands that are unique to each animal; 
(9)  Proof of a surety bond or liability insurance in the amount of $50,000.00 which covers incidences or occurrences involving the animal; 
(10)  A copy of a certificate of health from a local licensed veterinarian for each animal which certifies that the animal is in good health; 
(11)  Inspection notification from animal control; 
(12)  A statement of understanding signed by the owner/custodian concerning human exposure in relation to the current state and local laws involving rabies control. 
(f)  The permit shall not be transferable and shall be valid through December 31 of the year of which it was issued and shall be renewed by January 31 of each subsequent year. Permits for temporary exhibits shall be valid for the time specified in the permit. One permit per address will be issued within the city. The city exotic animal permits shall be provided to relevant city departments as notification for the public's health and safety purposes. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, dump and/or release any exotic animal into the wild. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish false information for the purpose of obtaining a permit pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. Any permit obtained under fraudulent pretenses shall be null and void with any animals named thereon subject to impoundment by the animal control officer pending a determination by a court of competent jurisdiction as to the appropriate disposition of the said animal. 
(i)  The permit fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code covers the cost of administration. A charge as set forth in appendix A to this Code will be collected for annual permit renewal, the adding of additional animals to an existing permit, or the duplication of an existing permit. 
(j)  The city treasurer's office or his designee in conjunction with animal control may reject an application for an exotic animal permit, renewal of a permit, or the addition of an animal to an existing permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to comply with or supply any information required in subsection (b) of this section; 
(2)  Falsification of any information required of this section; 
(3)  Previous or current violations of any provisions of this section; 
(4)  Previous or current violations of any local, state or federal law relating to animals; 
(5)  History or demonstration of the vicious or dangerous nature of an animal; 
(6)  Previous or current violations which endanger the public's safety and health. 
(k)  The animal control officer or his designee may revoke an exotic animal permit and impound the animal for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to comply with any and all terms of the permit issued; 
(2)  Falsification of any information required in subsection (b) of this section; 
(3)  Violation of any local, state or federal laws applicable to animals; 
(4)  Current violations which endanger the public's safety and welfare. 
(l)  The permittee shall post a placard provided by the animal control unit in an area of public view on the premises, building or structure where the animals are kept or housed. Failure to post the placard shall be a violation of this section. 
(m)  Wildlife rehabilitators shall be excluded from this section for the purpose of acting under the state and federal license for the purpose of treating injured, sick and/or orphaned wild animals.  
Sec. 4-33.1. - Authority to control dangerous or vicious dogs. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal, other than a dog, or killed a companion animal. However, when a dog attacks or bites another dog, the attacking or biting dog shall not be deemed dangerous: (i) if no serious physical injury as determined by a licensed veterinarian has occurred to the other dog as a result of the attack or bite, or (ii) both dogs are owned by the same person. No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking or inflicting injury on another dog while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. 
Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has: (i) killed a person; (ii) inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or (iii) continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(b)  Any animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate of the city for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before the general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. The animal control officer or owner shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this section. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6562, which said section is incorporated herein by reference, it being the intent of this section that any amendment of the aforementioned section by the legislature of the state shall be deemed to be incorporated herein upon the effective date of such legislation. 
(c)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor shall the city council prohibit the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was: (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian, (ii) committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian, or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be dangerous dog or a vicious dog. No animal which, at the time of acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, or its owner or owner's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(d)  The owner of any animal found by the court to be a dangerous dog shall, within 45 days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the city treasurer for a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The city treasurer's office shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be updated and renewed by January 31 of each calendar year for a renewal fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. 
(e)  All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence: (i) of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable, and (ii) that the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that: (i) they possess a current city dog license, (ii) their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property, (iii) the animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation, (iv) will cause the animal to be spayed or neutered, and (v) will purchase liability insurance coverage of at least $100,000.00. 
(f)  While on the property of its owner, an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height not less than six feet with a secure top and designed to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with all the elements of basic animal care as enumerated in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6503. When off its owner's property, an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. Such muzzle shall be approved by the animal control officer. 
(g)  If the owner of an animal found by the court to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(h)  After an animal has been found by the court to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, notify the local animal control authority if the animal: (i) is loose or unconfined; (ii) bites a person or attacks another animal; (iii) is sold, given away or dies; or (iv) has been moved to a different address. If the animal has been sold or given away, the former owner or custodian shall provide the new owner's or custodian's name, address, and telephone number to the local animal control authority. 
(i)  The owner of any animal which has been found by a court to be a dangerous dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and the dog may be ordered to be seized and euthanized by the court. 
(j)  All fees collected pursuant to this section, less the cost incurred by the animal control authority in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by this section, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund in the treasury of the city for the purpose of paying the expenses and any training course required under Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6556, which section is incorporated herein by reference, it being the intent of this section that any amendment to the aforementioned section by the legislature of the state shall be deemed to be incorporated herein upon the effective date of such legislation. 
(Code 1988, § 4-33.1; Ord. No. 1993-47, § 1, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 1994-53, § 3, 6-14-1994; O rd. No. 2013-03, § 1, 1-8-2013; Ord. No. 2016-13, § 6, 2-23-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority for section, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93:1.  
Sec. 4-34. - Female dogs in season. 
(a)  No person shall permit any female dog in season to go at large in the city or allow her to remain on his premises to the annoyance of the neighborhood. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall take into custody any female dog in season found in violation of this section and, if the owner is readily identifiable, the control officer shall notify the owner within 24 hours after the female dog in season is taken into custody. The female dog in season may be redeemed by the owner within 24 hours after such notice in the manner prescribed by section 4-32(c). If not so redeemed, the female dog in season shall be euthanized by a method prescribed or approved by the state veterinarian. 
(c)  The impoundment or destruction of a female dog in season under subsection (b) of this section shall not relieve the owner from liability for any fine imposed for a violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 4-27; Code 1988, § 4-34)  
Sec. 4-35. - Riding in open vehicle. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has control of any dog to allow such dog to ride in any motor vehicle in any portion thereof that is open in such a manner as to permit such dog to jump out of the vehicle or to be thrown therefrom by acceleration or stopping of the vehicle or by an accident involving the vehicle. The prohibited portion of a motor vehicle shall include, but not be limited to, the open bed of a truck, the interior of a convertible vehicle with the top down, or removed, the rear storage portion of a station wagon with the tailgate open and the trunk or hatchback portion of any vehicle with the trunk or hatchback open. For the purpose of this section, the operator of a motor vehicle shall be deemed to have control of any dog riding therein. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who owns or has control of any dog and who allows such dog to ride in the prohibited portion of any motor vehicle if such dog is confined to a cage of adequate construction and design to prevent escape therefrom; and 
(2)  Any portion of a motor vehicle which is fully enclosed except for open windows. 
(Code 1973, § 4-23; Code 1988, § 4-35) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 22.  
Sec. 4-36. - Urinating or defecating on property of another; defecating on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of a dog to: 
(1)  Knowingly or willfully allow the dog to urinate or defecate on the private property of another person without the consent of the person having control of the property or his agent. 
(2)  Knowingly or willfully allow the dog to defecate on public property, except that defecation by a dog on public property shall not constitute a violation of this section if the owner of the dog immediately removes the material defecated and disposes of it in a safe and sanitary manner. 
(Code 1973, § 4-28; Code 1988, § 4-36)  
Secs. 4-37—4-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOG LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses generally, ch. 20. 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog four months old or older in the city unless such dog is licensed under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 4-34; Code 1988, § 4-61; Ord. No. 1988-108, § 1(4-34), 12-13-1988) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.85.  
Sec. 4-62. - Application; applicant must be city resident. 
(a)  Any person may obtain a dog license by making oral or written application to the city treasurer, accompanied by the amount of the license tax required by section 4-63 and the certificate of vaccination required by section 4-66. The treasurer shall have authority to license only dogs of resident owners or custodians who reside within the limits of the city and may require information to this effect from any applicant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false statement in an application made under this section in order to secure a dog license to which he is not entitled. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-35, 4-36, 4-51; Code 1988, § 4-62) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.86, 3.1-796.128.  
Sec. 4-63. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  The following license tax is imposed on dogs required to be licensed under this article: 
(1)  For each dog, whether it is male or female, for the period of one calendar year: $10.00. 
(2)  For each dog, whether it is male or female, for the period of two calendar years: $20.00. 
(3)  For each dog, whether it is male or female, for the period of three calendar years: $30.00. 
(4)  Kennel for 20 dogs, for the period of one calendar year: $60.00. 
(5)  Kennel for 50 dogs, for the period of one calendar year: $100.00. 
(6)  For each dog that is spayed or neutered, for the period of one calendar year: $5.00. 
(7)  For each dog that is spayed or neutered, for the period of two calendar years: $10.00. 
(8)  For each dog that is spayed or neutered, for the period of three calendar years: $15.00. 
(b)  No license tax shall be levied on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person or that is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person. As used in this subsection, the term "hearing dog" means a dog trained to alert its owner by touch to sounds of danger and sounds to which the owner should respond. 
(Code 1973, § 4-37; Code 1988, § 4-63; Ord. No. 1990-31, § 1, 5-15-1990) 
State Law reference— Duty of city to impose license tax on ownership of dogs and provisions similar to subsection (b) above, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.87.  
Sec. 4-64. - When tax payable. 
The license tax on dogs required by this article shall be due and payable as follows: 
(1)  On or before January 1 and not later than January 31 of each year, the owner of any dog four months old or older shall pay the license tax prescribed by this article. 
(2)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between January 1 and November 1 of any year, the license tax for the current calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner. 
(3)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between October 31 and December 31 of any year, the license tax for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner, and such license shall be valid from the date the license is purchased. 
(Code 1973, § 4-38; Code 1988, § 4-64; Ord. No. 1988-108, § 1(4-38), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1990-72, § 1, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.88.  
Sec. 4-65. - Failure to pay tax when due. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person liable for the license tax imposed by this article to fail to pay the same when it is due. Payment of such tax subsequent to a summons to appear before a court for failure to do so within the time required shall not operate to relieve such person from the penalties provided for such failure. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be required to obtain the proper license forthwith and unless the fine and license tax are immediately paid, the trial court shall order the dog killed by the animal control officer or some other officer, but the killing of such dog shall not relieve the owner of the payment of the fine or the license tax already due. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-39, 4-51; Code 1988, § 4-65) 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsection (a) above, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.128.  
Sec. 4-66. - Issuance. 
Upon receipt of a proper application for a license required by this article and payment of the prescribed license tax, the city treasurer shall issue the license; provided, however, that the treasurer shall not issue such license unless the applicant presents a certificate showing that the dog for which the license is sought has been currently vaccinated or inoculated as required by section 4-96. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-40, 4-41; Code 1988, § 4-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.86, 3.1-796.97.  
Sec. 4-67. - Composition. 
A dog license shall consist of a license tax receipt and a metal tag. The receipt shall have recorded thereon the name and address of the owner or custodian of the dog, the date of payment of the tax, the year for which issued, the serial number of the tag, and whether same is issued for a male, unsexed male, unsexed female, female or kennel. The tag shall be stamped or permanently marked to show the name of the city as the issuing authority, the sex of the dog and the calendar year for which issued and shall bear a serial number. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-40, 4-41; Code 1988, § 4-67; Ord. No. 1991-62, § 1, 6-25-1991) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.88, 3.1-796.90.  
Sec. 4-68. - Term. 
(a)  Dog licenses issued under this article shall run by the calendar year for which issued, beginning with January 1 of each such year and ending with December 31 following. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a license issued pursuant to this article shall be effective only as long as the period of time for which the license is obtained does not exceed the period that the rabies inoculation for the day in question is effective as certified by a veterinarian. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-37, 4-45; Code 1988, § 4-68)  
Sec. 4-69. - Preservation and exhibition of license receipt. 
Dog license receipts issued under this article shall be carefully preserved by the licensee and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by the animal control officer or a police officer. 
(Code 1973, § 4-42; Code 1988, § 4-69) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.92.  
Sec. 4-70. - Tag to be worn by dog; exceptions. 
(a)  A dog license tag issued under this article shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian of the dog and shall be worn by the dog. The owner of the dog may remove the collar and license tag when the dog is engaged in lawful hunting, when the dog is competing in a dog show, when the dog has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar, when the dog is confined or when the dog is under the immediate control of its owner. 
(b)  Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed, and in any proceedings under this article the burden of proof of the fact that such dog has been licensed or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time shall be on the owner of the dog. 
(Code 1973, §§ 4-43, 4-46; Code 1988, § 4-70; Ord. No. 1990-72, § 2, 6-29-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.89, 3.1-796.92.  
Sec. 4-71. - Duplicate tags. 
If a dog license tag shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the city treasurer for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the city treasurer that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, he shall issue a duplicate license tag, which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. The city treasurer shall endorse the number of such duplicate license tag and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for such duplicate license tag shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code, which shall be reported in the gross dog license collections. 
(Code 1973, § 4-47; Code 1988, § 4-71) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.91.  
Sec. 4-72. - Special provisions for kennels. 
The owner of a kennel shall securely fasten the license tag issued pursuant to this article to the kennel enclosure in full view and keep one of the identification plates provided therewith attached to a collar of each dog authorized to be kept enclosed in the kennel. Any identification plates not so in use must be kept by the owner or custodian and promptly shown to the animal control officer or other officer upon request. A kennel dog shall not be permitted to stray beyond the limits of the enclosure, but this shall not prohibit removing dogs therefrom temporarily while under the control of the owner or custodian thereof for the purpose of exercising, hunting, breeding, trial or show. 
(Code 1973, § 4-48; Code 1988, § 4-72)  
Sec. 4-73. - Disposition of unlicensed dogs. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to capture and have euthanized any dog of unknown ownership found running at large on which the license tax under this article has not been paid in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 4-32. However, the animal control officer may deliver such dog to any person in the city who will pay the required license tax on such dog, with the understanding that if the legal owner thereafter claims the dog and proves his ownership, he may recover such dog by paying to the person to whom it was delivered by the animal control officer the amount of the license tax paid by him and a reasonable charge for the keep of the dog while in his possession. 
(Code 1973, § 4-49; Code 1988, § 4-73) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.119.  
Sec. 4-74. - Records, reports and audit of license sales; destruction of unsold tags, and disposition of funds. 
(a)  The city treasurer shall enter in a dog license sales, record the date of the sale of dog tags, including kennels, the names and addresses of persons to whom sold and the serial number of the tags and shall keep an account of the amount of the license tax paid. The city treasurer shall keep a copy of such dog license sales record in numerical order and at the close of the calendar year shall file an annual report of such sales with the city manager. The chief financial officer shall audit such records, accounts and unsold dog license tags and authorize the city treasurer to destroy unsold tags. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall deposit all funds collected for dog license taxes into the general fund of the city. The city shall use the funds for the following purposes: 
(1)  The salary and expenses of the animal control officer and necessary staff; 
(2)  The care and maintenance of a dog pound; 
(3)  The maintenance of a rabies control program; 
(4)  Payments as a bounty to any person neutering or spaying a dog up to the amount of one year of the license tax as provided by ordinance; 
(5)  Payments for compensation as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6553; and 
(6)  Efforts to promote sterilization of dogs and cats. 
Any funds unexpended for such purposes on December 31st of any year will remain in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-50; Code 1988, § 4-74; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 2, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 1995-90, § 1, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 3, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2016-013, § 7, 2-23-2016)  
Secs. 4-75—4-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt measures to prevent spread of rabies, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.100. 
 
Sec. 4-96. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or have in his care, custody or control, any dog or cat four months old or older unless such dog or cat has been vaccinated or inoculated against rabies in the manner set forth in subsection (b) of this section within a period of 12 months, if such dog or cat has been vaccinated or inoculated by the one-year vaccine or within a period of 36 months if such dog or cat has been vaccinated or inoculated by the three-year vaccine. Any person transporting a dog or cat into the city from another jurisdiction shall comply with this subsection within 30 days from the day he brings such dog or cat into the city, if such dog or cat is to be kept in the city more than 30 days. 
(b)  The vaccination or inoculation required by subsection (a) of this section shall be by vaccine approved by the state department of health and shall be certified to by a licensed veterinarian. Such certificate shall be dated as of the date of inoculation or vaccination, shall show the rabies tag number, the sex and breed of the dog or cat, the name of the owner thereof, and whether the vaccine given is the one-year vaccine or the three-year vaccine, together with such other information as may reasonably be required by the director of public health. Such tag shall be firmly attached to the dog's or cat's collar and shall be worn at all times when the dog or cat is not on the property of the owner or custodian of the dog or cat or in the immediate control of some responsible person. 
(c)  The owner of the dog or custodian of the dog or cat shall furnish within a reasonable period of time, upon the request of an animal control officer, humane investigator, law enforcement officer, or official of the department of health, the certificate of vaccination for such dog or cat. 
(Code 1973, § 4-66; Code 1988, § 4-96; Ord. No. 1988-108, § 1(4-66(a)), (4-67), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1994-53, § 4, 6-14-1994)  
Sec. 4-97. - Impoundment of unvaccinated dogs or cats; redemption, disposal. 
(a)  Any dog or cat over four months found within the limits of the city without evidence that such dog or cat has been vaccinated or inoculated in accordance with the provisions of section 4-96 shall be impounded by the animal control officer, any police officer, or other authorized person for a period of at least five days during which time such dog or cat may be returned to its owner upon proof of ownership and upon payment by such owner of the cost of keeping such dog or cat at the rate as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the first day, and the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code for each additional day or any part thereof, together with the payment of any fines lawfully assessed against such owner under the provisions of this chapter. Payment of such costs shall not relieve the owner of liability for any violation of this Code. 
(b)  Upon redemption of a dog or cat by its owner, the Portsmouth Humane Society or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter shall notify the owner of such dog or cat that an animal control officer of the city may appear at his place of residence on or after seven days following redemption of the animal. At such time, the owner of the redeemed animal shall present to the animal control officer proof of the animal's vaccination or inoculation against rabies. 
(c)  At the expiration of the five-day period of impoundment, any dog or cat not so claimed by its owner shall become the property of the Portsmouth Humane Society, Inc. or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter, who shall offer such animal by adoption to any person who shall meet the adoption requirements of the Portsmouth Humane Society or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter. Any animal not so adopted may be humanely disposed of by the Portsmouth Humane Society or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter in accordance with law. 
(Code 1973, § 4-68; Code 1988, § 4-97; Ord. No. 1988-108, § 1(4-68), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 2016-013, § 8, 2-23-2016)  
Sec. 4-98. - Quarantine of certain animals. 
(a)  The term "quarantine," as used in this section, shall mean the keeping of any animal under such conditions of reasonable security, confinement, or strict isolation as may be determined by the director of public health to be necessary or desirable in the interest of public health and safety. In the discretion of the director of public health, such quarantine may be effected on the premises of the owner or person having custody of the animal to be quarantined or by delivery to an approved veterinarian, kennel or pound, which shall be at the cost and expense of the owner or person having custody of such animal. 
(b)  Dogs or cats showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies shall be confined under competent observation for such a time as may be necessary to determine a diagnosis. If confinement is impossible or impracticable, such dog or cat shall be euthanized by one of the methods approved by the state veterinarian as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. Any dog or cat, for which no proof of current rabies vaccination is available, and which is exposed to rabies through a bite, or through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane, by an animal believed to be afflicted with rabies, shall be confined in a pound, kennel or enclosure approved by the health department for a period not to exceed six months at the expense of the owner; however, if this is not feasible, the dog or cat shall be euthanized by one of the methods approved by the state veterinarian as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. A rabies vaccination shall be administered prior to release. Inactivated rabies vaccine may be administered at the beginning of confinement. Any dog or cat so bitten, or exposed to rabies through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane with proof of a valid rabies vaccination, shall be revaccinated immediately following the bite and shall be confined to the premises of the owner, or other site as may be approved by the local health department, for a period of 90 days. 
(c)  If the owner or person having custody of such animal shall be unwilling or unable to subject any animal to the quarantine required by the director of public health, or if, in the opinion of the director of public health, such is necessary, it shall be the duty of the director of public health to cause such animal to be impounded at the facility of the Portsmouth Humane Society, Inc. or other entity serving as the city's public animal shelter for the quarantine period required, and the owner or custodian of such animal shall pay the sum as set forth in appendix A to this Code for each day or part thereof the animal is so quarantined. 
(d)  Any animal quarantined pursuant to this section shall be so kept as to be reasonably available for inspection by any duly authorized officer of the department of public health at all reasonable times and shall not be removed by any person from the place of quarantine without the written consent of the director of public health. 
(Code 1973, § 4-63; Code 1988, § 4-98; Ord. No. 1995-90, §§ 1, 2, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 2016-013, § 9, 2-23-2016)  
Sec. 4-99. - Confinement of animal which has bitten person or another animal. 
(a)  At the discretion of the director of public health, any animal which has bitten a person shall be confined at the expense of the owner, under competent observation in a pound, kennel or enclosure approved by the director of public health, or in such other place as may be required by the director, for a period of ten days, unless the animal develops active symptoms of rabies or expires before that time; provided, however, that a seriously injured or sick animal may be euthanized in a manner prescribed or approved by the state veterinarian and its head sent to the division of consolidated laboratory services of the state department of general services for evaluation. 
(b)  When any potentially rabid animal, other than a dog or cat, exposes or may have exposed a person to rabies through a bite, or through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane, that animal shall be confined at the discretion of the director of public health in a manner approved by the health department or humanely euthanized as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546 and its head sent to the division of consolidated laboratory services of the department of general services or the local health department for evaluation. 
(c)  When any animal, other than a dog or cat, is exposed to rabies through a bite, or through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane, by an animal believed to be afflicted with rabies, that newly exposed animal shall be confined at the discretion of the director of public health in a manner approved by the health department or humanely euthanized as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. 
(Code 1973, § 4-26; Code 1988, § 4-99; Ord. No. 1995-90, § 1, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 2016-013, § 10, 2-23-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.98.  
Sec. 4-100. - Report of rabid, etc., animals. 
It shall be the duty of any person owning or having custody of or any person having knowledge of the existence of any animal known to have rabies or known to have been exposed to rabies or which shall have bitten any person, in addition to the other duties imposed in this article, to immediately report such matter to the director of public health. 
(Code 1973, § 4-64; Code 1988, § 4-100; Ord. No. 1995-90, § 1, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 4-101. - Destruction and disposal of rabid animals. 
It shall be the duty of any person owning or having custody of any animal known to have rabies at once to cause such animal to be killed and to have the body buried or burned at a site approved by the director of public health. In the event of failure of the owner or person having custody of such animal to cause such animal to be killed, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer, upon request from the director of public health, to cause such animal to be killed and the body buried or burned and to recover on behalf of the city from the owner or person having custody of the animal the cost incurred for this service. 
(Code 1973, § 4-65; Code 1988, § 4-101)  
Sec. 4-102. - Concealing or harboring animal to prevent its destruction or confinement under article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or harbor any dog, cat or other animal to prevent its destruction, confinement or quarantine in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1973, § 4-69; Code 1988, § 4-102; Ord. No. 1995-90, § 1, 8-8-1995)  
Chapter 5 - BICYCLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Bicycles, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1719, 15.2-1720, 46.2-808, 46.2-847, 46.2-903—46.2-908.1, 46.2-932, 46.2-1015, 46.2-1051, 46.2-1054, 46.2-1066, 46.2-1078, 46.2-1081. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definition. 
The word "bicycle," as used in this chapter, means a device propelled solely by human power, having pedals, two or more wheels and a seat height of more than 25 inches from the ground when adjusted to its maximum height. 
(Code 1973, § 5-1; Code 1988, § 5-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100.  
Sec. 5-2. - General penalty for violation of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $20.00. 
(Code 1973, § 5-12; Code 1988, § 5-2)  
Sec. 5-3. - Removing, altering, etc., frame number. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, change, alter, mutilate or in any way render undistinguishable any bicycle frame number; provided however, that when a bicycle is registered under this chapter and the frame number has been obliterated or is illegible or if there is no frame number, the commissioner of the revenue may place or cause to be placed a frame number thereon for registration purposes; and further provided that every person engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging, or trading new or used bicycles shall, prior to the sale of a bicycle not having a frame number, stamp a frame number thereon in accordance with regulations propounded by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  Any person who removes, changes, alters or mutilates any bicycle frame number in violation of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50.00. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-7, 5-12; Code 1988, § 5-5)  
Secs. 5-4—5-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 5-26. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride or use, or permit to be operated, ridden or used, any bicycle upon the streets of the city, unless such bicycle is registered as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 5-2; Code 1988, § 5-26) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to license bicycles, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720.  
Sec. 5-27. - Duties of dealers. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or trading new or used bicycles shall: 
(1)  Register the bicycle on forms prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue and affix a decal prescribed by the commissioner in a conspicuous place on that part of the bicycle frame into which the seat post is fitted or such other place as may be designated by the commissioner of the revenue before sale is consummated; or 
(2)  Provide to the commissioner of the revenue the name and address of the purchaser and the serial number of the bicycle purchased, if available, together with the registration fee prescribed in this article within 30 days from the date of the sale. 
(b)  The registration fee prescribed in this article shall be collected by such person, held in trust and paid to the commissioner of the revenue. Such person may charge a service fee of ten percent for all registration fees collected. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3; Code 1988, § 5-27)  
Sec. 5-28. - Application. 
The registration of bicycles, other than those registered under section 5-27 shall be upon written application therefor made to the commissioner of the revenue on forms prescribed by him. Such forms shall be distributed to the public by such persons and business establishments designated by the commissioner of the revenue. Written application shall be made by the owner of the bicycle, if the owner is 18 years of age or older. If the owner is under 18 years of age, the application shall be made by his parent or guardian. The completed application shall be delivered or mailed to the commissioner of the revenue along with the prescribed registration fee. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3; Code 1988, § 5-28)  
Sec. 5-29. - Fee. 
The fee for registration of a bicycle shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code, to be paid as provided in section 5-27 or 5-28. 
(Code 1973, § 5-5; Code 1988, § 5-29) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 5-30. - Issuance of card and decal; display of decal. 
After approval of an application submitted under this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall issue to the applicant a registration card and a decal in a form prescribed by him. The decal shall be affixed to the registered bicycle in a conspicuous place on that part of the bicycle frame into which the seat post is fitted. No person shall attach any such decal to a bicycle other than the one for which the decal was issued. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3; Code 1988, § 5-30)  
Sec. 5-31. - Information to be furnished chief of police. 
Upon issuance of a bicycle registration card and decal, the commissioner of the revenue shall cause to be delivered to the chief of police a copy of the application for registration, indicating thereon the registration number of the decal issued. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3; Code 1988, § 5-31)  
Sec. 5-32. - Removing, destroying or altering decal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any bicycle decal issued under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 5-6; Code 1988, § 5-32)  
Sec. 5-33. - Replacement of lost or mutilated decal; fee. 
(a)  When any decal issued under this article is mutilated, lost, stolen or misplaced and cannot be found, upon satisfactory evidence of such fact being presented to the commissioner of the revenue, he shall issue another decal and shall change the registration of the bicycle accordingly. The commissioner shall cause notification of the change to be delivered to the chief of police. 
(b)  The fee for the issuance of a replacement decal under this section shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code, which fee shall be paid prior to issuance of the decal. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-4, 5-5; Code 1988, § 5-33)  
Sec. 5-34. - Fee for transfer of registration. 
When the registration of a bicycle is changed from one person to another there shall be paid a fee as set out in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 5-5; Code 1988, § 5-34)  
Sec. 5-35. - Suspension or revocation of card and decal. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall have the right to suspend or revoke a registration card and decal issued under this article, at his discretion, upon the submission of satisfactory evidence of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by the person to whom the same were issued, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard has been given such person. Any person whose card and decal are so suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to the general district court of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 5-8; Code 1988, § 5-35)  
Sec. 5-36. - Return of card upon sale or transfer of ownership of bicycle. 
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the commissioner of the revenue the registration card issued to such person, together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred. Such report shall be made within seven days of the date of the sale or transfer. The commissioner shall cause a copy of the report to be delivered to the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 5-9; Code 1988, § 5-36)  
Sec. 5-37. - Records to be kept. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall keep a complete report of all bicycles registered pursuant to this article, showing the name and address of the owner thereof, the make, class and frame number of the bicycle, the number of the decal issued therefor and such other information as the commissioner may prescribe. 
(Code 1973, § 5-3; Code 1988, § 5-37)  
Sec. 5-38. - Impoundment of unregistered bicycles. 
(a)  When any police officer or other officer charged with the duty of enforcing the ordinances of the city discovers any unregistered bicycle in any public place in the possession or control of any person, he may take custody of the bicycle and impound the same. Any bicycle impounded shall be released only upon a satisfactory showing of ownership, payment of the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code for storage charge and proper registration and display of registration decal by the owner or his agent. 
(b)  Any person under 18 years of age whose bicycle is taken into custody pursuant to this section shall be escorted forthwith to his place of residence or other appropriate place. 
(c)  The officer shall inform the person from whose possession or control the bicycle was removed, of the provisions of this section upon his taking the bicycle into custody, and he shall mail or hand deliver a notice containing the provisions of this section to such person. In the case of persons under 18 years of age, such notice shall be mailed or hand delivered to the parents or guardians of such person. 
(d)  If any bicycle impounded under this section not reclaimed within 30 days from the date of impounding, the chief of police shall cause the bicycle to be sold and the funds therefrom shall be paid over to the city treasurer, and shall be used for the purpose of defraying the cost and expenses incident to the registration of bicycles and carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 5-12.1; Code 1988, § 5-38) 
Cross reference— General provisions as to disposition of unclaimed property in custody of police, § 27-51 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for sale of unclaimed bicycles, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719.  
Secs. 5-39—5-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION AND EQUIPMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Riding bicycle on Elizabeth River seawall or adjacent areas, § 6-5; application of traffic regulations to persons riding bicycles, § 22-6. 
 
Sec. 5-61. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1988, § 5-61; Ord. No. 1992-59, § 1, 6-23-1992) 
State Law reference— Penalty for traffic infractions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113.  
Sec. 5-62. - Compliance with traffic signals and directions of police. 
Every person riding a bicycle over any street shall comply with all traffic signs, signals and lights and with all directions given by any member of the police department. 
(Code 1973, § 5-24; Code 1988, § 5-62)  
Sec. 5-63. - Consent of owner prerequisite to operation. 
No person shall operate any bicycle upon any street without the consent of the owner of the bicycle. 
(Code 1973, § 5-32; Code 1988, § 5-63)  
Sec. 5-64. - Stopping and turning signals. 
A person riding a bicycle shall signal his intention to stop, turn or change direction. Such signal, however, need not be given continuously if both hands are needed in the control or operation of the bicycle. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-25, 23-65; Code 1988, § 5-64)  
Sec. 5-65. - Rider not to attach himself or bicycles to vehicle on roadway. 
No person riding a bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-26, 23-336; Code 1988, § 5-65) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions applicable to persons riding mopeds, roller skates, etc., § 22-708(c). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932.  
Sec. 5-66. - Riding on sidewalks or crosswalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk or crosswalk in an area where signs indicate that such riding is prohibited. 
(b)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, where such use of bicycles is prohibited by official traffic-control devices. 
(c)  In locations where the riding of bicycles on sidewalks or crosswalks is not prohibited: 
(1)  A person riding a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian and shall ride in a single file. 
(2)  A person riding a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties of a pedestrian under the same circumstances. 
(d)  Violation of any provision of this section shall not be considered a traffic infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-27, 23-73; Code 1988, § 5-66; Ord. No. 1995-27, § 1, 3-28-1995; Ord. No. 2014-21, § 1, 3-25-2014 ) 
Cross reference— Riding bicycle on Elizabeth River seawall or adjacent areas, § 6-5. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-904.  
Sec. 5-67. - Coasting, trick riding. 
It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon a bicycle on any street to coast upon such bicycle by permitting it to proceed by inertia or momentum with his feet removed from the pedals, but the rider shall at all times keep his feet upon the pedals and a hold upon the handlebars, so as to have the same under proper control to avoid accidents. No rider of a bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars or practice any trick or fancy riding on any street, lane, alley or highway. 
(Code 1973, § 5-28; Code 1988, § 5-68)  
Sec. 5-68. - Passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon a one-seated bicycle to carry any additional person upon the same. 
(Code 1973, § 5-29; Code 1988, § 5-69)  
Sec. 5-69. - Reckless operation; speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle recklessly or at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper or so as to endanger the property and life or limb of the rider or of any other person. 
(Code 1973, § 5-30; Code 1988, § 5-70)  
Sec. 5-70. - Riding on busy thoroughfares. 
Upon all heavily traveled thoroughfares, it shall be the duty of all persons operating bicycles to keep close to the righthand curb and ride in single file. 
(Code 1973, § 5-31; Code 1988, § 5-71)  
Sec. 5-71. - Warning devices. 
Every bicycle shall be equipped with an ordinary bicycle bell or other warning device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use any siren or whistle upon a bicycle. 
(Code 1973, § 5-33; Code 1988, § 5-72)  
Sec. 5-72. - Brakes. 
Every bicycle shall be equipped with brakes sufficient for the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1973, §§ 5-34, 23-376; Code 1988, § 5-73) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1066.  
Sec. 5-73. - Lamps and reflectors. 
Every bicycle when in use between sunset and sunrise shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the superintendent of state police which shall be visible from all distances in clear weather from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible in clear weather from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in lieu of or in addition to the red reflector. 
(Code 1973, § 23-360; Code 1988, § 5-74) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1015.  
Chapter 6 - BOATS AND WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Litter receptacles required for marinas, piers, etc., § 16-7(b)(7); litter receptacles required for boat launching areas, § 16-7(b)(8); swimming in polluted water, § 24-9; damaging, tampering with, etc., boats, § 24-321. 
State Law reference— Waters of the state, ports and harbors, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Deposit of trash, logs, etc., in city waters or obstructing such waters. 
It shall be a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to throw or otherwise dispose of trash, debris, tree laps, logs or fell timber or make or cause to be made any obstruction which exists for more than a week in any river, creek, stream or swamp, so as to obstruct the free passage of boats, canoes or other floating vessels or fish in such waters. 
(Code 1973, § 23-507; Code 1988, § 6-1) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; unlawful disposal of trash generally, § 16-3 et seq.  
Sec. 6-2. - Removal or repair of hazardous or obstructing docks, piers or other structures or vessels. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager is of the opinion that any dock, wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel might endanger the public health or safety of persons, or might constitute a hazard or obstruction to the lawful use of the waters within or adjoining the city, he shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner of such structure or vessel or the land upon which the same is situated, directing the owner to remove, repair or secure such property within the time specified in such notice. Any owner who fails to remove, repair or secure such property within the time specified in the notice shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If the owner fails to remove, repair or secure such dock, wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel within the time specified in the notice given pursuant to this section, the city manager may remove, repair or secure such property at the expense of the owner, and the expense shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property. Such expense shall be a lien upon such property or upon any parcel of land of which it is a part or to which it is affixed or from which it was removed, until paid, and shall be reported by the city manager to the city treasurer, who shall collect the same in the manner in which city taxes levied upon the real estate are authorized to be collected. Such lien shall be recorded in the judgment lien docket book in the circuit court of the city and may be reduced to a personal judgment against the owner. 
(c)  If the identity or whereabouts of the lawful owner of such dock, wharf, pier, piling, bulkhead or other structure or vessel is unknown or cannot be ascertained, after a reasonable search and after lawful notice has been given to the last known address of any known owner, the city manager may remove, repair or secure such property after giving notice by publication once each week for two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where such property is located. 
(Code 1973, § 23-507.1; Code 1988, § 6-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-909.  
Sec. 6-3. - Sinking or abandoning vessels, barges, etc., prohibited. 
It shall be a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to voluntarily sink or abandon, or permit or cause to be sunk or abandoned, any vessel, barge, scow or other craft in the waters in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 23-507; Code 1988, § 6-3) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 6-4. - Marking and removal of wrecked or sunken vessels, barges, etc. 
Whenever any vessel, barge, scow or other craft is wrecked or sunk in any of the waters in the city, accidentally or otherwise, the owner of such craft shall immediately mark it with a buoy and a lighted lantern at night, and maintain such markers until such sunken craft has been removed. It shall be the responsibility of such person to immediately remove the same and to prosecute such removal with diligence. The neglect or failure of the owner to so mark and remove the craft shall be a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day such craft or object remains abandoned and unmarked shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 23-507; Code 1988, § 6-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 6-5. - Use of or riding of roller skates, skateboards, or other similar devices on the seawall along the Elizabeth River or adjacent areas. 
(a)  No person shall use or ride on the seawall along the Elizabeth River or the areas adjacent to the seawall designated as the Portside Festival site any skateboards, toys or similar related devices on wheels or runners. This provision shall not be applicable to the use of wheelchairs for transportation of handicapped persons or the use of baby carriages, strollers or related modes of transportation for infants, who are accompanied by a parent or guardian. The use of roller skates shall be permitted only in areas so designated by markings provided by the city's traffic engineering department for that specific use or activity. 
(b)  The use or riding of bicycles in those areas designated in subsection (a) of this section shall be permitted except where signs indicate that such use or riding is prohibited. 
(c)  Violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00. 
(Code 1973, § 5-27; Code 1988, § 6-5; Ord. No. 1991-49, § 1, 5-28-1991; Ord. No. 1995-29, § 1, 3-28-1995; Ord. No. 2014-21, § 2, 3-25-2014 )  
Sec. 6-6. - Swimming, fishing or crabbing from bridge or seawall. 
It shall be a class 4 misdemeanor for any person to swim, fish or crab from or on any bridge or the seawall. 
(Code 1973, § 21-172; Code 1988, § 6-6) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 6-7. - City piers, wharves, docks, landings, etc.; regulation. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  High Street Inlet means that body of water located at the eastern end of High Street. 
(2)  North Harbor means that body of water adjacent to the Elizabeth River and bordered by Harbor Court, Bill Deal Street, and the Renaissance Hotel. 
(3)  Portsmouth Seawall means that publicly-owned wall and walkway beginning at the northeast corner of the South Inlet and the Southern Branch of the Elizabeth River and running north to the end of the structure approximately 2,880 feet along the west side of the Southern Branch of the Elizabeth River. 
(b)  The following rules and regulations are established for vessels in the North Harbor and the High Street Inlet and along the Portsmouth Seawall: 
(1)  No boater less than 18 years of age shall moor a vessel in the North Harbor or the High Street Inlet. 
(2)  The mooring of recreational vessels in the Elizabeth River along the Portsmouth Seawall is prohibited. 
(3)  Vessels shall tie up or moor only to the docks, not to other vessels. "Rafting up" is not permitted. 
(4)  The anchoring of vessels is not permitted in the North Harbor or the High Street Inlet unless the vessel is also tied up to the dock. 
(5)  Except for ferry vessels being utilized for the operation of the HRT public ferry service, no vessel shall be tied up or moored in the North Harbor or the High Street Inlet for more than 36 continuous hours or a total of 72 hours within any 30-day period. 
(6)  Except for ferry vessels being utilized for the operation of the HRT public ferry service, the mooring of vessels shall be on a first come, first serve basis, and no spaces shall be "held" or reserved for vessels not actually present. 
(7)  Except for ferry vessels being utilized for the operation of the HRT public ferry service, moored vessels shall not exceed 40 feet in length. The portion of the High Street Inlet adjacent to the flagpole shall be utilized only by vessels 35-40 feet in length. 
(8)  The discharge or pumping out of sanitary facilities into the North Harbor or the High Street Inlet is strictly prohibited. 
(c)  The city manager or his/her designee shall establish such additional rules and regulations as he or she shall deem necessary for the safe, sanitary, orderly, and efficient operation of city-owned or city-operated piers, wharves, docks, landings, and other similar water-related or water-dependent facilities. 
(d)  Any vessel operated, anchored, or moored in violation of subsection (b) or (c) above may be removed from such city facility at the direction of the city manager or his/her designee. The owner of any vessel so removed shall pay all removal and storage costs for the vessel prior to its return. 
(e)  Municipal pools shall be regulated under the provisions of Chapter 25 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2012-34, § 1, 6-11-2013 ; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, 3-24-2015 ; Ord. No. 2020-13 , § 1, 2-25-2020)  
Secs. 6-8—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION OF PLEASURE BOATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Boat registration and identification, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-700 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Penalty for violations of article. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Code 1973, § 23-516; Code 1988, § 6-31)  
Sec. 6-32. - License fee imposed. 
For each year beginning with January 1 and ending December 31 following, there is hereby imposed and there shall be collected from every person owning a pleasure boat or watercraft used for recreational purposes only, which pleasure boat or watercraft is normally docked, stored or kept within the city limits or any waters within the territorial limits of the city, a license fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code for each such boat or watercraft. 
(Code 1973, § 23-516; Code 1988, § 6-32; Ord. No. 1991-47, § 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 6-33. - When license fee assessed and collected; penalty for late payment. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall begin to assess and the city treasurer shall collect the license fee imposed by this article beginning January first of each year. If the fee is not paid by June 5th of any year there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten percent or $10.00, whichever is greater, to be assessed and paid as a part thereof. No penalty shall exceed the amount of the unpaid license fee. Interest shall accrue at a rate of ten percent per annum on the first day following the due date and each month thereafter until paid in full. 
(Code 1973, § 23-516; Code 1988, § 6-33; Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005; Ord. No. 2005-30, § 1, 4-25-2006)  
Secs. 6-34—6-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOATING, SKIING, ETC., REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Boating safety, Code of Virginia, §§ 29.1-734—29.1-746; authority of city to adopt ordinances paralleling state law on boating safety, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-744. 
 
Sec. 6-61. - Violations of article—Penalty. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-514; Code 1988, § 6-61) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state laws similar to this article, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-746.  
Sec. 6-62. - Same—Arrest procedure. 
(a)  When any violation of the provisions of this article is committed in the presence of any police officer while in the discharge of his duty, he shall take the name and address of the person violating this article and shall issue a summons or otherwise notify such person, in writing, to appear before a judge of the general district court of the city, at a time to be specified in such summons or notice, for a hearing on such violation. Upon the serving of such summons or giving of such notice, the person charged with such violation shall give his written promise to appear at the time and place designated. Any person refusing to give such written promise to appear shall be taken immediately by the arresting officer or other police officer before the nearest and most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail having jurisdiction under this article. 
(b)  Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear given in accordance with this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, regardless of, and in addition to, the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested, summoned or notified to appear. 
(Code 1973, § 23-515; Code 1988, § 6-62) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 6-63. - Regattas, races, etc. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prohibit regattas, boat races, marina parades, tournaments or exhibitions which are approved, publicly announced, properly supervised and adequately patrolled. Written approval for such events from the city manager, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the state board of game and inland fisheries or from such board or an authorized agency of the United States, shall be deemed sufficient evidence of approval. 
(Code 1973, § 23-504; Code 1988, § 6-63) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-743.  
Sec. 6-64. - Musing device for motorboats; use of cutouts. 
The exhaust of every internal combustion engine used on any motorboat on waters within the city shall be effectively muffled by equipment so constructed and used as to muffle the noise of the exhaust in a reasonable manner. The muffling device shall exhaust at or below the water line or it shall be equipped with mechanical baffles. The use of cutouts is prohibited, except for motorboats competing in a regatta or boat race approved as provided in section 6-63 and for such motorboats while on trial runs, during a period not to exceed 48 hours immediately preceding such regatta or race and for such motorboats while competing in official trials for speed records during a period not to exceed 48 hours immediately following such regatta or race. The use of cutouts is prohibited, except as approved by the state or the U.S. Coast Guard. 
(Code 1973, § 23-500; Code 1988, § 6-64) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-737.  
Sec. 6-65. - Speed limits for motorboats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating any motorboat to pass under any bridge in the city at a speed in excess of five miles per hour. No motorboats shall be operated in any area designated as a "No Wake" area by the city manager at such speed as to create more than a minimum wake. 
(b)  No person shall be convicted of violating this section until appropriate signs indicating the speed limit of five miles per hour or "No Wake" have been posted so as to give notice of such restrictions. The city manager is hereby authorized to have posted such signs as may be required by this section. 
(Code 1973, § 23-508; Code 1988, § 6-65; Ord. No. 1998-22, § 1, 4-28-1998) 
State Law reference— Application and placement or removal of no-wake buoys, etc., Code of Virginia, § 29.1-744.  
Sec. 6-66. - Observer required in towing boat unless skier wears life preserver. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorboat on any waters in this city for towing a person on water skis, surfboard or other device, unless another person is in such motorboat, in addition to the operator, in a position to observe the progress of the person being towed, or unless the person being towed wears a life preserver. 
(Code 1973, § 23-501; Code 1988, § 6-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-742.  
Sec. 6-67. - Skiing prohibited during certain hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorboat on any waters in this city towing a person on water skis, surfboard or similar device between the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in water skiing or a similar activity on any of the waters in the city during these hours. 
(Code 1973, § 23-502; Code 1988, § 6-67) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-742.  
Sec. 6-68. - Exceptions from sections 6-66 and 6-67. 
The provisions of sections 6-66 and 6-67 shall not apply to a performer engaged in a professional exhibition or to a person engaged in an activity authorized by section 6-63. 
(Code 1973, § 23-502; Code 1988, § 6-68) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-742.  
Sec. 6-69. - Passing too close to capsized boats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any motorboat towing water skis, or a surfboard or similar device, or for the person being towed, to pass within 100 feet of any motorboat, sailboat or other watercraft which has capsized, unless such boat is effecting a rescue or rendering aid or assistance, or unless such boat is operated wholly within a marked channel and if such boat has reduced its speed to five miles per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 23-512; Code 1988, § 6-69)  
Sec. 6-70. - Passing too close to swimmers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motorboat or a motorboat towing water skis, a surfboard or similar device, or for the person being towed, to pass within 100 feet of any swimmer. For the purpose of this section, a fallen water skier or surfboarder shall be considered a swimmer. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person operating a motorboat while effecting a rescue or rendering aid or assistance, or to any motorboat operating wholly within a marked channel, if such boat has reduced its speed to five miles per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 23-510; Code 1988, § 6-70)  
Sec. 6-71. - Skiing near piers, shores, bulkheads, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a motorboat and towing a person on water skis, a surfboard or similar device, or for the person being towed, to pass within 50 feet of any pier, shoreline, bulkhead, bridge or anchored or drifting boat or vessel unless such motorboat is operated wholly within a marked channel or unless such person is "taking off" on water skis, surfboard or other similar device or "landing" from water skis, surfboard or other similar device from private property with the consent of the owner. 
(Code 1973, § 23-509; Code 1988, § 6-71)  
Sec. 6-72. - Motorboat following too close to skiers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any motorboat to follow any person on water skis or a surfboard or similar device closer than 100 feet. 
(Code 1973, § 23-511; Code 1988, § 6-72)  
Sec. 6-73. - Causing skis or person thereon to collide with object or person. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or manipulate any motorboat, tow rope or other device by which the direction or location of water skis, surfboards and similar devices may be affected or controlled in such a way as to cause the water skis, surfboards or similar devices, or any person thereon, to collide with any object or person. 
(Code 1973, § 23-503; Code 1988, § 6-73) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-742.  
Sec. 6-74. - Flags for skin and scuba divers. 
(a)  No person shall engage in skin diving or scuba diving from a boat in the waters of the city which are open to boating or assist in such diving, without displaying a diver's flag from a mast, buoy or other structure at the place of diving, and no person shall display such flag, except when diving operations are under way or in preparation or display a diver's flag in a location which will unreasonably obstruct vessels from making legitimate navigational use of the water. 
(b)  The diver's flag required by this section shall be square, not less than 12 inches on a side, and shall be of red background with a diagonal white stripe, of a width equal to one-fifth of the flag's height, running from the upper corner adjacent to the mast downward to the opposite outside corner. 
(c)  No operator of a vessel under way in the waters of the city shall permit such vessel to approach closer than 25 yards to any structure from which a diver's flag is then being displayed as required by this section. 
(Code 1988, § 6-74) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-734.1.  
Sec. 6-75. - Reckless operation of boat or manipulation of skis, etc. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorboat or other vessel, or manipulate any water skis, surfboard or similar device or engage in any spearfishing while skin diving or scuba diving, on any of the waters in the city in a reckless manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. 
(b)  Penalty for violation generally. A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Operating boat in an improper manner; penalty. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, upon the trial of any person charged with reckless boating where the degree of culpability is slight, the court, in its discretion, may find the accused not guilty of reckless boating but guilty of improper boating. Improper boating shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-505, 23-506; Code 1988, § 6-75; Ord. No. 1988-62, § 2, 6-28-1988; Ord. No. 1991-63, § 1, 6-25-1991) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-738.  
Sec. 6-76. - Operating boat while under influence of intoxicants or drugs. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motorboat or vessel on any of the waters of the city while under the influence of alcohol, any narcotic drug or other self-administered intoxicant or drug of whatsoever nature, or any combination of such alcohol, intoxicants or drugs, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 29.1-738 et seq. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-506; Code 1988, § 6-76; Ord. No. 1988-62, § 2, 6-28-1988) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-738.  
Sec. 6-77. - Creation of loud, unreasonable, etc., noise by persons aboard boat. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, while aboard any motorboat, vessel, barge or any other watercraft, whether under way, drifting, berthed or at anchor, to make or create any loud, disturbing or unreasonable noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the health or life of any person or to unreasonably disturb or annoy the quiet, comfort or repose of any person. 
(Code 1973, § 23-513; Code 1988, § 6-77)  
Sec. 6-78. - Disregarding signal by law enforcement officer to stop. 
Any person who, having received a visible or audible signal of a flashing light or siren from any game warden or other law enforcement officer to bring his motorboat or other vessel to a stop, fails to do so promptly shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 6-78; Ord. No. 1993-48, § 1, 6-22-1993)  
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Erosion and sediment control, excavations, ch. 11; fire prevention and protection generally, ch. 13; fire suppression systems required for certain buildings, § 13-1; smoke detectors for buildings, § 13-131 et seq.; flood protection, ch. 14.1; litter receptacles required for construction sites, § 16-7(b)(6); control of trash, debris, etc., at construction sites, § 16-8; construction debris not to be collected by city, § 16-39; housing and community development, ch. 17; minimum standards for nonresidential structures, § 17-101 et seq.; vacant buildings, § 17-131 et seq.; purchase of secondhand building material, § 18-76 et seq.; license tax on contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, § 20-14; license tax on rental of residential property, § 20-68; mobile homes, ch. 21; prohibition against construction activities at night in residential districts, § 24-255(b)(11); security alarms, ch. 31; streets and sidewalks and local improvements, ch. 32; establishment and verification of street lines upon erection of structure, § 32-4; sidewalk barriers required for certain repair work on buildings, § 32-15; maintenance of cellar doors or vaults in sidewalks, § 32-16; building setback lines, § 32-91 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 33.1; swimming pools, ch. 34; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 38; wetlands, ch. 39; zoning, ch. 40.1. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to building regulations, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-117, 36-105—36-105.3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter, including any provision of the building code adopted by section 7-96, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any owner or any other person, firm, or corporation convicted of such a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. In addition, each day the violation continues after conviction has expired shall constitute a separate offense. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a second offense committed with a period of five to ten years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten days and a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $5,000.00, either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(Code 1988, § 7-1; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 4-8-2003) 
State Law reference— Penalty for building code violations, Code of Virginia, § 36-106.  
Sec. 7-2. - Contractor's registration and bond. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every building, electrical, mechanical or plumbing contractor who makes contracts for work for which a permit is required, and every contractor or subcontractor making such contracts and subletting the same or any part thereof, to register, with the building official, giving his full name and the addresses of his residence and place of business. In case of a change in either such address, he shall have a corresponding change made in such register. It shall be the further duty of every such contractor or subcontractor not licensed by the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation to give good and sufficient bond, in the sum of $5,000.00, to be approved by the department of law of the city, payable to the city with surety conditioned to indemnify and save harmless the city as well as any other person from all expense and damage that may be caused by any negligent, defective or inadequate work done in the city under his certificate, license or direction and to secure the payment of all required fees and to secure and ensure his compliance with the regulations of the building official and the building code and other ordinances or laws of the city. 
(b)  When any work done by a contractor or subcontractor not licensed by the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation is deemed defective or inadequate by the inspector from the building inspection division of the department of permits and inspections and the contractor or subcontractor fails to revise or put such work in proper condition to the satisfaction of the inspector within ten days after written notification to do so sent to the address shown in the register provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the bond posted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be forfeited and the principal and surety thereon shall be and become liable for and shall pay so much on account of such bond as may be necessary in order to perfect such work and, in addition thereto, shall pay any and all damages which may be occasioned to any person by reason of such defective or inadequate work. 
(Code 1973, § 6-18; Code 1988, § 7-2; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2010-51, § 1, 6-22-2010) 
Cross reference— License tax on contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, § 20-14.  
Sec. 7-3. - Bond for moving contractors. 
It shall be the duty of the moving contractor engaged in moving buildings to give good and sufficient bond in the penal sum of $50,000.00, to be approved by the department of law, payable to the city with surety conditioned to indemnify and save harmless the city from all expense and damage that may be caused by any negligent, defective or inadequate work or any act done as a result of the moving of any building or structure and against any and all claims, actions or causes of action which may accrue as a result thereof, and to secure and ensure such moving contractor's compliance with the regulations of the building official and the building code and other ordinances or laws of the city. In addition to liability for any damages or indemnification to the city or to any person by reason of such negligence or defective or inadequate work, when any work done by a moving contractor is deemed defective or inadequate or to be not in compliance with the regulations of the building official or the building code or other ordinances or laws of the city, and the contractor shall fail to revise or put such work in proper condition or comply with any regulation, code, ordinance or law to the satisfaction of the building official within seven days after written notification to the contractor's address as provided by the contractor at the time of making application for a certificate of use and occupancy for the new location, the bond shall be forfeited, and the principal and surety on such bond shall be and become liable to the city or to any person for damages sustained, for the sum of $50,000.00. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-3)  
Sec. 7-4. - Numbering of buildings. 
(a)  All buildings within the limits of the city shall be numbered in accordance with a plan heretofore or hereafter adopted and established by the city council. The owner shall number every building using such number as may be designated by the building official. With each permit issued for the erection of the new building, the building official shall designate the number for the building. 
(b)  The building official may, from time to time, to eliminate confusion, change the numbers of buildings by giving written notice of such change to the owner or tenant, the post office and utility companies. The owner or tenant shall, within seven days of receipt of such notice, affix the new number and remove the old number. 
(Code 1973, § 6-10; Code 1988, § 7-4) 
State Law reference— Authority to require numbering of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-22024.  
Secs. 7-5—7-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 7-31. - Created; appointment, removal, etc., of building official. 
The department of permits and inspections is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official, who shall be appointed by the city manager. The building official shall not be removed from office except for cause, and after full opportunity has been granted him to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and before the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 6-7(a); Code 1988, § 7-31; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 4-8-2003)  
Sec. 7-32. - Division of building inspection. 
(a)  The building official shall have general supervision of the division of building inspections of the department of permits and inspections. The division of building inspection of the department of permits and inspections shall be immediately supervised by the assistant to the building official/plans examiner, who shall have such assistants as may, from time to time, be authorized by the city manager and appointed by the building official. 
(b)  The assistant to the building official/plans examiner shall have any combination equivalent to five years of experience in the field of building construction and including two years of experience as a building inspector. 
(c)  Each building inspector shall have at least four years' experience in the field of building construction. 
(Code 1973, § 6-7(e); Code 1988, § 7-32; Ord. No. 1990-41, § 3, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 4-8-2003)  
Secs. 7-33—7-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-96. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain code known as the "Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code," and the accumulative supplements thereto and the amendments thereto, save and except such portions as are hereinafter amended or deleted, as permitted in the enabling legislation, and building regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant thereto, and the same are hereby adopted and referred to herein as the building code of the city as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-1; Code 1988, § 7-96; Ord. No. 1988-19, § 1, 2-23-1988; Ord. No. 1994-54, § 1, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998) 
Cross reference— Volume II of Uniform Statewide Building Code adopted as city's housing code, § 17-22. 
State Law reference— Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.  
Sec. 7-97. - Reserved.  
Sec. 7-98. - Continuation of existing use and occupancy. 
The legal use and occupancy of any existing structure which have been heretofore approved, may be continued without change, except as may be specifically covered in the code adopted by this article or in the property maintenance section of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code or as may be deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
(Code 1973, § 6-6; Code 1988, § 7-98; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 4-8-2003) 
Cross reference— Housing code, § 17-21 et seq.  
Sec. 7-99. - Conflicts with other ordinances. 
In the event that there is any conflict between any provision of the building code adopted in this article and any other ordinance of this city, the more stringent provisions shall control. 
(Code 1973, § 6-4; Code 1988, § 7-99)  
Sec. 7-100. - Availability of copies. 
Copies of the building code adopted by this article may be obtained at the state department of housing and community development, Richmond, Virginia. 
(Code 1973, § 6-5; Code 1988, § 7-100)  
Sec. 7-101. - Inspections of work. 
The inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be performed by an inspector from the department of permits and inspections, or by a third party designated by the building official upon notification from the permit holder or such holder's agent. Such inspector shall either approve that portion of the work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his agent where such work fails to comply with the building code or departmental regulation. Additional inspections may be required by the inspector where, in the inspector's judgment, such inspections are necessary because of the scope or complexity of the work to be installed or performed. Except as provided in section 7-136, a reinspection fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be paid prior to each reinspection unless waived by the building official. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-101; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 4-8-2003) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 7-102. - Failure to obtain permit; inspection, certificate of occupancy, etc. 
If any person commences any work on a building or structure or any of the component parts thereof, including but not limited to electrical, plumbing and mechanical features or fixtures, or signs, before obtaining the necessary permit from the department of permits and inspections; or after obtaining such permit executes the work without calling for and receiving inspections from the appropriate division of the department of permits and inspections; or after obtaining such permit, deviates from the plan approved by such department without receiving written approval from the building official; or allows the occupancy of the building or structure for which the permit was obtained before a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official; then such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty prescribed by section 7-1. In addition to any criminal penalties and sanctions, where the unlawful acts described above have been identified before a permit is obtained, an administrative fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be paid by such person to the city, as well as the permit fee due. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-9102; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 4-8-2003) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 7-103. - Fee for certificate of occupancy and commercial reinspection. 
(a)  The fee for a certificate of occupancy required by the building code for an existing structure shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. When a certificate of occupancy is issued pursuant to the satisfactory completion of final inspections pursuant to a building permit issued, no fee shall be required for the certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy issued by the building official before the completion of the work covered by a permit shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  The fee for the first renewal of a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. No fee shall be charged for subsequent renewals. 
(d)  Before a commercial property is occupied by a new tenant or owner, or by the same tenant or owner, if the property undergoes a change of occupancy as defined by the building code and a building permit is not required, or is vacant for a period of 90 days or more a commercial reinspection including plumbing, mechanical, electrical and building inspections shall be required. The fee for a commercial reinspection shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7-103; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1990-41, § 3, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 2015-24, § 1, 5-12-2015 ) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 7-104. - Fees for review of construction plans. 
In addition to the permit fees prescribed in this article, there shall be a fee for the review of construction plans for all matters for which permits are mandated by the building code, including, but not limited to, building permits, electrical permits, plumbing permits and mechanical permits, in accord with the fee schedule set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following categories: 
(1)  New construction and additions to one-family and two-family buildings: 
a.  Under 2,000 square feet. 
b.  Over 2,000 square feet. 
(2)  All other structures: 
a.  Zero to 2,499 square feet. 
b.  Two thousand five hundred square feet to 4,999 square feet. 
c.  Five thousand square feet to 9,999 square feet. 
d.  Ten thousand square feet to 74,999 square feet. 
e.  Seventy-five thousand and up. 
(3)  Existing structures when altered or enlarged. 
A fee for the review of construction plans may be waived at the discretion of the building official for minor residential projects where the permit fee is less than $100.00. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-104; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2015-24, § 2, 5-12-2015 ) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 7-105. - Appeal fee. 
A fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code for each appeal of a decision of a building and/or code official shall be paid by the appellant to the city at the time application for the appeal is made. 
(Code 1988, § 7-105; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2015-24, § 3, 5-12-2015 ) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 7-105.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-24, § 4, adopted May 12, 2015 , deleted § 7-105.1, which pertained to administrative fee and derived from Code 1988, § 7-105.1; Ord. No. 1990-41, § 3, adopted May 15, 1990; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, adopted Apr. 28, 1998; and Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, adopted Apr. 8, 2003.  
Sec. 7-106. - Fire limits designated. 
The fire limits of the city shall comprise the areas containing congested business, commercial, manufacturing and industrial uses or in which such uses are developing. The limits of such areas are described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Queen Street (projected) with the pierhead line in the southern branch of the Elizabeth River as established by the U.S. Army Engineers; thence southerly along said pierhead line as it meanders along the southern branch of the Elizabeth River to its intersection with the centerline of Henry Street (projected); thence westerly along said centerline to the centerline of First Street; thence northerly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Crawford Street; thence northerly along said centerline to the centerline of County Street; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of property belonging to the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad; thence southeast along said railroad property 275 feet to a point; thence southerly along the west property line of the Ida Barbour Public Housing Project to the north right-of-way of Clifford Street; thence west along said right-of-way 150 feet + and thence running west along the north boundary of the Swanson Homes Public Housing Project 800 feet +; thence south 300 feet +; thence southwest 115 feet +; thence west 370 feet + along the rear property line of properties fronting Rose Avenue; thence southerly to the south right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 264; thence westerly along said right-of-way to its intersection with the centerline of property belonging to Norfolk and Portsmouth Belt Line Railroad; thence north along said railroad property to its intersection with the centerline of High Street; thence east along said centerline to the centerline of the Martin Luther King Expressway; thence north along said centerline for 106 feet; thence east along said line to its intersection with the centerline of Jamestown Avenue; thence northerly along centerline to the centerline of Queen Street; thence east along said centerline to its intersection (projected) with the pierhead line on the southern branch of the Elizabeth River, the point of origin. 
(Code 1973, § 6-9; Code 1988, § 7-106)  
Sec. 7-107. - Compliance with other regulations. 
Before a building permit may be issued for the construction of any new building, or the addition to an existing building, plans must be approved for compliance with the following ordinances or parts thereof of the city Code: 
Chapter 40—Zoning Ordinance; 
Chapter 9.1—Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District; 
Chapter 36, Article III—Tree Planting and Replacement; 
Chapter 39—Wetlands; 
and where necessary Sections 105.10 and 121.0 of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7-107; Ord. No. 1992-65, § 8, 7-28-1992)  
Secs. 7-108—7-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14. 
 
Sec. 7-131. - Application of division. 
This division shall apply to the fees for permits and inspections required by the building code. 
(1)  The minimum fee for any permit shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  Additional inspections may be required by the inspector, where, in the inspector's judgment, such inspections are necessary. Each reinspection shall require a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code to be paid prior to said reinspection. 
(Code 1988, § 7-131; Ord. No. 1990-41, § 3, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2015-24, § 5, 5-12-2015 )  
Sec. 7-132. - Schedules—Building permits. 
The fees for building (general construction) permits shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following categories: 
(1)  All Commercial Buildings: 
a.  For 100 square feet up to and including 999 square feet, a fee per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 
b.  For 1,000 square feet up to and including 4,999 square feet, a fee for the first 1,000 square feet plus an additional amount per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 
c.  For 5,000 square feet or more, a fee for the first 5,000 square feet plus and additional amount per 100 square feet or fraction thereof without limit. 
(2)  Use Group O—Residential Garages, Porches, Decks and Similar Accessory Residential Buildings: 
a.  For up to and including 999 square feet, a fee per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 
b.  For 1,000 square feet or more, a fee for the first 1,000 square feet and an additional amount per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Residential Use Group R5—Single-Family Residence, Duplex, or Townhome: 
a.  For up to and including 1,999 square feet, a fee per 100 square feet, or fraction thereof. 
b.  From 2,000 square feet up to and including 4,999 square feet, a fee for the first 2,000 square feet plus an additional amount per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 
c.  For 5,000 square feet or more, a fee for the first 5,000 square feet, plus an additional amount per 100 square feet or fraction thereof, without limit. 
(4)  Use Group T— 
a.  Alterations, repairs, private piers, wharves, bulkheads, pools, walls, bay windows, dormers, roofing, siding, commercial interior finish, miscellaneous structures: 
1.  Minimum fee. 
2.  For a valuation up to $4,999.00 a fee per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
3.  For a valuation from $5,000.00, up to and including $19,999.00 a fee for the first $5,000.00 plus an additional amount for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
4.  For a valuation from $20,000.00 up to and including $99,999.00, a fee for the first $20,000.00 plus an additional amount for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
5.  For a valuation of over $100,000.00, a fee for the first $100,000.00 plus an additional amount for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, without limit. 
b.  Tents, mobile homes and other temporary structures: 
1.  For tents and other temporary structures, each. 
2.  For the new placement of mobile homes on a site including the tie-down and foundation. 
3.  For the replacement of mobile homes on a site including the tie-down and foundation. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-132; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1990-41, § 3, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2015-24, § 6, 5-12-2015 )  
Sec. 7-133. - Same—Electrical permits and inspections. 
(a)  The fees for electrical permits shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following categories: 
(1)  Minimum permit fee. 
(2)  a.  Temporary service, 60 amperes. 
b.  Temporary service, 100 amperes. 
c.  Temporary service for construction regardless of amperage. 
(3)  a.  Fees for new services whether single- or three-phase include all circuits, motors, generators and other derivations of an electrical system. Single-phase per 50 amperes. 
b.  Three-phase service per 50 amperes for first 1,000 amperes and an additional amount per 50 amperes for remaining amperes after 1,000. 
(4)  a.  Changes of service: For single-phase service. Fees for changes of service (pay for change of service and any additional circuits added or worked on) per 50 amperes for single-phase. For circuit fee, see additions or repairs schedule below. 
b.  Changes of service: For three-phase service. Fees for changes of service per 50 amperes for the first 1,000 amperes and an additional amount per 50 amperes for the remaining amperes after 1,000. 
(5)  Additions or repairs: For each piece of equipment connected and for each circuit or feeder installed, extended, relocated or repaired the fee shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(6)  Miscellaneous: 
Pool inspection. 
Pool grounding. 
Inspection for temporary release. 
Mobile homes or trailers, see addition or repair schedule and services. 
(b)  The fees referred to in this section shall be charged based upon amperage for each piece of electrical apparatus inspected and not on the aggregate number of amperes. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-133; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1990-41, § 3, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1992-65, § 9, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2015-24, § 7, 5-12-2015 )  
Sec. 7-134. - Same—Plumbing permits and inspections. 
(a)  For each plumbing permit issued, the permit fee shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  In addition to the permit fee required in subsection (a) of this section, there shall be inspection fees as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following: 
(1)  For each plumbing fixture or trap placed or replaced, or removed from one place to another, and for each place roughed-in for a fixture. 
(2)  For each house sewer. 
(3)  For renewal or replacement of existing house sewer. 
(4)  For each house water service. 
(5)  For renewal or replacement of existing house water service. 
(6)  For each water heater. 
(7)  For replacement of water heaters. 
(8)  For roof drains or internal rain leaders. 
(9)  A per trip fee will be charged for site work inspections. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-134; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1992-65, § 10, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998)  
Sec. 7-135. - Same—Mechanical permits and inspections. 
(a)  For the installation in new construction of mechanical systems or equipment, storage tanks for flammable liquids or gases, and fire suppression systems, the permit fee shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  For the replacement, repair or alteration of mechanical systems or equipment, storage tanks for flammable liquids or gases, or fire suppression systems, in existing buildings or structures, or the removal of storage tanks, the fee shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  For the installation of one kitchen hood vent and not more than three bathroom vents in a single-family dwelling, the fee shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(d)  For the installation of standpipes, the fee shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for each riser, plus an additional amount for each floor served by that riser. 
(e)  For amusement ride permits and inspections, the fees shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code and the categories of fees shall be construed with general reference to the Virginia Amusement Device Regulations. All fees shall be reduced by 75 percent if the applicant provides an approved certified third party inspector for the amusement devices. These fees shall be collected for each ride inspected. For all other structures at carnivals the permit fee shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code per structure with inspection required. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-135; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1992-65, § 11, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2015-24, § 8, 5-12-2015 ; Ord. No. 2017-33 , § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 7-136. - Same—Elevator permits and inspections. 
For periodic inspections made on elevators, dumbwaiters, moving stairs, moving walks and manlifts in accordance with the building code, a processing fee and the following inspection fees as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall apply unless otherwise provided: 
(1)  Six-month inspection. 
(2)  Annual hydraulic inspection. 
(3)  Annual traction inspection. 
(4)  Three-year inspection. 
(5)  Five-year inspection. 
(6)  Acceptance test for new construction. 
(7)  Reinspection (no additional processing fee). 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-136; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1990-41, § 3, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 2003-21, § 2, 4-8-2003)  
Sec. 7-137. - Same—Moving permits. 
(a)  The fee for a permit to move a building shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following: 
(1)  From without the city to a site within the city. 
(2)  From within the city to a site out of the city. 
(3)  From one location to another within the city. 
(4)  Through the city. 
(5)  Moving on the same parcel within the city. 
(b)  An additional fee shall be paid pursuant to section 7-138(b). 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-137; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995)  
Sec. 7-138. - Same—Demolition permits and inspections. 
(a)  The fee for demolition permits for single-family structures and for any other structure shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  The person obtaining a demolition or moving permit shall be responsible for watertight sealing of the building or structure's sanitary sewer lateral at the curb, at the edge of the street pavement if there is no curb, or at the point of connection to the city installed portion of the sanitary sewer lateral. Such seal shall be constructed with a flexible, expandable synthetic or natural rubber sewer plug specifically designed for such purpose and backed with 3,000 psi (minimum) compression strength concrete in accordance with the department of public utilities standards. A fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be paid for the inspection of the seal by the city. The responsibility for safeguarding the excavation made for sealing the lateral until inspection and for adequately backfilling, compacting and restoring such excavation after inspection and acceptance shall be borne by the demolition permit holder. The person obtaining a demolition permit may elect to have the city seal the building or structure's sanitary sewer lateral at a cost as set forth in appendix A to this Code, subject to the availability of city personnel. If such election is made, and if city personnel are available to seal the lateral and the cost fee is paid, the sanitary lateral sealing inspection fee will be waived. 
(c)  The person obtaining a demolition permit shall comply with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-138; Ord. No. 1990-41, § 3, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1992-65, § 12, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1998-23, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1, 5-14-2002)  
Sec. 7-139. - Same—Sign permits. 
(a)  Permit fees for the erection, painting, placing, replacing, hanging and rehanging of signs not otherwise specified in this division shall be based on the area of the sign and shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following categories: 
(1)  Under 100 square feet. 
(2)  100 to 299 square feet. 
(3)  300 square feet and over. 
(b)  The permit fee for repainting a duly authorized sign in place when the sign will not be changed shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  The fee for the permit for the repair of each billboard shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(d)  Application fees for a certificate of compliance, or a use permit, shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-139; Ord. No. 1988-50, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1992-65, § 13, 7-28-1992)  
Sec. 7-140. - Payment. 
The fees for all permits shall be paid at the time the permit is issued. No permit shall be valid unless all prescribed fees are paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fees, if any, are paid to the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-141)  
Sec. 7-141. - Refunds. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, shall apply to any refund of permit fees. 
(b)  There will be no refunds of permit fees of $100.00 or less. All refunds will be subject to a processing fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code and must be approved by the building official. When the permit holder requests a refund in writing from the building official stating the reason for the request, the table below indicates the percentage of refund permissible in each situation. 
Inspection Completed 	Percentage of 
Refund 
Building: 	
 Permit issued, no inspection 	75 
 Foundation inspection 	50 
 Framing and foundation 	25 
Electrical: 	
 Permit issued, no inspection 	75 
 Rough-in 	35 
Plumbing: 	
 Permit issued, no inspection 	75 
 Rough-in 	35 
Mechanical: 	
 Permit issued, no inspection 	75 
 Rough-in 	35 
 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 7-142; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 1, 4-25-1995)  
Sec. 7-142. - State levy fee. 
In addition to the fees cited within this division, the amount as specified in the Virginia Statewide Building Code, designated as a fee to be levied by localities to be used to support the training program of the Virginia Building Code Academy, shall be collected at the time of payment for fees required under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 7-143; Ord. No. 1995-40, § 2, 4-25-1995)  
Sec. 7-143. - Rental inspection fees. 
The per unit fees as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall apply to residential rental dwelling unit inspections for the following: 
(1)  Initial inspection. 
(2)  Follow-up inspection (first). 
(3)  Second and subsequent follow-up inspection. 
(4)  Periodic inspection. 
(Code 1988, § 11.1-4; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 3, 6-28-2005)  
Chapter 9 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cemeteries generally, Code of Virginia, § 57-22 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Establishment or enlargement prohibited. 
(a)  No cemetery shall be established or enlarged in the city except as otherwise permitted by city council through a rezoning of the subject property to a Preservation P-1 zoning district. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 7-1; Code 1988, § 9-1; Ord. No. 2009-31, § 1-, 4-14-2009) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 9-2. - Permissible places of burial. 
(a)  No person shall bury or cause to be buried, without permission of the director of public health, the remains of any person in any private lot or at any other place within the city except in Cedar Grove Cemetery, Oak Grove Cemetery, Olive Branch Cemetery, Olive Branch Annex Cemetery, Lincoln Memorial Park, Saint Paul Cemetery, Evergreen Memorial Park, the cemeteries on Paradise Creek belonging to the congregations of Gomley Chesed Synagogue and Chevra Thilim Synagogue, and the cemetery belonging to Olive Branch Baptist Church and Oak Grove Baptist Church; provided, however, that the remains of no person shall be buried in the cemetery belonging to Olive Branch Baptist Church within 60 feet of the centerline of Airline Boulevard. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 7-2; Code 1988, § 9-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; retaining or exposing dead bodies, § 24-2.  
Sec. 9-3. - City cemetery fees and charges. 
(a)  The schedule of fees and charges is hereby established for opening and closing graves for ground burials in city cemeteries. The fees and charges for the following categories shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code: 
(1)  Adult graves: Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(2)  Adult graves: Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(3)  Adult graves: Sunday and state and federal holidays, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(4)  Child graves: Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., for a grave not exceeding a length of 48 inches, a width of 40 inches, and a depth of 48 inches. 
(5)  Child graves: Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., for a grave not exceeding a length of 48 inches, a width of 40 inches, and a depth of 48 inches. 
(6)  Child graves: Sunday and state and federal holidays, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., for a grave not exceeding a length of 48 inches, a width of 40 inches, and a depth of 48 inches. 
(7)  Cremation graves: Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(8)  Cremation graves: Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(9)  Cremation graves: Sunday and state and federal holidays, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(10)  Additional fee: For services where the funeral party is not present at the graveside by 4:00 p.m. 
(b)  The fees and charges for the above categories as set out in appendix A to this Code shall be paid before the work is performed and a receipt shall be issued therefore. 
(Code 1988, § 11.1-9; Ord. No. 2005-99, § 3, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 9-4. - Malicious mischief. 
(a)  If any person shall: 
(1)  Destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure placed within any cemetery, graveyard or other place of burial or any lot belonging to any memorial or monumental association within the city or any fence, railing, or other work for the protection or ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure aforesaid, or any cemetery lot within any cemetery; 
(2)  Destroy, remove, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub or plant within any cemetery or lot of any monumental or memorial association; 
(3)  Destroy, mutilate, injure or remove and carry away any flowers, wreaths, vases or other ornaments placed upon or around any grave, tomb, monument or lot in any cemetery, graveyard or other place of burial; or 
(4)  Obstruct proper ingress or egress to and from any cemetery or lot belonging to any memorial association; 
he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any work which is done by or under the supervision of the person in charge of a city cemetery, or by the authorities in charge of a private cemetery in the maintenance or improvement of any burial ground or cemetery under his or their management or control. 
(Code 1973, §§ 7-4, 21-119; Code 1988, § 9-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; authority of city manager to offer reward in cases involving damage to city property, § 2-167. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-127.  
Secs. 9-5—9-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY CEMETERIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide and operate cemeteries, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1111, 15.2-1121. 
 
Sec. 9-26. - Burial grounds, city cemeteries designated. 
(a)  The burial ground at Glasgow Street and Fort Lane shall be known as "Cedar Grove Cemetery." The burial ground at London Boulevard and Peninsula Avenue shall be known as "Oak Grove Cemetery." The burial grounds adjoining City Park and Clifford Street shall be known as "Olive Branch Cemetery," and "Olive Branch Annex Cemetery." The burial ground located on Pulaski Street in the Prentis Park neighborhood shall be known as the "Mount Calvary Cemetery Complex" and shall include Mount Calvary Cemetery, Fisher's Hill Cemetery, the Pauper's Field Cemetery, and Mount Olive Cemetery. 
(b)  Cedar Grove Cemetery, Oak Grove Cemetery, Olive Branch Cemetery and the Mount Calvary Cemetery Complex are hereby designated as city cemeteries. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "city cemeteries" shall mean only those cemeteries so designated in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 7-16; Code 1988, § 9-26; Ord. No. 1995-33, § 1, 4-11-1995; Ord. No. 2005-99, § 1, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2014-82, § 1, 9-23-2014 ; Ord. No. 2016-60 , § 1, 8-23-2016)  
Sec. 9-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-82, § 2, adopted Sept. 23, 2014 , repealed § 9-27, which pertained to application of article and derived from Code 1973, § 7-17; and Code 1988, § 9-27.  
Sec. 9-28. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 9-28) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 9-29. - Perpetual care of city cemeteries; cemetery trust fund. 
(a)  The city shall, in perpetuity, maintain in good order, free from weeds and undergrowth, the city cemetery grounds of Cedar Grove Cemetery, Oak Grove Cemetery, Olive Branch Cemetery, and the Mount Calvary Cemetery Complex. The city shall also maintain the monuments and stones of said city cemeteries in an upright position so long as the same continue intact. 
(b)  There is hereby established a cemetery trust fund having an initial nonexpendable corpus of $1,000,000.00. The amount of the nonexpendable corpus may be increased at any time. There shall also be added to the trust fund all sums from burial permit fees, donations, legacies, and other funds received from any other source for the care of city cemeteries. 
(c)  The nonexpendable portion of the cemetery trust fund shall be invested in securities authorized pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 26-40 for funds administered by fiduciaries. The income derived from such investment of these funds shall be paid as received into the treasury of the city. The investment income and any funds not included in the nonexpendable corpus of the trust shall be utilized solely for capital improvements to the city cemeteries. 
(d)  The city treasurer shall have custody of such funds and shall be responsible for the same under his official bond. The city treasurer and the chief financial officer shall keep separate records of such funds and the amount of income from such investments that has been paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1973, § 7-18; Code 1988, § 9-29; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2005-99, § 1, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2014-82, § 1, 9-23-2014 )  
Sec. 9-29.1. - Burial permit fee. 
A burial permit fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be paid for each adult burial in a city cemetery identified in section 9-26. No burial permit fee shall be charged for the burial of children in child graves having the dimensions established in section 9-3 or for the burial of individuals verified as indigent by the department of social services. A burial permit fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be paid for the burial of cremated remains. The person or entity responsible for the opening and closing of graves shall collect and remit the fee to the city treasurer no later than the 15th of the month following the burial. The city treasurer shall deposit funds so collected into the cemetery trust fund established pursuant to section 9-29. 
(Code 1988, § 9-29.1; Ord. No. 2005-99, § 2, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 9-30. - Record of sales of lots; transfer of ownership. 
The person in charge of a city cemetery shall keep suitable books and record therein the sale of all lots, half lots or spaces sold, with the date of sale, price received therefor, the number of the lot or designation of the half lot or space, and the name of the purchaser. In case of transfer of ownership, a proper entry shall be made thereof, and the lot, half lot or space again registered in the name of the new owner. Such person shall make a good faith effort to ensure, prior to interment, that the ownership of the cemetery lot is vested in the decedent's estate or that permission for the interment has been granted by the person holding such ownership. 
(Code 1973, § 7-22; Code 1988, § 9-31; Ord. No. 1991-64, § 1, 6-25-1991)  
Sec. 9-31. - Right to use lot; reverter for nonuse. 
The person to whom a receipt of purchase has been issued with reference to a lot, half lot, space or section in a city cemetery, or his assignee shall be entitled to the lot, half lot, space or section so paid for, as a burying place for himself or for any person who is a member of his family or one of his descendants or friends. When a lot, half lot or space shall remain without any interment therein for 50 years, and the purchaser or his assignee shall have died or relocated from the city, and no relative is known to reside in the city, the city council may give notice thereof once a week for four weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. If no relative of the purchaser or his assignees appears within 30 days from the last day of such publication, then the lot, half lot or space, as the case may be, shall revert to the city. Whether there is such reverter or not, the city council may, at any and all times, regulate the interments in the cemetery, or any part thereof, as may seem to it proper. 
(Code 1973, § 7-23; Code 1988, § 9-34; Ord. No. 1995-33, § 1, 4-11-1995)  
Sec. 9-32. - Devolution of rights upon death of lot owner. 
In case of death of the purchaser of any portion of a city cemetery, the purchaser's spouse shall be recognized as the owner thereof if they were living together at the time of the purchaser's death. At the death of the spouse, the heirs at law of the purchaser shall be so recognized. 
(Code 1973, § 7-24; Code 1988, § 9-35)  
Sec. 9-33. - Opening and closing hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to go onto or enter upon any portion of any city cemetery during the hours when the cemetery is designated as closed. Hours of opening and closing shall be designated by the city manager and posted therein for public information. 
(Code 1973, § 7-25; Code 1988, § 9-36; Ord. No. 1988-23, 3-8-1988)  
Sec. 9-34. - When burials may take place. 
Under ordinary circumstances, all burials in city cemeteries shall take place between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. The person in charge of the cemetery may, however, in an emergency or under extraordinary circumstances permit burials at other hours. Burials after 4:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays are prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 7-26; Code 1988, § 9-37)  
Sec. 9-35. - Proof of purchase upon opening of grave. 
The proof of purchase issued with reference to a lot, half lot, space or section in a city cemetery shall be exhibited to the person in charge of the cemetery when ordering a grave to be opened, should he deem it necessary to establish the authority of the person giving the order. 
(Code 1973, § 7-27; Code 1988, § 9-38; Ord. No. 1995-33, § 1, 4-11-1995)  
Sec. 9-36. - Second interments. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to prohibit or prevent, in a city cemetery, the opening of a grave in which a previous interment has been made for the purpose of making a second interment therein; provided that the same shall be done with the approval and consent of the owner of the section or grave and with the approval and in a manner satisfactory to the person in charge of the cemetery in which the same is proposed to be made. Any person aggrieved by the determination of any such person in charge may appeal to the city manager for redress, whose determination shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1973, § 7-28; Code 1988, § 9-39)  
Sec. 9-37. - Record of burials. 
The person in charge of a city cemetery shall keep a record of all burials made in the cemetery and he shall enter in a suitable book the name, age, residence of the person deceased, the dates of his birth and death, date of burial, and number of lot and number of space therein, or number of space in a single grave portion in which the deceased has been interred. Such entries shall be consecutively numbered, and an alphabetical index of the deceased persons' names shall be kept. 
(Code 1973, § 7-29; Code 1988, § 9-40; Ord. No. 1995-33, § 1, 4-11-1995)  
Sec. 9-38. - Charges for work performed. 
The fees and charges for worked performed in city cemeteries shall be as established in section 9-3 and as set out in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 7-30; Code 1988, § 9-41; Ord. No. 1991-42, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1995-57, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 2005-99, § 1, 11-22-2005) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14. 
State Law reference— Authority for above charges, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1121.  
Sec. 9-39. - Removal of dirt, rubbish upon completion of work. 
All dirt, bricks or rubbish used or accumulated in doing any work in a city cemetery shall be removed therefrom by the contractor under whose supervision the work was done immediately after the completion thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 7-32; Code 1988, § 9-43; Ord. No. 1995-33, § 1, 4-11-1995)  
Sec. 9-40. - Mausoleums. 
No mausoleum shall be erected in any city cemetery except upon a site fronting on a roadway of sufficient size to permit the handling of material and equipment and except in compliance with the following conditions and specifications: 
(1)  The exterior walls shall be of the best quality marble or granite, at least eight inches thick at the base, and no other materials or veneer construction shall be permitted. The joints shall be so formed and pointed that deterioration of mortar will not weaken the stability of the structure. 
(2)  The foundation shall be excavated to a depth of firm soil with a minimum of four feet under the main walls of the building, with footings at least eight inches thick of poured, well-mixed concrete. 
(3)  The floors shall be constructed of concrete or of stone laid on concrete slab. 
(4)  The roof shall be of the same kind of material as the outside walls, and shall be either a solid stone of sufficient size to cover the entire structure, or shall be a series of stones running the length of the building with no vertical joints, and overlapping one another at least six inches at the joints. The joints under the overlap shall be flushed with mastic setting compound or waterproof cement, pointed up solid to prevent leaks. 
(5)  All door and window frames shall be of bronze. All glass windows shall be covered with exterior protecting shatterproof glass. 
(6)  All ventilators shall be of bronze or aluminum alloy with fine bronze wire screen on the inside. 
(7)  All crypt shelves shall be of marble or stone and no prefabricated slabs or concrete shall be used. 
(8)  The steps shall be placed on an adequate foundation sufficient to prevent frost heaving or settling. 
(9)  A space at least five feet wide shall be left open between the walls and the edge of the lot or site. 
(Code 1973, § 7-33; Code 1988, § 9-44)  
Sec. 9-41. - Monuments. 
(a)  Not more than one monument may be erected in any lot in any city cemetery. Any stone that projects more than 24 inches above the grade of a lot shall be deemed to be a monument. 
(b)  In no city cemetery shall any monument be permitted in any lot or fractional part of any lot having a surface area of less than 128 square feet. 
(c)  In city cemeteries, all monuments shall be set in the center of the lot. 
(d)  Foundations for monuments must be of solid masonry, solid concrete or a concrete cap over concrete columns (to be installed in accordance with an administrative directive of the city manager) of a sufficient number to sustain the weight of the monument. All such foundations for monuments must be laid not less than four feet below the grade of the lot. 
(e)  The area of the top of all such foundations shall be at least equal to that of the base of the superstructure. 
(Code 1973, § 7-34; Code 1988, § 9-45)  
Sec. 9-42. - Gravestones. 
No gravestone in any city cemetery shall be less than four nor more than 12 inches thick, nor more than 24 inches in width, nor shall any such stone project more than six inches above the grade of the lot in which it is set, or be set so as to rest on the brickwork of the grave, nor shall more than one stone be permitted for any grave. Every such stone shall be set on a foundation of solid masonry or solid concrete or a concrete cap over concrete columns (to be installed in accordance with an administrative directive of the city manager) of a sufficient number to sustain the weight of the gravestone, and the area of the top surface of such foundation shall be at least equal to that of the base of the superstructure. All such foundations must be laid to a depth of not less than four feet. 
(Code 1973, § 7-35; Code 1988, § 9-46)  
Sec. 9-43. - Burial vaults. 
Every grave opening shall contain a burial container or vault, which burial container or vault shall be so constructed of metal, stone, or reinforced concrete, and so installed as to effectively prevent settling of the ground, lot or grave site. 
(Code 1973, § 7-35.1; Code 1988, § 9-47)  
Sec. 9-44. - Mounds. 
No grave in any city cemetery shall have its mound more than four inches above the grade level, after a reasonable time for settling of the dirt has elapsed. 
(Code 1973, § 7-36; Code 1988, § 9-48)  
Sec. 9-45. - Grade of lots. 
The grade of all lots in city cemeteries shall be established by the director of public works, and no change may be made in any grade so established. 
(Code 1973, § 7-37; Code 1988, § 9-49)  
Sec. 9-46. - Lot boundaries. 
The boundaries of all lots in city cemeteries shall be defined by means of corner posts. Such posts will be six inches square, and shall be set within lot lines at ground level. The number of each lot will be designated on one of such corner posts. 
(Code 1973, § 7-38; Code 1988, § 9-50)  
Sec. 9-47. - Enclosures around lots, graves. 
No enclosure, flower bed, hedge or border of any kind will be permitted around, or alongside of, any lot or grave in any city cemetery. 
(Code 1973, § 7-39; Code 1988, § 9-51)  
Sec. 9-48. - Decorations. 
No ornament or decoration other than cut or artificial flowers shall be placed on any grave in any city cemetery, except that on Decoration Day and Memorial Day, established by law, flags may be placed on graves, subject to the right of the keeper to remove the same after the expiration of five days. Floral designs may be used at burials in city cemeteries, but shall be removed from lots within ten days thereafter. 
(Code 1973, § 7-40; Code 1988, § 9-52)  
Sec. 9-49. - Signs, notices. 
No sign, notice or advertisement of any kind shall be permitted upon any part of the grounds of any city cemetery. The keeper shall cause the immediate removal of all such signs, notices or advertisements. 
(Code 1973, § 7-41; Code 1988, § 9-53)  
Sec. 9-50. - Seating accommodations in lots. 
No chair or other seating accommodation may be placed in any lot in any city cemetery. 
(Code 1973, § 7-42; Code 1988, § 9-54)  
Sec. 9-51. - Maximum speed limit. 
The maximum speed in any city cemetery shall be 15 miles an hour. 
(Code 1973, § 7-43; Code 1988, § 9-55) 
Cross reference— Speed limits generally, § 22-395.  
Sec. 9-52. - Riding or driving on lawn or walkway. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive on any lawn or walkway of any city cemetery. 
(Code 1973, § 7-44; Code 1988, § 9-56)  
Sec. 9-53. - Entering, exiting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or leave the grounds of any city cemetery except by way of the roads. 
(Code 1973, § 7-45; Code 1988, § 9-57)  
Sec. 9-54. - Hunting or fishing. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or fish within the grounds of any city cemetery. 
(Code 1973, § 7-46; Code 1988, § 9-58)  
Sec. 9-55. - Discharging fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any fireworks within the grounds of any city cemetery. 
(Code 1973, § 7-47; Code 1988, § 9-59) 
Cross reference— Fireworks generally, § 13-101 et seq.  
Sec. 9-56. - Dogs prohibited, except as provided herein. 
No person shall permit a dog to go into any city cemetery except: 
(1)  An individual who is on the cemetery property for the purpose of visiting a gravesite, attending a burial, or another similar purpose may be accompanied by a guide dog, service dog or other dog accorded special status under federal or state disability or accommodation laws or regulations; and 
(2)  The city manager or the city manager's designee may authorize the presence of specially trained dogs on the cemetery property for property maintenance activities conducted by or at the direction of the city, provided that all such activities shall be performed in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(Code 1973, § 7-48; Code 1988, § 9-60; Ord. No. 2016-87 , § 1, 10-25-2016) 
Cross reference— Dogs generally, § 4-31 et seq.  
Sec. 9-57. - Duty of person in charge as to violations of certain sections. 
Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the person in charge of any city cemetery, or any of his assistants, that any person is about to violate any of the provisions of sections 9-41 through 9-56, such person shall be by him warned against such violation and, if necessary, shall be notified of such threatened violation. In every case where any such violation has actually occurred, it shall be the duty of the keeper and his assistants to report the same at once. 
(Code 1973, § 7-49; Code 1988, § 9-61)  
Chapter 9.1 - CHESAPEAKE BAY PRESERVATION AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Boats and waterways, ch. 6; erosion and sediment control, excavation, ch. 11; flood protection, ch. 14; parks and recreation, ch. 25; streets, sidewalks and local improvements, ch. 32; subdivisions, ch. 33; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 38; wetlands, ch. 39; zoning, ch. 40. 
State Law reference— Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2100 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9.1-1. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries is one of the most important and productive estuarine systems in the world, providing economic and social benefits to the citizens of the City of Portsmouth and the Commonwealth of Virginia. The health of the Bay is vital to maintaining the city's economy and the welfare of its citizens. 
(b)  The Chesapeake Bay waters have been degraded significantly by many sources of pollution, including nonpoint source pollution from land uses and development. Existing high quality waters are worthy of protection from degradation to guard against further pollution. Certain lands that are proximate to shorelines have intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform. Other lands have severe development constraints from flooding, erosion, and soil limitations. With proper management, they offer significant ecological benefits by providing water quality maintenance and pollution control, as well as flood and shoreline erosion control. These lands together, designated by the city council as Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas (hereinafter "CBPAs"), need to be protected from destruction and damage in order to protect the quality of water in the Bay and consequently the quality of life in the City of Portsmouth and the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-1; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004)  
Sec. 9.1-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  This chapter is enacted to implement the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2100 et seq., the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act. The intent of the city council and the purpose of the overlay district is to: 
(1)  Protect existing high quality state waters; 
(2)  Restore all other state waters to a condition or quality that will permit all reasonable public uses and will support the propagation and growth of all aquatic life, including game fish, which might reasonably be expected to inhabit them; 
(3)  Safeguard the clean waters of the commonwealth from pollution; 
(4)  Prevent any increase in pollution; 
(5)  Reduce existing pollution; and 
(6)  Promote water resource conservation in order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the present and future citizens of the city. 
(7)  Control and regulate runoff at the source to protect against and minimize pollution and deposition of sediment in city wetlands and streams that are tributaries of the Chesapeake Bay. 
(b)  This district shall be in addition to and shall overlay all other zoning districts where they are applied so that any parcel of land lying in the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District shall also lie in one or more of the other zoning districts provided for by chapter 40, Zoning. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the review and approval procedures provided for in chapters 7, 11, 14, 33, 39 and 40 of this Code, and all other applicable ordinances shall be followed in reviewing and approving development, redevelopment, and uses also regulated by this chapter. 
(c)  This chapter is enacted under the authority of 9 VAC 10-20 et seq., the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations, and Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2100 et seq., Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act and Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2283. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-2; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 2009-88, § 1, 8-25-2009)  
Sec. 9.1-3. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms used in the overlay district have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words and terms not defined in this chapter but defined in the zoning ordinance as set out in chapter 40 shall be given the meanings set forth therein. 
Agricultural lands means those lands used for the planting and harvesting of crops or plant growth of any kind in the open; pasture; horticulture; dairying; floriculture; or raising of poultry and/or livestock. 
Best management practice or BMP means a practice, or a combination of practices that is determined by a state or designated area-wide planning agency to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing the amount of pollution generated by nonpoint sources to a level compatible with water quality goals. 
Buffer area means an area of natural or established vegetation managed to protect other components of a resources protection area and state waters from significant degradation due to land disturbances. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area or CBPA means any land designated by the city council pursuant to Part III of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations, 9 VAC 10-20-70 et seq., and Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2107. A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall consist of a resource protection area and a resource management area. 
Construction footprint means the area of all impervious surface including, but not limited to, buildings, roads and drives, parking areas, and sidewalks and all land disturbances on the site including access areas necessary for construction of such improvements. 
Development means the construction, or substantial alteration of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation, or utility facilities or structures. 
Diameter at breast height or DBH means the diameter of a tree measured outside the bark at a point 4.5 feet above ground. 
Dripline means a vertical projection to the ground surface from the furthest lateral extent of a tree's leaf canopy. 
Highly erodible soils means soils (excluding vegetation) with an erodibility index (EI) from sheet and rill erosion to or greater than eight. The erodibility index for any soil is defined as the product of the formula RKLS/T, where K is the soil susceptibility to water erosion in the surface layer; R is the rainfall and runoff; LS is the combined effects of slope length and steepness; and T is the soil loss tolerance. 
Highly permeable soils means soils with a given potential to transmit water through the soil profile. Highly permeable soils are identified as any soil having a permeability equal to or greater than six inches of water movement per hour in any part of the soil profile to a depth of 72 inches (permeability groups "rapid" and "very rapid") as found in the "National Soil Survey Handbook" of November 1996 in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to: roofs, buildings, streets, parking areas, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
Intensely developed area or IDA means a portion of a resource protection area and a resource management area designated by the where development is concentrated and little of the natural environment remains as provided for in subsection 9.1-4(b)(3). 
Land disturbance means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the state, including, but not limited to, clearing of vegetation, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land. Land change shall include, but not be limited to, any activity that causes, contributes to or results in the destruction, removal or covering of the vegetation upon such land including, but limited to, clearing dredging, filling, grading, or excavating. Land change shall not include minor activities such as home gardening, individual home landscaping, and home maintenance. 
Nonpoint source pollution means pollution consisting of constituents such as sediment, nutrients, and organic and toxic substances from diffuse sources, such as runoff from agriculture and urban land development and use. 
Nontidal wetlands means those wetlands other than tidal wetlands that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, in 33 CFR 328.3b. 
Noxious weeds means weeds that are difficult to control effectively, including, but not limited to, Johnson Grass, Kudzu, and multiflora rose. A complete list is contained in the Department of Conservation and Resources Division of Natural Heritage publication entitled Invasive Plant Species of Virginia. 
Plan of development means the process for site plan or subdivision plat review to ensure compliance with Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2109 and this chapter, prior to any clearing or grading of a site or the issuance of a building permit. 
Public road means a publicly owned road designed and constructed in accordance with water quality protection criteria at least as stringent as requirements applicable to the state department of transportation, including regulations promulgated pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq. (the Erosion and Sediment Control Law) and Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.1 et seq. (the Virginia Stormwater Management Act). This definition includes those roads where the Virginia Department of Transportation exercises direct supervision over the design or construction activities, or both, and cases where secondary roads are constructed or maintained in accordance with the standards of the city. 
Redevelopment means the process of developing land that is or has been previously developed. 
Resource management area or RMA means that component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area that is not classified as the resource protection area. An RMA includes land types that, if improperly used or developed, have the potential for causing significant water quality degradation or for diminishing the functional value of the resource protection area as provided for in subsection 9.1-4(b)(2). 
Resource protection area or RPA means that component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area comprised of lands adjacent to water bodies with perennial flow that have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or that are sensitive to impacts which may result in significant degradation to the quality of state waters as provided for in subsection 9.1-4(b)(1). 
State waters means all waters, on the surface or underground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdictions, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560. 
Substantial alteration means expansion or modification of a building or development that would result in a disturbance of land exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet in the RMA only. 
Tidal shore or shore means land contiguous to a tidal body of water between the mean low water level and the mean high water level. 
Tidal wetlands means vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands as defined in Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300. 
Water body with perennial flow means a body of water that flows in a natural or manmade channel year-round during a year of normal precipitation. This includes, but is not limited to streams, estuaries, and tidal embayments and may include drainage ditches or channels constructed in wetlands or from former natural drainageways, which convey perennial flow. Lakes and ponds, into, out of, or through which a perennial stream flows. are a part of the perennial stream. Generally, the water table is located above the streambed for most of the year and groundwater is the primary source for stream flow. 
Water-dependent facility means a development of land that cannot exist outside of the RPA and must be located on the shoreline by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operation. These facilities include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Ports; 
(2)  The intake and outfall structures of power plants, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants, and storm sewers, including outfalls for required stormwater management best management practices; 
(3)  Marinas and other boat docking structures; 
(4)  Beaches and other public water-oriented recreation areas; and 
(5)  Fisheries or other marine resources facilities. 
Wetlands means tidal and nontidal wetlands. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-3; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 2009-88, § 1, 8-25-2009)  
Sec. 9.1-4. - Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District Map; applicability. 
(a)  The boundaries of the district are hereby established as shown on the map sheet entitled "Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, Portsmouth, Virginia," dated September 25, 2009, which accompanies and, together with all explanatory material thereon, is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter, the said map sheet hereinafter being referred to as the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map. Modifications to the RMA and the RPA shown on the map sheet must be approved by the director of planning and must be supported by documentation of the more accurate extent of the land and water features. 
(b)  The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District shall apply to all lands identified and designated as CBPAs by the city council, as shown on the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map. 
(1)  At a minimum the RPA shall include: 
a.  Tidal wetlands; 
b.  Nontidal wetlands connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or water bodies with perennial flow; 
c.  Tidal shores; and 
d.  A 100-foot vegetated buffer area located adjacent to and landward of the components listed in subsections a. through c. of this section, and along both sides of any water body with perennial flow. 
(2)  The RMA is defined as adjacent to the RPA and shall be composed of: 
a.  The 100-year floodplain (AE and VE zones) as identified on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Map dated September 25, 2009; 
b.  Nontidal wetlands not connected by surface flow to tidal wetlands, water bodies with perennial flow or other tidal waters; 
c.  Where the floodplain or nontidal wetlands exist outside of the RPA then the extent of these features delineate the RMA. If these features do not exist or do not extend at least 530 feet beyond the RPA, the RMA is 530 feet from the landward edge of the RPA. 
(3)  The intensely developed area (IDA) is an overlay of the RPA and the RMA as shown on the map entitled "Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, Portsmouth, Virginia dated September 25, 2009. Modifications to RMA and the RPA shown on the map must be approved by the city council and must be supported by documentation of the more accurate extent of the land and water features. This area serves as a redevelopment area and shall have one of the following characteristics: 
a.  Development has severely altered the natural state of the area such that it has more than 50 percent impervious surface; 
b.  Public sewer and water systems, or a constructed stormwater drainage system, or both, have been constructed and served the area as of the original Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay Ordinance adoption date of September 1, 1990. (This condition does not include areas planned for public sewer and water or constructed stormwater drainage systems); or 
c.  Housing density is equal to or greater than ten dwelling units per acre. 
(c)  The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area (CBPA) Map showing the general location of CBPAs should be consulted and, per section 9.1-9, a site-specific determination of the resource protection [area] (RPA) shall be performed by persons contemplating regulated activities within the city. 
(d)  Portions of RPAs and RMAs designated by the city council as intensely developed areas shall serve as redevelopment areas. Areas so designated shall comply with all erosion and sediment control requirements and the performance standards for redevelopment in section 9.1-10. 
(e)  If at least 25 percent of a lot, parcel, or development project lies within the boundaries of a CBPA, the entire lot, parcel, or development project shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-4; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 2009-88, § 1, 8-25-2009)  
Sec. 9.1-5. - Use regulations. 
Permitted uses, special permit uses, accessory uses, and special requirements shall be as established by the underlying zoning district, unless specifically modified by the requirements set forth herein. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-5; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004)  
Sec. 9.1-6. - Lot size. 
Lot size shall be subject to the requirements of the underlying zoning district, provided that any lot shall have sufficient area outside the RPA to accommodate an intended development, in accordance with the performance standards in section 9.1-10, when such development is not otherwise allowed in the RPA. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-6; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004)  
Sec. 9.1-7. - Required conditions. 
(a)  All development and redevelopment exceeding 2,500 square feet of land disturbance shall be subject to a plan of development process, including the approval of a site plan in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance set out in chapter 40 or a subdivision plat in accordance with chapter 33. 
(b)  The city may allow development in RPAs upon approval only if it: 
(1)  Is water-dependent as listed in subsection 9.1-10(c); or 
(2)  Constitutes redevelopment as listed in subsection 9.1-10(c). 
(c)  A water quality impact assessment shall be required for any proposed land disturbance within RPAs and for any development within RMAs when required by the city engineer because of the unique characteristics of the site or intensity of development, in accordance with the provisions of subsection 9.1-11(6). 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-7; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 2009-88, § 1, 8-25-2009)  
Sec. 9.1-8. - Conflict with other regulations. 
In any case where the requirements of this chapter conflict with any other provision of this Code or existing state or federal regulations, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall apply. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-8; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004)  
Sec. 9.1-9. - Interpretation of resource protection area boundaries. 
(a)  Delineation by the applicant. The site-specific boundaries of the RPA shall be determined by the applicant through the performance of an environmental site assessment, subject to approval by the director of planning and in accordance with subsection 9.1-11(2). A site-specific evaluation shall be conducted to determine whether water bodies on or adjacent to the development site have perennial flow. The Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Map shall be used as a guide to the general location of RPAs. 
(b)  Where conflict arises over delineation. Where the applicant has provided a site-specific delineation of the RPA, the director of planning will verify the accuracy of the boundary delineation. In determining the site-specific RPA boundary, the director of planning may render adjustments to the applicant's boundary delineation, in accordance with section 9.1-11. In the event the adjusted boundary delineation is contested by the applicant, the applicant may seek relief in accordance with the provisions of subsection 9.1-11(9). 
(c)  Final delineation shown on CBPA map. When a delineation of a CBPA has been approved or established by the director of planning, the CBPA Map shall be amended to reflect that delineation. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-9; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 2009-88, § 1, 8-25-2009)  
Sec. 9.1-10. - Performance standards. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The performance standards establish the means to minimize erosion and sedimentation potential, reduce land application of nutrients and toxics, and maximize rainwater infiltration. Natural groundcover, especially woody vegetation, is most effective in holding soil in place and preventing site erosion. Indigenous vegetation, with its adaptability to local conditions without the use of harmful fertilizers or pesticides, filters stormwater runoff. Minimizing impervious cover enhances rainwater infiltration and effectively reduces stormwater runoff potential. The purpose and intent of these requirements are also to implement the following objectives: prevent a net increase in nonpoint source pollution from new development; achieve a ten percent reduction in nonpoint source pollution from development on previously developed land where the runoff was not treated by one or more water quality best management practices; and achieve a 40 percent reduction in nonpoint source pollution from agricultural uses. 
(b)  General performance standards for development and redevelopment. 
(1)  Land development, redevelopment, or disturbance shall be limited to the minimum area necessary to provide for the proposed use or development. 
a.  The submitted site plan shall indicate the limits of the proposed land disturbance, including areas for clearing or grading and shall be limited to the minimum area necessary to provide for the construction footprint. These limits shall be clearly shown on submitted plan and physically marked on the development site. 
b.  Ingress and egress during construction shall be limited to one access point. 
(2)  Indigenous vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable consistent with the use or development proposed and in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. 
a.  Existing trees over two inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) shall be preserved outside the construction footprint. Diseased trees or trees weakened by age, storm, fire, or other injury, as documented in writing to the director of planning by a landscape architect or a certified arborist who holds a current membership in either the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA), the Tree Care Industry Association, or the American Society of Consulting Arborists (ASCA), may be removed. 
b.  Other woody vegetation onsite shall be preserved outside the approved construction footprint. 
c.  Clearing shall be allowed only to provide necessary access, positive site drainage, water quality BMPs, and the installation of utilities. 
(3)  Prior to clearing or grading, suitable protective barriers, such as fencing of a type detailed in the Landscape Planting and Protection Manual, Portsmouth, Virginia shall be erected five feet outside of the dripline of any tree or stand of trees to be preserved. These protective barriers shall remain so erected throughout all phases of construction. The storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill shall not be allowed within the area protected by the barrier. 
(4)  Land development, redevelopment or land disturbance which adds impervious cover shall minimize impervious cover to promote infiltration of stormwater into the ground consistent with the proposed use or development. Pervious surfaces where soil conditions and/or water table permit shall be used for any parking area, maneuvering aisle, or other low traffic driveway. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter or exceptions or exemptions thereto, any land disturbing activity exceeding 2,500 square feet, including construction of all single-family houses, septic tanks, and drainfields, shall also comply with the requirements of chapter 11 of this Code (erosion and sediment control). 
(6)  Where the best management practices require regular or periodic maintenance in order to continue their functions, such maintenance shall be ensured through a maintenance agreement between the owner or developer and the city or some other mechanism that achieves an equivalent objective. 
(7)  All on-site sewage disposal systems not requiring a VPDES permit shall be pumped out at least once every five years, in accordance with the provisions of section 38-312. 
(8)  For new construction a reserve sewage disposal site with a capacity at least equal to that of the primary sewage disposal site shall be provided, in accordance with section 38-313. This requirement shall not apply to any lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989, if such lot or parcel is not sufficient in capacity to accommodate a reserve sewage disposal site, as determined by the local health department. Building or construction of any impervious surface shall be prohibited on the area of all sewage disposal sites or on an on-site sewage treatment system, which operates under a permit issued by the state water control board, until the structure is served by public sewer. 
(9)  For any development or redevelopment, stormwater runoff shall be controlled by the use of best management practices consistent with the water quality protection provisions (4 VAC § 3-20-20-71 et seq.) of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations and shall achieve the following: 
a.  For development, the post-development nonpoint source pollution runoff load shall not exceed the pre-development load, based on the following land cover conditions for the city: lots platted before April 5, 1994, shall utilize 41 percent, lots platted after April 5, 1994, shall utilize 19 percent for the Elizabeth River Watershed, 40 percent for the Western Branch Watershed, and 54 percent for the Southern Branch Watershed; 
b.  For redevelopment, the nonpoint source pollution load shall be reduced by at least ten percent of the existing load. The city manager, or designee may waive or modify this requirement for redevelopment sites that originally incorporated best management practices for stormwater runoff quality control, provided that: 
1.  In no case may the post-development nonpoint source pollution runoff load exceed the predevelopment load; and 
2.  Best management practice facilities shall be in good working order and performing at the design levels of service. The city manager shall conduct a review of the original structural design and the maintenance plans of such facilities. The execution of a new maintenance agreement may be required to ensure compliance with these requirements. 
c.  For sites within IDAs or other isolated redevelopment sites, the nonpoint source pollution load shall be reduced by at least ten percent; 
d.  For redevelopment, both the pre- and post-development loadings shall be calculated by the procedures outlined by the current Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook Manual. Calculations involving the percentage of site area under impervious cover shall be based upon the lot area landward of mean high water and wetlands. However, where the design data is available, the original post-development nonpoint source pollution loadings can be substituted for the existing development loadings; and 
e.  Stormwater management criteria for redevelopment shall apply to any redevelopment, whether or not it is located within an intensely developed area designated by the city. 
(10)  Prior to initiating grading or other on-site activities on any portion of a lot or parcel, all required federal, state, and local permits shall be obtained and evidence of such submitted to the city engineer, in accordance with section 9.1-11. 
(c)  Criteria RPAs. 
(1)  Allowable land uses in the RPA. A water quality impact assessment in conformance with subsection 9.1-11(6) shall be submitted for all proposed land disturbances in the RPA. Land disturbances may be allowed only if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
a.  It is a water dependent facility, which meets the following: 
1.  It does not conflict with the comprehensive plan; 
2.  It complies with the performance standards section of this chapter; 
3.  Any nonwater-dependent component is located outside of the RPA; and 
4.  Access to the water dependent facility will be provided with the minimum disturbance necessary. Where practicable, a single point of access will be provided. 
b.  It constitutes redevelopment sited outside the IDA, and meets the following criteria: 
1.  Will result in a no net increase in the amount of impervious cover; 
2.  Will result in no further encroachment into the RPA; and 
3.  Will conform to chapter 11 (erosion and sediment control) and chapter 31.1 (stormwater management) of this Code. 
c.  It constitutes development or redevelopment within a designated intensely developed area. 
d.  It is a new use according to subsection (c)(4) of this section (permitted encroachments into the buffer area). 
e.  It is a road or driveway crossing, which meets the following: 
1.  The city finds that there exists no reasonable alternative to aligning the road or driveway in or across the RPA; 
2.  The alignment and design of the road are optimized, consistent with other applicable requirements, to minimize encroachments in the RPA and adverse effects to water quality; 
3.  The design and construction of the road or driveway satisfy all applicable criteria of this chapter; including the submission of a water quality impact assessment; and 
4.  The proposal is reviewed in coordination with the site plan, subdivision and plan of development review processes. 
f.  It is a flood control or stormwater facility that drains or treats water from multiple development projects or from a significant portion of a watershed, which meets the following: 
1.  The location of the facility has been found to be the optimum location by the city; 
2.  The size of the facility is the minimum necessary to provide the necessary flood control, stormwater treatment or both; 
3.  The facility is consistent with chapter 31.1 (stormwater management) and has been approved as a Phase I modification of the city's Chesapeake Bay Program; 
4.  All applicable permits for work in and around state and federal waters have been obtained and received prior to construction; 
5.  Approval must be received from the city prior to construction; and 
6.  Routine maintenance may be performed on such facilities to assure that they continue to function as designed. 
(2)  Exemptions in RPAs. The following land disturbances in the resource protection area may be considered exempt: 
a.  Water wells; 
b.  Passive recreational facilities such as boardwalks, trails and pathways; and 
c.  Historic preservation and archaeological activities, provided that they comply with the following: 
1.  The land disturbance undergoes an administrative review, pursuant to subsection 9.1-10(c), prior to approval; and 
2.  Any land disturbance exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet shall comply with chapter 11 (erosion and sediment control) of this Code. 
(3)  Buffer area requirements. To minimize the adverse effects of human activities on the other components of resource protection areas, state waters, and aquatic life, a 100-foot buffer area of vegetation that is effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff shall be retained if present and established where it does not exist. 
The buffer area shall be located adjacent to and landward of other RPA components and along both sides of any water bodies with perennial flow. The full buffer area shall be designated as the landward component of the RPA, in accordance with sections 9.1-4 and 9.1-11. Notwithstanding permitted uses, encroachments, and vegetation clearing as set forth in this section, the 100-foot wide buffer area is not reduced in width. The 100-foot buffer area shall be deemed to achieve a 75 percent reduction of sediments and a 40 percent reduction of nutrients. 
(4)  Permitted encroachments into the buffer area. 
a.  When the application of the buffer area would result in the loss of a buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989, the director of planning, after consulting with the city engineer, may allow encroachments into the buffer in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  Encroachments into the buffer areas shall be the minimum necessary to achieve a reasonable buildable area for a principal structure and necessary utilities; 
2.  Where practicable, a vegetated area equal to the area of encroachment into the buffer area shall be established elsewhere on the lot or parcel; and 
3.  The encroachment may not exceed into the seaward 50 feet of the buffer area. 
b.  When the application of the buffer area would result in the loss of a buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded between October 1, 1989, and March 1, 2002, encroachments may be allowed through the exception process described in subsection 9.1-12(c) in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  The lot or parcel was created as a result of a legal process conducted in conformance with chapter 33 (subdivisions) of this Code; 
2.  Conditions or mitigation measures imposed through a previously approved exception shall be met; 
3.  If the use of a best management practice (BMP) was previously required, the BMP shall be evaluated to determine if it continues to function effectively and, if necessary, the BMP shall be reestablished or repaired and maintained, as required; and 
4.  The requirements set forth in subsections (4)a.1.—(4)a.3. of this section have been met. 
(5)  Permitted modifications of the buffer area. In order to achieve the functional value of the buffer, existing vegetation may be removed, subject to approval by the city planning director, only to provide for reasonable sight lines, access paths, general woodlot management, and best management practices, including those that prevent upland erosion and concentrated flows of stormwater, as follows: 
a.  Trees may be pruned or removed as necessary to provide for reasonable sight lines and vistas, provided that where removed, they shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. 
b.  Any path shall be constructed and surfaced as to effectively control erosion. 
c.  Dead, diseased, or dying trees or shrubbery and noxious weeds such as Johnson grass, kudzu and multiflora rose may be removed and thinning of trees may be allowed, pursuant to sound horticulture practice. 
d.  For shoreline erosion projects, trees and woody vegetation may be removed, necessary control techniques employed, and appropriate vegetation established to protect or stabilize the shoreline in accordance with the best available technical advice and applicable permit conditions or requirements. 
e.  Flower and/or vegetable gardens, or similar amenity as long as no brush and/or trees are removed from the RPA. 
(6)  Buffer area requirements for intensely developed areas. In the intensely developed area the director of planning may, after consulting with the city engineer, exercise discretion regarding whether to require the establishment of vegetation in the 100-foot-wide buffer area. However, while the immediate establishment of vegetation in the buffer area may be impractical, consideration to implementing measures that would establish vegetation in the buffer in these areas over time shall be considered in order to maximize water quality protection, pollutant removal and water resource conservation. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-10; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 2009-88, § 1, 8-25-2009)  
Sec. 9.1-11. - Plan of development process. 
Any land disturbance, development or redevelopment exceeding 2,500 square feet of land disturbance shall be accomplished through a plan of development process prior to any clearing or grading of the site or the issuance of any building permit, to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter. The fee for review of plans of development for compliance with this chapter (exclusive of any other applicable fees for review of the plan of development) shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
Notwithstanding the provisions above, no clearing or grading of any lot or parcel shall be permitted without an approved clearing plan. For existing single-family lots, a clearing line shown on the plat plan normally submitted as part of the building permit application shall satisfy clearing plan requirements. No clearing or grading shall occur on existing single-family lots until a complete building permit application is approved. 
(1)  Required information. In addition to the requirements of the zoning ordinance set out in chapter 40, or the requirements of chapter 33, regarding subdivisions, the plan of development process shall consist of the plans and studies identified below. The following plans or studies shall be submitted, unless otherwise directed: 
a.  A site plan in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance set out in chapter 40 or a subdivision plat in accordance with the provisions of chapter 33; 
b.  An environment site assessment; 
c.  A landscaping plan; 
d.  A stormwater management plan; 
e.  An erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with the provisions of chapter 11; and 
f.  A water quality impact assessment as necessary under the requirements of subsection 9.1-11(f). 
(2)  Environmental site assessment. An environmental site assessment shall be submitted in conjunction with a preliminary site plan or preliminary subdivision plan approval for the purposes of determining the site-specific boundaries of the RPA. 
a.  The environmental site assessment shall be drawn to scale and clearly delineate the following environmental features: 
1.  Tidal wetlands; 
2.  Tidal shores; 
3.  Nontidal wetlands connected by surface flow and contiguous to tidal wetlands or water bodies with perennial flow; 
4.  A 100-foot buffer area located adjacent to and landward of the components listed in subsections (2)a.1. through (2)a.3. of this section, and any water bodies with perennial flow; and 
5.  Other sensitive environmental features as determined by the city engineer. 
b.  Wetlands delineations shall be performed consistent with the procedures specified in the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, 1987. 
c.  The environmental site assessment shall delineate the site-specific geographic extent of the RPA. 
d.  The environmental site assessment shall be drawn at the same scale as the preliminary site plan or subdivision plat, and shall be certified as complete and accurate by a professional engineer or a certified land surveyor. This requirement may be waived by the city engineer when the proposed use of development would result in less than 5,000 square feet of disturbed area. 
(3)  Landscaping plan. A landscaping plan shall be submitted in conjunction with site plan approval or as part of subdivision plat approval. No clearing or grading of any lot or parcel shall be permitted without a prior approved landscaping plan. Landscaping plans shall be prepared and certified by design professionals practicing within their areas of competence as prescribed by the Code of Virginia. 
a.  Contents of the plan. 
1.  The landscaping plan shall be drawn to scale and clearly delineate the location, size, and description of existing and proposed plant material. All existing trees on the site two inches or greater DBH shall be shown on the landscaping plan. Where there are groups of five or more trees, stands may be outlined instead. The specific number of trees two inches or greater DBH to be preserved outside of the construction footprint shall be indicated on the plan. Trees to be removed shall be clearly delineated on the landscaping plan. The plan shall be consistent with chapter 36, article III of this Code. 
2.  Any required buffer area shall be clearly delineated and any plant material to be added to establish or supplement the buffer area, as required by this chapter, shall be shown on the landscaping plan. 
3.  Within the buffer area, trees to be removed for sight lines, vistas, access paths, and best management practices, as provided for in this chapter, shall be shown on the plan. Vegetation required by this chapter to replace any existing trees within the buffer area shall also be shown on the landscaping plan. 
4.  Trees to be removed for shoreline stabilization projects and any replacement vegetation required by this chapter shall be shown on the landscaping plan. 
5.  The plan shall depict grade changes or other work adjacent to trees, which would affect them adversely. Specifications shall be provided as to how grade, drainage, and aeration would be maintained around trees to be preserved. 
6.  The landscaping plan will include specifications for the protection existing trees during clearing, grading, and all phases of construction, consistent with such measures as described in the Landscape Planting and Protection Manual, Portsmouth, Virginia. 
b.  Plant specifications. 
1.  All plant materials necessary to supplement the buffer area or vegetated areas outside the construction footprint shall be installed in accordance with the specifications referred to in subsection 36-52(9). 
2.  All supplementary or replacement plant materials shall be living and in a healthy condition. Plant materials shall conform to the standards of the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
3.  Where areas to be preserved, as designated on an approved landscaping plan, are encroached, replacement of existing trees and other vegetation will be achieved at a ratio of three planted trees to one removed. Replacement trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half inches DBH at the time of planting. 
c.  Maintenance. The applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance and replacement of all vegetation as may be required by the provisions of this chapter. In buffer areas and areas outside the construction footprint, plant material shall be tended and maintained in a healthy growing condition and free from refuse and debris. Unhealthy, dying, or dead plant materials shall be replaced during the next planting season, as required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Stormwater management plan. A stormwater management plan shall be submitted as part of the plan of development process required by this chapter and in conjunction with site plan or subdivision plan approval. 
a.  Contents of the plan. The stormwater management plan shall contain maps, charts, graphs, tables, photographs, narrative descriptions, explanations, and citations to supporting references as appropriate to communicate the information required by this chapter. At a minimum, the stormwater management plan must contain the following: 
1.  Location and design of all planned stormwater control devices; 
2.  Procedures for implementing nonstructural stormwater control practices and techniques which can be described in narrative form; 
3.  Pre-development and post-development nonpoint source pollutant loadings with supporting documentation of all utilized coefficients and calculation; and 
4.  For facilities, verification of structural soundness, including a professional engineer or class IIIB surveyor certification. 
b.  Site-specific facilities. Site-specific facilities shall be designed for the ultimate development of the contributing watershed based on zoning, comprehensive plans, local public facility master plans, or other similar planning document. 
c.  Engineering calculations. All engineering calculations must be performed in accordance with procedures outlined in the current edition of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations and the corresponding Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook. 
d.  Inspection and maintenance schedule. The plan shall establish a long-term schedule for inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities that include all maintenance requirements and the identities of persons responsible for performing maintenance. If the designated maintenance responsibility is with a party other than the city, a maintenance agreement shall be executed between the responsible party and the city. 
(5)  Erosion and sediment control plan. An erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted that satisfies the requirements of this chapter and is in accordance with chapter 11, in conjunction with site plan or subdivision plan approval. 
(6)  Water quality impact assessment. 
a.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the water quality impact assessment is to: 
1.  Identify the impacts of proposed development, redevelopment or land disturbance on water quality and lands within RPAs and other environmentally sensitive lands; 
2.  Ensure that, where development, redevelopment, or land disturbance does take place within RPAs and other sensitive lands, it will be located on those portions of a site and in a manner that will be least disruptive to the natural functions of RPAs and other sensitive lands; 
3.  To protect individuals from investing funds for improvements proposed for location on lands unsuited for such development because of high ground water, erosion, or vulnerability to flood and storm damage; 
4.  Provide for administrative relief from the terms of this chapter when warranted and in accordance with the requirements contained herein; and 
5.  Specify mitigation which will address water quality protection. 
b.  Water quality impact assessment required. A water quality impact assessment is required for: (i) any proposed land disturbance, development, or redevelopment, within an RPA, (ii) any development in a RMA as deemed necessary by the city engineer due to the unique characteristics of the site or intensity of the proposed development. There shall be two levels of water quality impact assessments: a minor assessment and a major assessment. 
c.  Minor water quality impact assessment. A minor water quality impact assessment pertains only to development within an RPA, which causes no more than 5,000 square feet of land disturbance. Submission of a plan of development that demonstrates through the use of calculations provided for by subsection (4)a. of this section that the remaining buffer area and necessary best management practices will result in removal of no less than 75 percent of sediments and 40 percent of nutrients from post-development stormwater runoff shall be deemed to have satisfied the requirement for a minor water quality impact assessment. The following elements shall be included in the preparation and submission of a minor water quality assessment: 
1.  Site plan indicating the location of the components of the RPA, including the 100-foot buffer area; 
2.  Location and nature of the proposed encroachment into the buffer area, including: type of paving material, limits for areas of clearing or grading, location of any structures, drives for other impervious cover and sewage disposal systems or reserve drainfield sites; and 
3.  Type and location of proposed best management practice to mitigate the proposed encroachment. 
d.  Major water quality impact assessment. A major water quality impact assessment shall be required for any development which: (i) exceeds 5,000 square feet of land disturbance within an RPA; or (ii) is located in a RMA and is deemed necessary by the city engineer. The information required in this section shall be considered a minimum. The following elements shall be included in the preparation and submission of a major water quality assessment: 
1.  All of the information required in a minor water quality impact assessment, as specified in subsection (6)c. of this section; 
2.  A hydrogeological element that: 
(i)  Describes the existing topography, soils, hydrology and geology of the site and adjacent lands; 
(ii)  Describes the impacts of the proposed development on topography, soils, hydrology and geology on the site and adjacent lands; 
(iii)  Indicates the disturbance or destruction of wetlands and justification for such action; 
(iv)  Indicates the disruptions or reductions in the supply of water to wetlands, streams, lakes, rivers or other water bodies; 
(v)  Indicates the disruptions to existing hydrology including wetland and stream circulation patterns; 
(vi)  Indicates the source location and description of proposed fill material; 
(vii)  Indicates the location of dredge material and location of dumping area for such material; 
(viii)  Indicates the location of and impacts on shellfish beds, submerged aquatic vegetation, and fish spawning areas; and 
(ix)  Describes the proposed mitigation measures for the potential hydrogeological impacts which may include: 
(A)  Proposed erosion and sediment control concepts which may include minimizing the extent of the cleared area, perimeter controls, reduction of runoff velocities, measures to stabilize disturbed areas, schedule and personnel for site inspection; 
(B)  Proposed stormwater management system; 
(C)  Creation of wetlands to replace those lost; and 
(D)  Minimizing cut and fill. 
3.  A landscape element that describes the proposed measures for mitigation of the water quality and land impacts within CBPAs. Possible mitigation measures include: 
(i)  Replanting schedule for trees and other significant vegetation removed for construction, in accordance with section 36-52 of the City Code. 
(ii)  Demonstration that the design of the plan will preserve to the greatest extent possible any significant trees and vegetation on the site and will provide maximum erosion control and overland flow benefits from such vegetation. 
(iii)  Demonstration that indigenous plants are to be used to the greatest extent possible. 
4.  As part of any major water quality impact assessment submittal, the city engineer may require review by the Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance Division (CBLAD). Upon receipt of a major water quality impact assessment, the city engineer will determine if such review is warranted and may request CBLAD to review the assessment and respond with written comments. Any comments by CBLAD will be incorporated into the final review by the city engineer, provided that such comments are provided by CBLAD within 90 days of the request. 
e.  Evaluation procedure. 
1.  Upon the completed review of a minor water quality impact assessment, the city engineer will determine if the following criteria have been satisfied: 
(i)  The proposed encroachment is necessary due to the inability to place improvements elsewhere on the site to avoid disturbance of the buffer area; 
(ii)  Impervious surface is minimized; 
(iii)  Proposed best management practices, where required, achieve the requisite reductions in pollutant loadings; 
(iv)  Proposed mitigation measures, including the revegetation plan and site design, result in minimal disturbance to all components of the RPA, including the 100-foot buffer area; and 
(v)  The development, as proposed, meets the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
2.  Upon the completed review of a major water quality impact assessment, the city engineer will determine if the proposed development is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and that the following criteria have been satisfied: 
(i)  Within any RPA, the proposed development is a water-dependent facility; 
(ii)  The disturbance of any wetlands will be minimized and the applicant will provide a statement on the plans that wetland permits will be obtained prior to the issuance of any other permits or approvals; 
(iii)  Proposed erosion and sediment control concepts are adequate to achieve the reductions in runoff and prevent off-site sedimentation; 
(iv)  Proposed stormwater management concepts are adequate to control the stormwater runoff to achieve the required performance standard for pollutant control; 
(v)  Proposed revegetation of disturbed areas will provide optimum erosion and sediment control benefits; 
(vi)  The design and location of any proposed drainfield will be in accordance with the requirements of section 9.1-10; 
(vii)  The cumulative impact of the proposed development, when considered in relation to other development in the vicinity, both existing and proposed, will not result in a significant degradation of water quality; and 
(viii)  The development, as proposed, is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
3.  The city engineer shall require additional mitigation where potential impacts have not been adequately addressed. Evaluation of mitigation measures will be made by the city engineer based on the criteria listed in subsections (6)e.1. and (6)e.2. of this section. 
(7)  Final plan. Final plans for property within CBPAs shall be final plats for land to be subdivided or site plans for land not to be subdivided as required in the zoning ordinance. 
a.  Final plans for all lands within CBPAs shall include the following additional information: 
1.  The delineation of the PA boundary; 
2.  The delineation of required buffer areas; 
3.  All wetlands permits required by law; and 
4.  A maintenance agreement as deemed necessary and appropriate by the city engineer to ensure proper maintenance of best management practices in order to continue their functions. 
b.  Installation and bonding requirements. 
1.  Where buffer areas, landscaping, stormwater management facilities or other specifications of an approved plan are required, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the installation of required plant materials or facilities is completed, in accordance with the approved site plan. 
2.  When the occupancy of a structure is desired prior to the completion of the required landscaping, stormwater management facilities, or other specifications of an approved plan, a certificate of occupancy may be issued only if the applicant provides to the city a form of surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the value of the remaining plant materials, related materials, and installation costs of the required landscaping or other specifications or maintenance costs for any required stormwater management facilities. 
3.  All required landscaping shall be installed and approved by the first planting season following issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the surety may be forfeited to the city. 
4.  All required stormwater management facilities or other specifications shall be installed and approved within 18 months of project commencement. Should the applicant fail, after proper notice, to initiate, complete or maintain appropriate actions required by the approved plan, the surety may be forfeited to the city. The city may collect from the applicant the amount by which the reasonable cost of required actions exceeds the amount of the surety held. 
5.  After all required actions of the approved site plan have been completed, the applicant must submit a written request for a final inspection. If the requirements of the approved plan have been completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer, such unexpended or unobligated portion of the surety held shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated within 60 days following the receipt of the applicant's request for final inspection. The city engineer may require a certificate of substantial completion from a professional engineer or class IIIB surveyor before making a final inspection. 
(8)  Administrative responsibility. Administration of the plan of development process shall be in accordance with the zoning ordinance set out in chapter 40 or chapter 33 regarding subdivisions. 
(9)  Denial of plan, appeal of conditions or modifications. In the event the final plan or any component of the plan of development process is disapproved and recommended conditions or modifications are unacceptable to the applicant, the applicant may appeal such administrative decision to the planning commission. In granting or denying an appeal, the planning commission must find such plan to be in accordance with all applicable ordinances and include necessary elements to mitigate any detrimental impact on water quality and upon adjacent property and the surrounding area and such plan meets the purpose and intent of the performance standards in this chapter. If the planning commission finds that the applicant's plan does not meet the above stated criteria, it shall deny approval of the plan. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-11; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 2006-87, § 1, 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 2009-88, § 1, 8-25-2009; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 6, 5-12-2020)  
Sec. 9.1-12. - Nonconformities, exemptions and exceptions. 
(a)  Nonconforming uses and noncomplying structures. The lawful use of a building or structure located in a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area which existed on September 1, 1990, and which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. No change or expansion of use shall be allowed with the exception that: 
(1)  The director of planning may grant a nonconforming use and development waiver for principal structures on legal nonconforming lots or parcels to provide for remodeling and alterations to such nonconforming structures provided that the city engineer has certified that: 
a.  There will be no increase in nonpoint source pollution load; 
b.  Any development or land disturbance exceeding an area of 2,500 feet complies with all erosion and sediment control requirements of this chapter; and 
c.  There shall be no expansion of the footprint of the nonconforming structure or use. 
(2)  The director of planning may grant a nonconforming use and development waiver for principal structures on legal nonconforming lots or parcels to provide for expansion to such nonconforming structures provided that the city engineer has certified that: 
a.  There will be no increase in nonpoint source pollution load; 
b.  Any development or land disturbance exceeding an area of 2,500 feet complies with all erosion and sediment control requirements of this chapter; and 
c.  The city engineer has found the requirements under subsection 9.1-12(c)(3) have been met. 
(3)  An application for a nonconforming use and development waiver shall be made to and upon forms furnished by the zoning administrator and shall include for the purpose of proper enforcement of this chapter, the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
b.  Legal description of the property and type of proposed use and development; 
c.  A sketch of the dimensions of the lot or parcel, location of buildings and proposed additions relative to the lot line, and boundary of the RPA; and 
d.  Location and description of any existing private water supply or sewage system. 
(4)  A nonconforming use and development waiver shall become null and void 12 months from the date issued if no substantial work has commenced. 
(5)  It is not the intent of this chapter to prevent the reconstruction of pre-existing structures within CBPAs from occurring as a result of casualty loss unless otherwise restricted by the City Code. 
(b)  Public utilities, railroads, public roads and facilities exemptions. Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of electric, natural gas, fiber-optic and telephone transmission lines, railroads and public roads and their appurtenant structures in accordance with chapters 11 and 31.1 of this Code shall be found to be exempt. 
(1)  The exemption of public roads is further conditioned by: 
a.  The optimization of the road alignment and design, consistent with other applicable requirements to prevent or minimize encroachments into the RPA; and 
b.  The optimization of the road alignment and design that minimizes the adverse affects of water quality. 
(2)  The exemption for the construction, installation and maintenance of water, sewer, natural gas, underground telecommunications and cable television lines owned, permitted or both by the city or regional service authority are further conditioned that: 
a.  To the degree possible, the location of such utilities and facilities should be outside the RPA; 
b.  No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide the proposed utility installation; 
c.  All such construction, installation and maintenance of such utilities and facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable state and federal permits and designed and conducted in a manner that protects water quality; and 
d.  Any land disturbance exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet complies with chapter 11 (erosion and sediment control) of this Code. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  An application for an exception to the requirements of subsection 9.1-10(c) shall be made in writing to the director of planning on a form provided by the director. The director of planning shall accept no such application unless accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code. The application shall identify the impacts of the proposed exception on water quality and on lands within the RPA through the performance of a water quality impact assessment, which complies, with the provisions of section 9.1-11(6). 
(2)  The director shall notify the adjacent property owners of such request, shall cause a sign to be posted on the property and shall cause to be published a legal notice of a public hearing in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  The planning commission shall review the request for an exception and the water quality impact assessment and may grant the exception with such conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary to further the purpose and intent of this chapter, if the planning commission finds that: 
a.  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by this chapter to other property owners in the overlay district; 
b.  The exception request is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed, nor does the request arise from conditions or circumstances either permitted or nonconforming that are related to the adjacent parcels; 
c.  The exception request is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
d.  The exception request will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter, and not injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to water quality or the public welfare; and 
e.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed which will prevent the exception request from causing a degradation of water quality. 
(4)  An application for an exception to the requirements any other sections of the chapter except subsection 9.1-10(c) shall be made in writing to the director of planning on a form provided by the director. The director shall review the request for an exception to these sections and the water quality impact assessment and may grant the exception with such conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary to further the purpose and intent of this chapter, if the director finds that: 
a.  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by this chapter to other property owners in the overlay district; 
b.  The exception request is not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed, nor does the request arise from conditions or circumstances either permitted or nonconforming that are related to the adjacent parcels; 
c.  The exception request is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
d.  The exception request will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter, and not injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to water quality or the public welfare; and 
e.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed which will prevent the exception request from causing a degradation of water quality. 
(5)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission regarding the denial of a requested exception may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court of Virginia. The aggrieved party must file the appeal to the circuit court within 30 days from the date of such decision to appeal and notify the director of planning of the appeal. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-12; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2, 1-11-2005; Ord. No. 2009-88, § 1, 8-25-2009)  
Sec. 9.1-13. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who: (i) violates any provision of any such ordinance or (ii) violates or fails, neglects, or refuses to obey any final notice, order, rule, regulation, or variance or permit condition authorized by the city under such ordinance shall, upon such finding by an appropriate circuit court, be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000.00 for each day of violation. Such civil penalties may, at the discretion of the court assessing them, be directed to be paid into the city treasury for the purpose of abating environmental damage to or restoring Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas therein, in such a manner as the court may direct by order, except that where the violator is the city itself or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(b)  With the consent of any person who: (i) violates any provision of this chapter or (ii) violates or fails, neglects, or refuses to obey any local governmental body's or official's notice, order, rule, regulation, or variance or permit condition authorized under such ordinance, the city may provide for the issuance of an order against such person for the one-time payment of civil charges for each violation in specific sums, not to exceed $10,000.00 for each violation. Such civil charges shall be paid into the city treasury for the purpose of abating environmental damage to or restoring Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas therein, except that where the violator is the city or its agent, the civil charges shall be paid into the state treasury. Civil charges shall be in lieu of any appropriate civil penalty that could be imposed under subsection (a) above. Civil charges may be in addition to the cost of any restoration required or ordered by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1-13; Ord. No. 2004-02, § 1, 1-13-2004; Ord. No. 2009-88, § 1, 8-25-2009)  
Chapter 9.2 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  
ARTICLE I. - ENTERPRISE ZONES 
 
Sec. 9.2-1. - Enterprise zone; development fees rebate authorized. 
(a)  The city treasurer is authorized to issue a rebate of the fees and in the amounts set out in section 9.2-2 to a qualifying applicant for qualifying activity in an enterprise zone designated by the governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia and located in the city. 
(b)  Qualifying activity means new construction or improvements to an existing structure totaling $50,000.00 or more that results in a net increase in the subject property's real estate assessment as determined by the city assessor. 
(c)  Qualifying applicant means any business or property owner who has (i) completed a qualifying activity within a designated enterprise zone in the city; (ii) has paid the fees that are subject to rebate as set out in section 9.2-2 together with all fees and taxes required to engage in the qualifying activity; (iii) is not delinquent in the payment of any tax or fee levied by the city; (iv) has submitted Part 1 of the development fee rebate application to the local enterprise zone administrator within ten days of obtaining the required permits; and (v) has submitted Part 2 of the development fee rebate application to the local enterprise zone administrator within 120 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and has received approval of the application by the administrator. 
(d)  Written certification of approval of the rebate application shall be provided by the local enterprise zone administrator to the city treasurer prior to issuance of any rebate. 
( Ord. No. 2011-70, § 2, 9-13-2011)  
Sec. 9.2-2. - Enterprise zone; fees eligible for rebate. 
Upon compliance with the requirements of section 9.2-1, a qualifying applicant shall be eligible for certain city permit, application, and review fees paid by the applicant in the following amounts: 
(1)  Fifty percent of construction plans review fees and building, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing permit fees authorized by chapter 7 and established in appendix A. A state levy imposed under the Uniform Statewide Building Code and city fees for inspection, re-inspection, or a certificate of occupancy shall not be subject to rebate; and 
(2)  Ninety percent of rezoning, use permit, and subdivision application fees and site plan review fees authorized by chapters 33.1 and 40.1 and established in appendix A. 
( Ord. No. 2011-70, § 2, 9-13-2011)  
ARTICLE II. - ARTS AND CULTURAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 9.2-31. - Arts and cultural district established; purpose. 
(a)  There is hereby established the Portsmouth Arts and Cultural District, consisting of all the area within the following boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of South Street and Godwin Street, thence north along Godwin Street to Shawn Sykes Avenue; thence east and north along Shawn Sykes Avenue to Columbia Street; thence west along Columbia Street to Armstrong Street; thence north along Armstrong Street to County Street; thence east along County Street to Elm Avenue; thence north along Elm Avenue to Queen Street; thence east along Queen Street to Crawford Street; thence north along Crawford Street and Crawford Parkway to the Elizabeth River; thence easterly and southerly along the Elizabeth River waterfront to the southeast corner of the North Pier; thence westerly along the southern line of the North Pier to Harbor Center Court; thence southeast along Harbor Center Court to Wavy Street; thence southwest along Wavy Street to Harbor Center Way; thence northwest along Harbor Center Way to Wythe Street; thence southwest along Wythe Street to Court Street; thence north along Court Street to Pavilion Drive; thence east and north along Pavilion Drive to Bart Street; thence east along Bart Street to Crawford Circle; thence northeast along Crawford Circle to Crawford Street; thence north along Crawford Street to King Street; thence west along King Street to Green Street; thence south along Green Street to County Street; thence west along County Street to Effingham Street; thence north along Effingham Street to King Street; thence west along King Street to Phoebus Street; thence south along Phoebus Street to County Street; thence west along County Street to Elm Avenue; thence south along Elm Avenue to South Street; thence southwest along South Street to Godwin Street, the point of beginning, all as shown on the map entitled "Proposed Arts & Cultural District, Portsmouth, Virginia" dated July 11, 2017 attached to Ord. No. 2017-53. 
(b)  The purpose of this district is to increase awareness and support for the arts and cultural venues within the city, including by supporting existing arts and cultural venues and encouraging their expansion, and by attracting new arts and cultural venues. These existing, expanded, and new venues will increase the city's reputation and market presence as a regional destination for arts and cultural activities, as well as provide residents of the city with the benefits of arts and cultural offerings. 
(Ord. No. 2017-53 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-11-2017)  
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Nomination and election of mayor and members of council, § 3.02 et seq.; initiative and referendum elections, § 10.06; recall elections, § 10.09. 
State Law reference— Elections, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PRECINCTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-21. - Division of city into precincts. 
The city shall not be divided into wards but shall be divided into the following election precincts, the respective designation and boundaries of which shall be as provided in division 2 of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 9-16; Code 1988, § 10-21) 
State Law reference— Duty to establish election districts or precincts, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-307.  
Secs. 10-22—10-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOUNDARIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Several former precincts have been abolished. Hence, the skip in precinct numbers in this division and in article III of this chapter. 
 
Sec. 10-41. - Precinct No. 1. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 1 shall be as follows: Beginning at a point where the centerline of the Downtown Tunnel intersects with the eastern boundary line of the city; thence westerly along said tunnel centerline and its prolongation to the centerline of Interstate Route 264; thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Interstate Route 264 to its interchange with the centerline of Effingham Street; thence north along the centerline of Effingham Street to the centerline of High Street; thence west along the center of High Street to the centerline of Chestnut Street; thence north along the centerline of Chestnut Street to the centerline of Fort Lane; thence north along Fort Lane to the centerline of Leckie Street thence west along the centerline of Leckie Street to the centerline of Hatton Street; thence north along the centerline of Hatton Street to the centerline of Naval Avenue; thence east along the centerline of Naval Avenue and the southern boundary line of the United States Naval Hospital property to the eastern boundary line of the city in the southern branch of the Elizabeth River; thence southerly along said eastern city corporate boundary line to the centerline of the Downtown Tunnel, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-17; Code 1988, § 10-41)  
Sec. 10-42. - Precinct No. 5. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 5 shall be as follows: Beginning at a point where the centerline of the downtown tunnel intersects with the eastern boundary line of the city; thence westerly along said tunnel centerline and its prolongation to the centerline of Interstate Route 264; thence continuing westerly along the centerline of Interstate Route 264 to its interchange with Effingham Street; thence south along the centerline of Effingham Street to the centerline of Randolph Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Randolph Street to the centerline of Elm Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Elm Avenue to the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of George Washington Highway; thence westerly along the centerline of George Washington Highway to its intersection with the centerline of Elm Avenue; thence southerly and easterly along the centerline of Elm Avenue to the southern branch of the Elizabeth River at the eastern boundary line of the city; thence north along said city corporate line to the centerline of the downtown tunnel, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-21; Code 1988, § 10-42)  
Sec. 10-43. - Precinct No. 7. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 7 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of London Boulevard with the centerline of Fort Lane; thence north along the centerline of Fort Lane to the centerline of Leckie Street; thence west along the centerline of Leckie Street to the centerline of Hatton Street; thence north along the centerline of Hatton Street to the centerline of Naval Avenue; thence east along the centerline of Naval Avenue and the southern boundary line of the United States Naval Hospital property to the eastern boundary line of the city in the southern branch of the Elizabeth River; thence northerly along said eastern city corporate boundary line to the centerline of Scott's Creek projected easterly; thence westerly along the center of the channel of Scott's Creek to the branch thereof lying between the sections known as West Park View and Shea Terrace; thence south along said Scott's Creek branch, its various courses, to the centerline of Holladay Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Holladay Street to its intersection with Williamsburg Avenue; thence southerly along the centerline of Williamsburg Avenue to its intersection with North Street; thence easterly along the centerline of North Street to its intersection with the centerline of Peninsula Avenue; thence southerly along Peninsula Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of London Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerline of London Boulevard to the centerline of Fort Lane, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-23; Code 1988, § 10-43; Ord. No. 2001-37, § 1, 8-28-2001)  
Sec. 10-44. - Precinct No. 9. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 9 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Fort Lane with the centerline of London Boulevard; thence westerly along the centerline of London Boulevard to its intersection with Peninsula Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Peninsula Avenue to its intersection with North Street; thence westerly along the centerline of North Street to its intersection with Williamsburg Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of Williamsburg Avenue to its intersection with Holladay Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Holladay Street to the projected centerline of Scott's Creek; thence north along said Scott's Creek branch, its various courses, to the centerline of the channel of Scott's Creek; thence easterly along the centerline of Scott's Creek to its intersection with the corporate city limits in the southern branch of the Elizabeth River; thence northwesterly along the corporate city limits to its intersection at the Midtown Tunnel and the centerline of the Martin Luther King Freeway; thence southerly along the centerline of said freeway to the centerline of London Boulevard; thence westerly along the centerline of London Boulevard to the centerline of the track of the Norfolk and Portsmouth Belt Line Railroad property; thence south along said railroad centerline to the centerline of the track of the CSX Railroad (formerly Seaboard Coast Line Railroad) property; thence northeasterly and southeasterly along said railroad centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Elm Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Elm Avenue to the centerline of Randolph Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Randolph Street to the centerline of Effingham Street; thence northerly along the centerline of Effingham Street to the centerline of High Street; thence west along the centerline of High Street to the centerline of Chestnut Street; thence north along the centerline of Chestnut Street to the centerline of London Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-25; Code 1988, § 10-44; Ord. No. 2001-37, § 1, 8-28-2001)  
Sec. 10-45. - Precinct No. 10. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 10 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of London Boulevard and the Martin Luther King Freeway; thence northerly and northeasterly along the centerline of said freeway to its intersection with the corporate city limits at the southern branch of the Elizabeth River; thence westerly along the city corporate limits to its intersection with the centerline of the West Norfolk Bridge; thence southerly along said bridge centerline to the centerline of Bayview Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerline of said Boulevard to the centerline of Florida Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Florida Avenue to the centerline of the London Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerline of London Boulevard to the centerline of the Martin Luther King Freeway, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-26; Code 1988, § 10-45)  
Sec. 10-46. - Precinct No. 11. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 11 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of London Boulevard and the centerline of the track of the Norfolk and Portsmouth Belt Line Railroad property; thence westerly and thence southerly along the centerline of London Boulevard to the centerline of Hamilton Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Hamilton Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of Frederick Boulevard; thence southerly along the centerline of Frederick Boulevard to the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence northeasterly along the center of said railroad property to the centerline of the track of the Norfolk and Portsmouth Belt Line Railroad property; thence north along the centerline of said railroad property to its intersection with the centerline of London Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-27; Code 1988, § 10-46)  
Sec. 10-47. - Precinct No. 13. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 13 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Frederick Boulevard and the centerline of the track of the CSX Railroad (formerly Seaboard Coast Line Railroad) property; thence northeasterly and thence southeasterly along said railroad property to its intersection with the centerline of Elm Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Elm Avenue to its intersection with Randolph Street; thence westerly along the centerline of Randolph Street to its intersection with the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard; thence southerly along the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard to the centerline of Frederick Boulevard; thence northerly along the centerline of Frederick Boulevard to its intersection with the track of the centerline of the CSX Railroad (formerly Seaboard Coast Line Railroad) property, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-29; Code 1988, § 10-47; Ord. No. 2001-37, § 1, 8-28-2001)  
Sec. 10-48. - Precinct No. 14. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 14 shall be as follows: Beginning at a point where the centerline of Elm Avenue intersects with the eastern boundary line of the city; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Elm Avenue to the centerline of George Washington Highway; thence northeasterly along the centerline of George Washington Highway to the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard; thence westerly along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of Elm Avenue; thence north along the centerline of Elm Avenue to the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence west along said railroad property to the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard to the center of Paradise Creek; thence southerly and easterly along the center of Paradise Creek to its intersection with the eastern boundary line at the southern branch of the Elizabeth River; thence north and northeasterly along said city corporate limits to its intersection with Elm Avenue, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-30; Code 1988, § 10-48)  
Sec. 10-49. - Precinct No. 16. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 16 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of George Washington Highway with the centerline of Channing Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of George Washington Highway to its intersection with the centerline of Greenwood Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard; thence northerly along the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Paradise Creek; thence southeasterly along the center of Paradise Creek to its intersection with the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence southerly along the centerline of Victory Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Channing Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Channing Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of George Washington Highway, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-32; Code 1988, § 10-49)  
Sec. 10-50. - Precinct No. 17. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 17 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of George Washington Highway with the centerline of Channing Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of George Washington Highway to its intersection with the centerline of Greenwood Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to its intersection with the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard; thence southerly along the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Victory Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Gust Lane; thence southerly along the centerline of Gust Lane to its intersection with the southern city boundary line at the right-of-way line of the Norfolk and Western Railway Company; thence easterly along said southern corporate limits to its intersection with the eastern boundary line of the city at the southern branch of the Elizabeth River; thence north along said city corporate boundary to the center of Paradise Creek; thence northwesterly along the center of Paradise Creek to its intersection with the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence southerly along the centerline of Victory Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Channing Avenue; thence westerly along the centerline of Channing Avenue to its intersection with the centerline of George Washington Highway, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-33; Code 1988, § 10-50)  
Sec. 10-51. - Precinct No. 19. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 19 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Victory Boulevard with the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard; thence northerly along the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Greenwood Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to its intersection with the centerline of McLean Street; northerly along the centerline of McLean Street to its intersection with the centerline of Interstate Route 264; thence southwesterly along said interstate route to its intersection with the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Victory Boulevard to its intersection with the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-35; Code 1988, § 10-51)  
Sec. 10-52. - Precinct No. 20. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 20 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard and the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard; thence southerly along the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard to the centerline of Greenwood Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to the centerline of McLean Street; thence northerly along the centerline of McLean Street to the centerline of Interstate Route 264; thence northeasterly along said interstate centerline to its interchange with the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard; thence east along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-36; Code 1988, § 10-52)  
Sec. 10-53. - Precinct No. 21. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 21 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard and the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard to the centerline of Frederick Boulevard; thence northerly along the centerline of Frederick Boulevard to the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence 646 southwesterly along said track centerline to the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence southerly along the centerline of Victory Boulevard to its interchange with the centerline of Interstate Route 264; thence northeasterly along said interstate centerline to its interchange with the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard; thence east along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of Deep Creek Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-37; Code 1988, § 10-53)  
Sec. 10-54. - Precinct No. 22. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 22 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Frederick Boulevard and the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence north along the centerline of Frederick Boulevard to the centerline of Hamilton Avenue; thence north along the centerline of Hamilton Avenue to the centerline of High Street; thence west along the centerline of High Street to its intersection with the centerline of Western Branch Boulevard; thence west along the intersection of Western Branch Boulevard to the centerline of Rodman Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Rodman Avenue to the centerline of Caroline Avenue; thence west and northwesterly along the centerline of Caroline Avenue to the centerline of Beachfront Terrace; thence southwest along the centerline of Beachfront Terrace projected to the centerline of Baines Creek; thence southwesterly along said creek line, its various courses, to the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of McLean Street; thence southerly along the centerline of McLean Street to the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence northeasterly along said track centerline to the centerline of Frederick Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-38; Code 1988, § 10-54)  
Sec. 10-55. - Precinct No. 23. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 23 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of King Street and Rodman Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Rodman Avenue to the centerline of Caroline Avenue; thence westerly and northwesterly along the centerline of Caroline Avenue to the centerline of Beachfront Terrace; thence southwest along the centerline of Beachfront Terrace projected to the centerline of Baines Creek; thence northerly along said creek centerline to the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence northeasterly along said river branch to the center of a channel separating the sections known as Waterview and Westhaven; thence southeasterly along said channel to the causeway connecting the Waterview and Westhaven sections; thence southerly along the centerline of said causeway to the centerline of King Street; thence east along the centerline of King Street to its intersection with the centerline of Rodman Avenue, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-39; Code 1988, § 10-55)  
Sec. 10-56. - Precinct No. 24. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 24 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of London Boulevard and High Street; thence west along the centerline of High Street to its intersection with the centerline of Western Branch Boulevard; thence west along the centerline of Western Branch Boulevard to the centerline of Rodman Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Rodman Avenue to the centerline of King Street; thence west along the centerline of King Street to the centerline of the causeway connecting the sections known as Westhaven and Waterview; thence north along the centerline of said causeway to the centerline of a channel of the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence northwesterly along the centerline of said channel to the centerline of the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence northerly along said river branch to its intersection with the centerline of High Street; thence southeasterly along the centerline of High Street to the centerline of Willett Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Willett Drive to the centerline of Hartford Street; thence east along the centerline of Hartford Street to the centerline of Florida Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Florida Avenue to the line of London Boulevard; thence west and along the centerline of London Boulevard to the centerline of High Street, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-40; Code 1988, § 10-56)  
Sec. 10-57. - Precinct No. 25. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 25 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of High Street and the centerline of Willett Drive; thence northwesterly along the centerline of High Street to its intersection with the centerline of the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence northeasterly along said river branch to the centerline of the West Norfolk Bridge; thence southerly along said bridge line to the centerline of Bayview Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerline of Bayview Boulevard to the centerline of Florida Avenue; thence south along the centerline of Florida Avenue to the centerline of Hartford Street; thence west along the centerline of Hartford Street to the centerline of Willett Drive; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Willett Drive to the centerline of High Street, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-41; Code 1988, § 10-57)  
Sec. 10-58. - Precinct No. 26. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 26 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Greenwood Drive and the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence westerly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to the centerline of Duce Street; thence south along the centerline of Duce Street to the centerline of Horne Avenue; thence easterly along the centerline of Horne Avenue to the centerline of Ekstine Drive; thence south along the centerline of Ekstine Drive to the centerline of Warfield Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Warfield Drive to the centerline of Cavalier Boulevard; thence south along the centerline of Cavalier Boulevard to the southern corporate limits of the city at the right-of-way of the Norfolk and Western Railway Company; thence east along said corporate boundary to the centerline of Gust Lane; thence northerly along the centerline of Gust Lane to the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence northerly along the centerline of Victory Boulevard to the centerline of Greenwood Drive, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-42; Code 1988, § 10-58)  
Sec. 10-59. - Precinct No. 27. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 27 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Victory Boulevard and the centerline for the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence westerly along the centerline of said railroad property to the centerline of Greenwood Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to the centerline of Cavalier Boulevard; thence south along the centerline of Cavalier Boulevard to the centerline of Warfield Drive; thence east along the centerline of Warfield Drive to the centerline of Ekstine Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Ekstine Drive to the centerline of Horne Avenue; thence west along the centerline of Horne Avenue to the centerline of Duce Street; thence north along the centerline of Duce Street to the centerline of Greenwood Drive; thence easterly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to the centerline of Victory Boulevard; thence northerly along the centerline of Victory Boulevard to the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-43; Code 1988, § 10-59)  
Sec. 10-60. - Precinct No. 28. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 28 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Cavalier Boulevard and Greenwood Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence westerly along the centerline of said railroad property to the western corporate city limits, such point being in the center of a box culvert and situated 965 feet northeasterly from the railroad company's six-mile post; thence southeasterly along said western corporate limits to the southern corporate city limits at the right-of-way of the Norfolk and Western Railway Company; thence east along said southern corporate limits to its intersection with the centerline of Cavalier Boulevard; thence north along the centerline of Cavalier Boulevard to the centerline of Greenwood Drive, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-44; Code 1988, § 10-60)  
Sec. 10-61. - Precinct No. 29. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 29 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard and the centerline of Mayflower Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the east abutment of the highway drawbridge crossing the western branch of the Elizabeth River and known as the Hodges Ferry Bridge; thence northerly along the east abutment of said bridge to the north side of the bridge; thence northwesterly to a point in the center of the western branch of the Elizabeth River 100 feet north of the Hodges Ferry Bridge; thence northeasterly along the centerline of western branch of the Elizabeth River to its intersection with the centerline of Cypress Road projected northwesterly; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Cypress Road to the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of Elmhurst Lane; thence south along the centerline of Elmhurst Lane to the centerline of Cherokee Road; thence westerly and southerly along the centerline of Cherokee Road to the centerline of Mayflower Road; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Mayflower Road to the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-44.1; Code 1988, § 10-61)  
Sec. 10-62. - Precinct No. 30. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 30 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard and the centerline of Elmhurst Lane; thence northerly along the centerline of Elmhurst Lane to the centerline of the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence easterly along said river branch to the center of the channel of Baines Creek; thence southerly along said channel center, its various courses, to the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard; thence westerly along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of Elmhurst Lane, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-45; Code 1988, § 10-62)  
Sec. 10-63. - Precinct No. 31. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 31 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of McLean Street and the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence northerly along the centerline of McLean Street to the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of Elmhurst Lane; thence south along the centerline of Elmhurst Lane to the centerline of Airline Boulevard; thence westerly along the centerline of Airline Boulevard to the centerline of Greenwood Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence northeasterly along the centerline of said railroad property to the centerline of McLean Street, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-46; Code 1988, § 10-63)  
Sec. 10-64. - Precinct No. 32. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 32 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Cherokee Road and Elmhurst Lane; thence southerly along the centerline of Elmhurst Lane to the centerline of Airline Boulevard; thence west along the centerline of Airline Boulevard to the centerline of Greenwood Drive; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Greenwood Drive to the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad property; thence westerly along the centerline of said railroad property to the western corporate city limits, such point being in the center of a culvert box and situated 965 feet northeasterly from the railroad company's six-mile post; thence westerly to the center of Hare's Creek; thence northerly along the centerline of Hare's Creek to its intersection with the centerline of the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence northwesterly, northerly and northeasterly along the centerline of the western branch of the Elizabeth River as it meanders to a point 100 feet southerly of the highway drawbridge crossing the river and known as the Hodges Ferry Bridge on Portsmouth Boulevard; thence northerly along the abutment of said bridge to the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard; thence easterly along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of Mayflower Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Mayflower to the centerline of Cherokee Read; thence northerly and easterly along the centerline of Cherokee Road to the centerline of Elmhurst Lane, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-47; Code 1988, § 10-64)  
Sec. 10-65. - Precinct No. 33. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 33 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard and the centerline of Elmhurst Lane; thence westerly along the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard to the centerline of Cypress Road; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Cypress Road to a point in the center of the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence northeasterly, easterly, and southerly along the center of the western branch of the Elizabeth River to its intersection with the centerline of Elmhurst Lane projected northerly; thence southerly along the centerline of Elmhurst Lane to the centerline of Portsmouth Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-48; Code 1988, § 10-65)  
Sec. 10-66. - Precinct No. 34. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 34 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Churchland Boulevard and the centerline of the track of the Norfolk, Franklin and Danville Railroad property; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Churchland Boulevard to the centerline of High Street, West; thence southeasterly along the centerline of the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence southwesterly along the centerline of said river branch to the centerline of Sterns Creek; thence northerly and westerly along the centerline of Sterns Creek as it meanders from the western branch of the Elizabeth River to the centerline of the track of the Norfolk, Franklin and Danville Railroad property; thence northeasterly along the centerline of the said railroad property to the centerline of Churchland Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-49; Code 1988, § 10-66)  
Sec. 10-67. - Precinct No. 35. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 35 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Churchland Boulevard and the centerline of the track of the Norfolk Southern Railway (formerly the Norfolk, Franklin and Danville Railroad) property; thence northeasterly along said railroad property centerline to the centerline of Cedar Lane; thence southerly along the centerline of Cedar Lane to the centerline of Hatton Point Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Hatton Point Road to its intersection with Riveredge Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Riveredge Drive to its intersection with Holly Cliff Lane; thence southeasterly along the centerline of Holly Cliff Lane to its intersection with the projected centerline of the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence southerly along the centerline of said river branch to the centerline of High Street, West; thence northwesterly along the centerline of High Street, West to the centerline of the track of the Norfolk Southern Railway (formerly Norfolk, Franklin, Danville Railroad) property, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-50; Code 1988, § 10-67; Ord. No. 2001-37, § 1, 8-28-2001)  
Sec. 10-68. - Precinct No. 36. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 36 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection with the centerline of Hatton Point Road and the centerline of Cedar Lane; thence northerly along the centerline of Cedar Lane to the southern boundary line of the Craney Island Fuel Depot; thence southeast along said depot boundary line to the centerline of Craney Creek; thence easterly along the centerline of Craney Creek to the centerline of the western branch of the Elizabeth River; thence southerly and southwesterly along said river branch centerline to its intersection with the projected centerline of Holly Cliff Lane; thence westerly along; Holly Cliff Lane to its intersection with Riveredge Drive; thence northerly along Riveredge Drive to its intersection with Hatton Point Road; thence westerly along Hatton Point Road to the centerline of Cedar Lane, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-51; Code 1988, § 10-68; Ord. No. 2001-37, § 1, 8-28-2001)  
Sec. 10-69. - Precinct No. 37. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 37 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Cedar Lane and the centerline of the track now or formerly of Norfolk, Franklin and Danville Railway Company; thence southwesterly along said railroad centerline to the centerline of the track now or formerly of the Seaboard Coast Line Railway Company; thence northerly and westerly along said railroad property centerline to the centerline of Twin Pines Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Twin Pines Road to the centerline of Swannanoa Drive; and thence easterly on the centerline of Swannanoa Drive to the centerline of River Shore Road; thence northerly on the centerline of River Shore Road to the centerline of Hedgerow Lane; thence easterly along the centerline of Hedgerow Lane to the western property line of Craney Island Fuel Depot; thence southerly along the western property line of the Craney Island Fuel Depot; thence meandering easterly along the southern property line of Craney Island Fuel Depot to the centerline of Cedar Lane; thence southerly along the centerline of Cedar Lane to the centerline of the track now or formerly of Norfolk, Franklin and Danville Railway Company, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-52; Code 1988, § 10-69; Ord. No. 2007-72, § 1, 7-10-2007)  
Sec. 10-70. - Precinct No. 38. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 38 shall be as follows: Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Twin Pines Road and the centerline of the track of the Seaboard Coast Line Railway Company; thence easterly and southerly along the centerline of said railroad property to the centerline of the track of the Norfolk, Franklin and Danville Railway Company; thence southwesterly along said railroad property to the centerline of Sterns Creek, said point being the western city corporate boundary line; thence north along said centerline of a concrete lined ditch crossing Churchland Boulevard to a point 300 feet north of Churchland Boulevard; thence westerly along the corporate boundary line, which is parallel to and 300 feet north of Churchland Boulevard and U.S. Route 17, to the corporate boundary line of the City of Suffolk; thence northeasterly along said corporate boundary line to its intersection with the centerline of Hoffler's Creek Parkway, if extended; thence southeasterly along the extended Hoffler's Creek Parkway centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Twin Pines Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Twin Pines Road to its intersection with the centerline of the tracks of the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad Company, the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 9-52.1; Code 1988, § 10-70)  
Sec. 10-71. - Precinct for absentee voters. 
The City Hall Building, 801 Crawford Street, shall be established as the central absentee voter election precinct for the city for the purpose of receiving, counting and reading absentee voter ballots. 
(Code 1973, § 9-53; Code 1988, § 10-71)  
Sec. 10-72. - Precinct No. 39. 
The boundaries of Precinct No. 39 shall be as follows: The boundaries of Precinct No. 39 shall be as follows: Beginning at the point where the centerline of Twin Pines Road and the centerline of Hofflers Creek Parkway intersect; thence westerly along the centerline of Hofflers Creek Parkway, if extended, to the corporate boundary line of the City of Suffolk; thence northerly along said corporate boundary line to its intersection with the corporate boundary line of the City of Newport News; thence northeast along the Newport News corporate boundary line to a point on the fairway for shallow draft vessels and tows, said point being located on the corporate limits as same existed on January 1, 1968; thence easterly along the corporate limits following the fairway for shallow draft vessels and tows to its intersection with the centerline of the Norfolk Harbor Reach Channel; thence south along the centerline of said channel to the centerline of Craney Creek; thence northwesterly and westerly along the centerline of Craney Creek to the western property line of the Craney Island Fuel Depot; thence northerly along the western line of the Craney Island Fuel Depot to the centerline of Hedgerow Lane; thence westerly along the centerline of Hedgerow Lane to the centerline of River Shore Road; thence southerly along the centerline of River Shore Road to the centerline of Swannanoa Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Swannanoa Drive to the centerline of Twin Pines Road; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Twin Pines Road, the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2007-72, § 2, 7-10-2007)  
Secs. 10-73—10-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VOTING PLACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Duty to establish polling places, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-307. 
 
Sec. 10-91. - Procedure when designated voting place not available. 
In the event any of the voting places designated in this article are not available for any election, another suitable place in the precinct in question shall be secured by the electoral board. 
(Code 1973, § 9-64; Code 1988, § 10-91)  
Sec. 10-92. - Precinct No. 1. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 1 shall be at the Emanuel A.M.E. Church at 637 North Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-65; Code 1988, § 10-92; Ord. No. 1997-47, § 1, 7-8-1997)  
Sec. 10-93. - Precinct No. 5. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 5 shall be at the Hampton Roads Community Health Center at 664 Lincoln Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-69; Code 1988, § 10-93; Ord. No. 1997-47, § 2, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-94. - Precinct No. 7. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 7 shall be at the Park View Elementary School at 260 Elm Avenue. 
(Code 1973, § 9-70; Code 1988, § 10-94; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-95. - Precinct No. 9. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 9 shall be at the Third Baptist Church, at 461 Godwin Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-72; Code 1988, § 10-95; Ord. No. 1993-55, § 1, 7-13-1993)  
Sec. 10-96. - Precinct No. 10. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 10 shall be at the Port Norfolk Recreation Center at 432 Broad Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-74; Code 1988, § 10-96; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-97. - Precinct No. 11. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 11 shall be at the Mt. Hermon Village at 2400 Cutherell Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-75; Code 1988, § 10-97; Ord. No. 1997-47, § 3, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-98. - Precinct No. 13. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 13 shall be at St. Mark Missionary Baptist Church at 2714 Frederick Boulevard. 
(Code 1973, § 9-77; Code 1988, § 10-98; Ord. No. 2001-37, § 1, 8-28-2001; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-99. - Precinct No. 14. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 14 shall be at Brighton Elementary School at 1100 Portsmouth Boulevard. 
(Code 1973, § 9-78; Code 1988, § 10-99; Ord. No. 1992-12, § 1, 2-11-1992; Ord. No. 1999-2, § 1, 1-26-1999; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 ; Ord. No. 2018-08 , § 1, 1-23-2018)  
Sec. 10-100. - Precinct No. 16. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 16 shall be at the Cradock Middle School at 21 Alden Avenue. 
(Code 1973, § 9-80; Code 1988, § 10-100; Ord. No. 2002-34, § 1, 6-25-2002)  
Sec. 10-101. - Precinct No. 17. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 17 shall be at the Victory Life Fellowship at 24 Channing Avenue. 
(Code 1973, § 9-81; Code 1988, § 10-101; Ord. No. 1994-47, § 1, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 1994-75, § 1, 7-26-1994; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-102. - Precinct No. 19. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 19 shall be at Fairview Heights Baptist Church at 4704 Deep Creek Boulevard. 
(Code 1973, § 9-83; Code 1988, § 10-102)  
Sec. 10-103. - Precinct No. 20. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 20 shall be at Noble Street Baptist Church at 100 Noble Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-84; Code 1988, § 10-103)  
Sec. 10-104. - Precinct No. 21. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 21 shall be at the John F. Kennedy Community Center at 12 Grand Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-85; Code 1988, § 10-104; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-105. - Precinct No. 22. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 22 shall be St. Mark Deliverance Center at 3801 Turnpike Road. 
(Code 1973, § 9-86; Code 1988, § 10-105; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 ; Ord. No. 2018-62 , § 1, 7-24-2018)  
Sec. 10-106. - Precinct No. 23. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 23 shall be at Westhaven Baptist Church at 4900 Caroline Avenue. 
(Code 1973, § 9-87; Code 1988, § 10-106; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-107. - Precinct No. 24. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 24 shall be at The Senior Station at 3500 Clifford Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-88; Code 1988, § 10-107; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 ; Ord. No. 2018-116 , § 1, 12-11-2018)  
Sec. 10-108. - Precinct No. 25. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 25 shall be at the John Tyler Elementary School at 3649 Hartford Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-89; Code 1988, § 10-108; Ord. No. 1991-23, § 1, 3-12-1991; Ord. No. 1991-29, § 1, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 1992-67, § 1, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 2002-34, § 1, 6-25-2002)  
Sec. 10-109. - Precinct No. 26. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 26 shall be at the William E. Waters Middle School at 600 Roosevelt Boulevard. 
(Code 1973, § 9-90; Code 1988, § 10-109; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-110. - Precinct No. 27. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 27 shall be at Cavalier Manor Recreation Center at 404 Viking Street. 
(Code 1973, § 9-91; Code 1988, § 10-110)  
Sec. 10-111. - Precinct No. 28. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 28 shall be at the Lakeview Elementary School at 1300 Horne Avenue. 
(Code 1973, § 9-92; Code 1988, § 10-111)  
Sec. 10-112. - Precinct No. 29. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 29 shall be St. Andrew's United Methodist Church at 5615 Portsmouth Boulevard. 
(Code 1973, § 9-92.1; Code 1988, § 10-112; Ord. No. 2014-53, § 1, 6-24-2014 )  
Sec. 10-113. - Precinct No. 30. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 30 shall be at The Rescue Church at 4810 Portsmouth Boulevard. 
(Code 1973, § 9-93; Code 1988, § 10-113; Ord. No. 2016-24, § 1, 4-12-2016)  
Sec. 10-114. - Precinct No. 31. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 31 shall be at the West Park Church of Christ, at 926 Cherokee Road. 
(Code 1973, § 9-94; Code 1988, § 10-114; Ord. No. 1994-47, § 2, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 1994-75, § 2, 7-26-1994)  
Sec. 10-115. - Precinct No. 32. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 32 shall be at Hodges Manor Elementary School at 1201 Cherokee Road. 
(Code 1973, § 9-95; Code 1988, § 10-115; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-116. - Precinct No. 33. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 33 shall be at Pinecrest Baptist Church at 209 Felton Road. 
(Code 1973, § 9-96; Code 1988, § 10-116)  
Sec. 10-117. - Precinct No. 34. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 34 shall be the Churchland Branch Library at 4934 High Street West. 
(Code 1973, § 9-97; Code 1988, § 10-117; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 ; Ord. No. 2014-53, § 1, 6-24-2014 )  
Sec. 10-118. - Precinct No. 35. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 35 shall be at the Churchland Elementary School at 5601 Michael Lane. 
(Code 1973, § 9-98; Code 1988, § 10-118; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-119. - Precinct No. 36. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 36 shall be the Scottish Rite Temple at 3401 Cedar Lane. 
(Code 1973, § 9-99; Code 1988, § 10-119)  
Sec. 10-120. - Precinct No. 37. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 37 shall be the Churchland Middle School at 4051 Rivershore Road. 
(Code 1973, § 9-100; Code 1988, § 10-120; Ord. No. 2014-28, § 1, 4-22-2014 )  
Sec. 10-121. - Precinct No. 38. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 38 shall be at Grove Baptist Church, 5910 West Norfolk Road, Portsmouth, Virginia. 
(Code 1973, § 9-101; Code 1988, § 10-121; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 1, 1-8-2002)  
Sec. 10-122. - Precinct No. 39. 
The voting place for Precinct No. 39 shall be at Churchland Primary & Intermediate School, located at 5700 Hedgerow Lane. The name of Precinct 39 shall be "Churchland Primary & Intermediate School." 
(Ord. No. 2007-72, § 2, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 2018-48 , § 1, 6-26-2018)  
Chapter 11 - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL, EXCAVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Building regulations, ch. 7; flood protection, ch. 14.1; housing and community development, ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and local improvements, ch. 32; subdivisions, ch. 33.1; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 38; wetlands, ch. 39; zoning, ch. 40.1. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Code of Virginia, §§ 10.1-560—10.1.571; local control programs, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-562. 
 
ARTICLE I. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Title and purpose; authority. 
(a)  Title and purpose. This article shall be known as the "Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance of the City of Portsmouth." The purpose of the article is to prevent degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources of the City of Portsmouth by establishing requirements for the control of soil erosion, sediment deposition and nonagricultural runoff and by establishing procedures whereby these requirements shall be administered and enforced. 
(b)  Authority. This article is authorized by Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq., known as the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law. 
(Code 1988, § 11-1; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 1, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 11-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the plan-approving authority and the owner that specifies conservation measures that must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the plan-approving authority in lieu of a formal site plan. 
Applicant means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing land-disturbing activities to commence. 
Board means the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board. 
Certified inspector means an employee or agent of a program authority who: 
(1)  Holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of project inspection; or 
(2)  Is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
Certified plan reviewer means an employee or agent of a program authority who: 
(1)  Holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review; 
(2)  Is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment; or 
(3)  Is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq. 
Certified program administrator means an employee or agent of a program authority who: 
(1)  Holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of program administration; or 
(2)  Is enrolled in the board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
City means the City of Portsmouth. 
Clearing means any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover including, but not limited to, root mat removal or top soil removal. 
Department means the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation. 
Development means a tract of land developed or to be developed as a single unit under single ownership or unified control, which is to be used for any business or industrial purpose or is to contain three or more residential dwelling units. 
Director means the director of the department of conservation and recreation. 
Erosion and sediment control plan or plan means a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory, and management information with needed interpretations and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions to assure that the entire unit of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. 
Erosion impact area means an area of land not associated with current land-disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of 10,000 square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
Excavating means any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth materials. 
Filling means any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
Grading means any excavating or filling of earth material or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled conditions. 
Land-disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the commonwealth, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include: 
(1)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work; 
(2)  Individual service connections; 
(3)  Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road, street or sidewalk provided such land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced; 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land-disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system; 
(5)  Surface or deep mining; 
(6)  Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads, feeder lines, and off-site disposal areas; 
(7)  Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations; including engineering operations and agricultural engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, de-silting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Virginia Dam Safety Act, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1100 et seq. or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1163(B); 
(8)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
(9)  Disturbed land areas of less than 2,500 square feet in size; 
(10)  Installation of fence and signposts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
(11)  Shoreline erosion control projects on tidal waters when all of the land-disturbing activities are within the regulatory authority of and approved by local wetlands boards, the Marine Resources Commission or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; however, any associated land that is disturbed outside of this exempted area shall remain subject to this article; and 
(12)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs; provided that if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the plan-approving authority. 
Land-disturbing permit means a permit issued by the city for the clearing, filling, excavating, grading, transporting of land or for any combination thereof or for any purpose set forth herein. 
Local erosion and sediment control program or local control program means an outline of the various methods employed by the city to regulate land-disturbing activities and thereby minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program and may include such items as local ordinances, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement, and evaluation. 
Natural channel design concepts means the utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its bankfull bench and its floodplain. 
Owner means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
Peak flow rate means the maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
Permittee means the person to whom the permit authorizing land-disturbing activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved erosion and sediment control plan will be followed. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Plan-approving authority means the department of public utilities/public works, through the stormwater administrator or their designee, responsible for determining the adequacy of a plan submitted for land-disturbing activities on a unit or groups of units of land and for approving plans. 
Program authority means the city, which has adopted a soil erosion and sediment control program approved by the board. 
Responsible land-disturber means an individual from the project or development team, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out a land-disturbing activity covered by an approved plan or agreement in lieu of a plan, who: 
(1)  Holds a responsible land-disturber certificate of competence; 
(2)  Holds a current certificate of competence from the board in the areas of combined administration, program administration, inspection, or plan review; 
(3)  Holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion and sediment control; or 
(4)  Is licensed in the state as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq. 
Runoff volume means the volume of water that runs off the land development project from a prescribed storm event. 
Single-family residence means a noncommercial dwelling that is occupied exclusively by one family. 
State erosion and sediment control program or state program means the program administered by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board pursuant to the Code of Virginia including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdictions. 
Transporting means any moving of earth materials from one place to another place other than such movement incidental to grading, when such movement results in destroying the vegetative ground cover either by tracking or the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
Water quality volume means the volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
(Code 1988, § 11-2; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 1, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2009-33 , § 1, 4-28-2009)  
Sec. 11-3. - Erosion and sediment control program. 
(a)  The regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications promulgated by the board for the effective control of soil erosion and sediment deposition to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources are hereby adopted. Said regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control are included in but not limited to the "Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations" and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. 
(b)  Before adopting or amending regulations, the city shall give due notice and conduct a public hearing on the proposed regulations or amendments, except that a public hearing shall not be required when the city is amending its program to conform to revisions in the state program. A public hearing shall be held if the city proposes adoption or amendment of regulations that will be more stringent than the state program. 
(c)  An erosion control plan shall not be approved until it is reviewed by a certified plan reviewer. A certified inspector shall conduct inspections of land-disturbing activities. The erosion control program of the city shall contain a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. 
(d)  The department of public utilities/public works, through the stormwater administrator or their designee, shall be the plan-approving authority. 
(e)  The program and regulations provided for in this article shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the department of public utilities/public works. 
(f)  In accordance with, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561, stream restoration and relocation projects that incorporate natural channel design concepts are not man-made channels and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels. 
(g)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561, any land-disturbing activity that provides for stormwater management intended to address any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels shall satisfy the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels if the practices are designed to (i) detain the water quality volume and to release it over 48 hours; (ii) detain and release over a 24-hour period the expected rainfall resulting from the one year, 24-hour storm; and (iii) reduce the allowable peak flow rate resulting from the one and one-half-, two-, and ten-year 24-hour storms to a level that is less than or equal to the peak flow rate from the site assuming it was in a good forested condition, achieved through multiplication of the forested peak flow rate by a reduction factor that is equal to the runoff volume from the site when it was in a good forested condition divided by the runoff volume from the site in its proposed condition, and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels. 
(Code 1988, § 11-3; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 1, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2009-33 , § 2, 4-28-2009)  
Sec. 11-4. - Submission and approval of plans; contents of plans. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until he has submitted to the city an erosion and sediment control plan for the land-disturbing activity and such plan has been approved by the plan-approving authority. Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one local control program, an erosion and sediment control plan, at the option of the applicant, may be submitted to the board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an "agreement in lieu of a plan" may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan if executed by the plan-approving authority. Any person who commences land-disturbing activities prior to the approval of an erosion and sediment control plan or an agreement in lieu of a plan may be liable for a civil charge in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. 
(b)  The standards contained within the "Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations" and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook shall be used by the applicant when making a submittal under the provisions of this article and in the preparation of an erosion and sediment control plan. The plan-approving authority, in considering the adequacy of a submitted plan, shall be guided by the same standards, regulations and guidelines. When the standards vary between the publications, the state regulations shall take precedence. Three copies of the erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the city. The plan shall include all information required by the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. 
(c)  The plan-approving authority shall review erosion and sediment control plans submitted to it and grant written approval within 45 days of the receipt of the plan if it determines that the plan meets the requirements of the board's regulations and if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the conservation measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions of this article. In addition, as a prerequisite to engaging in the land-disturbing activities shown on the approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, to the program authority, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence prior to engaging in land-disturbing activities may result in revocation of the approval of the plan, and the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(d)  The plan shall be acted upon within 45 days from receipt thereof by either approving said plan in writing or by disapproving said plan in writing and giving specific reasons for its disapproval. When the plan is determined to be inadequate, the plan-approving authority shall specify such modifications, terms and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. If no action is taken within 45 days, the plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(e)  An approved plan may be changed by the plan-approving authority when: 
(1)  The inspection reveals that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulations; or 
(2)  The person responsible for carrying out the plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this article, are agreed to by the plan-approving authority and the person responsible for carrying out the plans. 
(f)  In order to prevent further erosion, the city may require approval of a plan for any land identified in the local program as an erosion impact area. 
(g)  When land-disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission, and approval of an erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(h)  Electric, natural gas and telephone utility companies, interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline companies and railroad companies shall file general erosion and sediment control specifications annually with the board for review and written comments. The specifications shall apply to: 
(1)  Construction, installation or maintenance of electric, natural gas and telephone utility lines, and pipelines; and 
(2)  Construction of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of the railroad company. 
Individual approval of separate projects within subsections (h)(1) and (h)(2) of this section is not necessary when board approved specifications are followed, however, projects included in subsections (h)(1) and (h)(2) of this section must comply with board approved specifications. Projects not included in subsections (h)(1) and (h)(2) of this section shall comply with the requirements of the city erosion and sediment control program. 
(i)  Any excavation activities within the Abex Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Area, as defined in article II of this chapter, shall also comply with the requirements of article II of this chapter. 
(j)  State agency projects are exempt from the provisions of this article, except as provided for in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-564. 
(k)  In accordance with the procedure set forth by Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563(E), any person engaging in the creation and operation of wetland mitigation banks in multiple jurisdictions, which have been approved and are operated in accordance with applicable federal and state guidance, laws, or regulations for the establishment, use, and operation of mitigation banks, pursuant to a permit issued by the Department of Environmental Quality, the Marine Resources Commission, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, may, at the option of that person, file general erosion and sediment control specifications for wetland mitigation banks annually with the board for review and approval consistent with guidelines established by the board. 
(Code 1988, § 11-4; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 1, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2009-33 , § 3, 4-28-2009; Ord. No. 2009-36 , § 1, 5-12-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)  
Sec. 11-5. - Permits; fees; security for performance. 
(a)  Agencies authorized under any other law to issue grading, building, or other permits for activities involving land-disturbing activities may not issue any such permit unless the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. 
(b)  No person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until he has acquired a land-disturbing permit, unless the proposed land-disturbing activity is specifically exempt from the provisions of this article, and has paid the fees and posted the required bond. 
(c)  The applicant shall pay an administrative review fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code at the time of submission of the erosion and sediment control plan. Except no fee shall be charged for the following: 
(1)  The review of an erosion and sediment control plan for the development of an individual single-family residential lot; or 
(2)  If the plan is submitted in conjunction with a commercial or industrial site plan review. 
(d)  No land-disturbing permit shall be issued until the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. 
(e)  The applicant shall pay a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the cost of land disturbing permit processing, permit issuance, and inspections for the following categories: 
(1)  Development of an individual single-family lot involving over 2,500 square feet of land-disturbance. 
(2)  Demolition of a single-family structure involving over 2,500 square feet of land disturbance. 
(3)  Multifamily residential development. 
(4)  Demolition of multifamily structures. 
(5)  Commercial development and subdivisions involving less than one acre of land disturbance. 
(6)  Commercial development and subdivisions involving one to five acres of land disturbance. 
(7)  Commercial development and subdivisions involving more than five acres of land disturbance. 
(8)  Demolition of commercial structures. 
(f)  All applicants for permits shall provide to the city a performance bond, cash escrow, or an irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the plan-approving authority, to ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should the applicant fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation measures required of him as a result of his land-disturbing activity. The amount of the bond or other security for performance shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost to initiate and maintain appropriate conservation action based on unit prices for new public or private sector construction in the city and a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs and inflation which shall not exceed 25 percent of the cost of the conservation action. Should it be necessary for the city to take such conservation action, the city may collect from the applicant any costs in excess of the amount of the surety held. Within 60 days of adequate stabilization, as determined by the plan-approving authority in any project or section of a project, such bond, cash escrow or letter of credit, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof shall be either refunded to the applicant or terminated, based upon the percentage of stabilization accomplished in the project or project section. 
(g)  These requirements are in addition to all other provisions relating to the issuance of permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such permits. 
(Code 1988, § 11-5; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 1, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 9, 5-12-2020)  
Sec. 11-6. - Monitoring, reports, and inspections. 
(a)  The city may require the person responsible for carrying out the plan to monitor the land-disturbing activity. The person responsible for carrying out the plan will maintain records of these inspections and maintenance, to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  The plan-approving authority shall periodically inspect the land-disturbing activity in accordance with applicable regulations to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. The owner, permittee, or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be given notice of the inspection. If the plan-approving authority determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land-disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the specified time, the permit may be revoked and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
(c)  Upon determination of a violation of this article, the plan-approving authority may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this article, issue an order requiring that all or part of the land-disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. If land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan, the plan-approving authority may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this section, issue an order requiring that all of the land-disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits are obtained. Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, or where the land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan or any required permits, such an order may be issued without regard to whether the permittee has been issued a notice to comply as specified in this section. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with such a notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority or by the permit holder for appropriate relief to the Portsmouth Circuit Court. If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven days from the date of service of the order, the plan-approving authority may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the city. The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the Portsmouth Circuit Court. Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by the plan-approving authority may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Portsmouth Circuit Court to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective action or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the plan-approving authority from taking any other action authorized by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 11-6; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 1, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2009-36 , § 2, 5-12-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 9, 5-12-2020)  
Sec. 11-7. - Violations, penalties, legal remedies. 
(a)  [Reserved.] 
(b)  The plan-approving authority or the owner of property which has sustained damage or which is in imminent danger of being damaged, may apply to the circuit court to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article, without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. However, an owner of property shall not apply for injunctive relief unless: 
(1)  He has notified in writing the alleged violator, and the program authority, that a violation of the local program has caused, or creates a probability of causing, damage to his property; and 
(2)  Neither the alleged violator nor the program authority has taken corrective action within 15 days to eliminate the conditions which have caused, or create the probability of causing, damage to his property. 
(c)  In addition to any civil penalties provided under this article, any person who violates any provision of this article may be liable to the city in a civil action for damages. 
(d)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this article, any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation. The city may bring a civil action for such violation or failure. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the city, except that where the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(e)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or condition of a permit or any provision of this article, such person shall pay a civil charge in an amount identified at the time of the issuance of the land-disturbing permit. Such charge shall be not less than $100.00 nor more than $2,000.00 for each violation or noncompliance with any regulation or condition of a permit or any provision of this article. Such civil charge shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty that could be imposed under subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  The commonwealth's attorney shall, upon request of the city or the permit issuing authority, take legal action to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(Code 1988, § 11-7; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 1, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2009-36 , § 3, 5-12-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)  
Sec. 11-8. - Appeals and judicial review. 
(a)  Any applicant who is aggrieved by any action of the city or its agent in disapproving plans submitted pursuant to this article shall have the right to apply for and receive a review of such action by the public utilities/public works director or his designee provided an appeal is filed with the public utilities/public works director or his designee within 30 days from the date of the action. The public utilities/public works director or his designee shall conduct an appeal hearing within 30 days from receiving a request for such hearing. In reviewing the agent's actions, the public utilities/public works director or his designee shall consider credible evidence and professional opinions presented by the aggrieved applicant and the city's agent. After considering the credible evidence and professional opinions, the action may be affirmed, reversed or modified. The public utilities/public works director's or his designee's decision shall be in writing, setting forth factual findings and conclusions, and shall be final, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The decision of the public utilities/public works director or his designee shall be subject to review by the circuit court, provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
(Code 1988, § 11-8; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 1, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 11-9. - Variances. 
The plan-approving authority may waive or modify any of the regulations in this section that are deemed inappropriate or too restrictive for site conditions by granting a variance. A variance may be granted under these conditions: 
(1)  At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request a variance to become part of the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall explain the reasons for requesting variances in writing. Specific variances that are allowed by the plan-approving authority shall be documented in the plan. 
(2)  During construction, the person responsible for implementing the approved plan may request a variance in writing from the plan-approving authority. The plan-approving authority shall respond in writing either approving or disapproving such a request. If the plan-approving authority does not approve a variance within ten days of receipt of the request, the request shall be considered to be disapproved. Following disapproval, the applicant may resubmit a variance request with additional documentation. 
(3)  The plan-approving authority shall consider variance requests judiciously, keeping in mind both the need of the applicant to maximize cost effectiveness and the need to protect off-site properties and resources from damage. 
(Code 1988, § 11-9; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 1, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 11-10. - Plan contents; number of copies. 
The plan shall include all information required by the handbook referred to in section 11-3 and required for subdivision preliminary layouts by the subdivision ordinances, excluding commercial and industrial developments. The plan for commercial and industrial developments shall conform to the requirements of the handbook and the general requirements for parking lots as set forth in the zoning ordinance in chapter 40 of this Code. Three copies of the erosion and sedimentation control plan, along with a topographic survey and a plan showing the proposed development use, including but not limited to, subdivision, housing project, commercial or industrial development, condominium or planned unit development, shall be submitted to the plan-approving authority. 
(Code 1988, § 11.1-8; Ord. No. 2005-98, § 3, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2006-103, § 6, 12-12-2006)  
Secs. 11-11—11-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ABEX SUPERFUND SITE 
 
Sec. 11-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abex Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Area means the area generally bounded by Fifth Street on the east, Effingham Street on the west, Lincoln Street on the south, and Race Street on the north and inclusive of the area within a 350-foot radius of the corner of Seventh and Harrison Streets. 
Excavate means any disturbance or removal of any soils, including, but not limited to, soils beneath existing permanent covers (e.g., sidewalks, streets and any other paved areas), building or other permanent structures within the Abex Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Area. 
Person means an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, consortium, joint venture, commercial entity, United States Government, state, municipality, commission, political subdivision of a state, or any interstate body. 
(Code 1988, § 11-41; Ord. No. 1995-56, § 3, 10-15-1996)  
Sec. 11-42. - Environmental compliance excavation permit required; Abex Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Area. 
No person shall excavate any soils located within the Abex Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Area, as defined in section 11-41, prior to obtaining an environmental compliance excavation permit for such excavation from the city engineer or his designee. 
(Code 1988, § 11-42; Ord. No. 1995-56, § 3, 10-15-1996)  
Sec. 11-43. - Environmental compliance excavation permit; application procedures. 
(a)  No environmental compliance excavation permit for excavation of soils within the Abex Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Area shall be issued to any person unless such person has submitted an application for such a permit to the city engineer or his designee. An applicant for such a permit shall submit the following information, in writing to the city engineer or his designee: 
(1)  A description of the purpose and location of such excavation; the dates on which such excavation shall take place; the depth of such excavation; and the equipment to be used to conduct such excavation; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of such applicant; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of any person who will perform the excavation (if other than the applicant); 
(4)  The professional or other qualifications, if any, of applicant or such other person who will perform the excavation; 
(5)  Proof of receipt of written notice of the information described in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(4) of this section, by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Region III, Director, Hazardous Waste Management Division, 1640 Arch Street, Philadelphia, PA 19103-2029; 
(6)  Proof of publication of a notice in at least one local newspaper of general circulation of a brief description of the purpose and location of such excavation and the name of the applicant and the person who will perform the work, if different from the applicant. 
(b)  The city engineer or his designee shall notify EPA and the public in writing or his intention to issue a permit under this section no later than five days prior to issuance of such permit. Notification of the public shall be accomplished by publication of such notice of such intent in a local newspaper of general circulation. Such notice shall: 
(1)  State the city's intention to issue such permit; 
(2)  Include the name of the applicant and the person who will perform the work, if different; and 
(3)  Provide a description of the purpose and location of such excavation. Applicant shall pay the cost of publication. 
(c)  An environmental compliance excavation permit shall not be issued to any person until a complete application containing all of the information described in subsection (a) of this section has been submitted by such person to the city engineer or his designee. 
(Code 1988, § 11-43; Ord. No. 1995-56, § 3, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 2002-37, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Sec. 11-44. - Environmental compliance excavation permit; terms and conditions. 
An environmental compliance excavation permit issued pursuant to this article shall include the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  All excavation activities shall be conducted in accordance with applicable requirements of OSHA and federal and state solid and hazardous waste management laws and regulations; 
(2)  All excavation activities shall be conducted in a manner which is consistent with the remedy and performance standards set forth in the Amended Record of Decision for OU1 of the Abex Superfund Site (signed August 15, 1994) and the Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) signed October 5, 1995. Both documents are contained in the Abex Administrative Record, which is located at the Portsmouth Public Library, Reference Section, and the offices of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1650 Arch Street, Philadelphia, PA. 19103-2029; 
(3)  No excavation activities shall be conducted in a manner which may present an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health or welfare or the environment due to the release or threatened release of any hazardous substance, pollutant or contaminant. 
(Code 1988, § 11-44; Ord. No. 1995-56, § 3, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 2002-37, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Sec. 11-45. - Violations; penalties. 
Each of the following acts or omissions are prohibited and shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor: 
(1)  Excavation within the Abex Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Area without an environmental compliance excavation permit. 
(2)  Excavation by a permittee within the Abex Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Area in violation of the terms and conditions of an environmental compliance excavation permit. 
(3)  Excavation within the Abex Superfund Site Operable Unit 1 (OU1) Area in a manner inconsistent with the requirements or prohibitions contained in section 11-44. 
(Code 1988, § 11-45; Ord. No. 1995-56, § 3, 10-15-1996)  
Sec. 11-46. - Additional remedies for violations. 
The city engineer may issue a stop work order to and/or revoke the environmental compliance excavation permit issued to any person who engages in an activity in violation of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 11-46; Ord. No. 1995-56, § 3, 10-15-1996)  
Sec. 11-47. - Violations deemed public nuisance. 
Each act or omission described in section 11-45 shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 11-47; Ord. No. 1995-56, § 3, 10-15-1996)  
Sec. 11-48. - Forfeiture of bond for violations. 
A permittee who violates a term or condition of an environmental compliance permit issued under this section shall be subject to forfeiture of any bond required under section 11-5 and payment of all costs incurred by the city in abatement of the nuisance created thereby, including handling, analysis, treatment, storage and/or disposal of any excavated materials, as well as security and administrative costs. 
(Code 1988, § 11-48; Ord. No. 1995-56, § 3, 10-15-1996)  
Sec. 11-49. - Required notices. 
All notices required by this article to be provided to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall be provided to: 
Director 
Hazardous Waste Management Division 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Region III 
1650 Arch Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2029 
(Code 1988, § 11-49; Ord. No. 1995-56, § 3, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 2002-37, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Chapter 12 - FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; risk management and insurance funds, §§ 2-1, 2-2; procedure for adoption of ordinance or resolution appropriating money or authorizing the borrowing of money, § 2-29(b); maintenance fund for cemetery lots, § 9-29; licenses, ch. 20; special assessments for local improvements, § 32-251 et seq.; taxation, ch. 35. 
State Law reference— General financial powers of cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1100 et seq.; Public Finance Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2600 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the city shall begin on July 1 of each year. 
(Code 1973, § 11-1; Code 1988, § 12-1) 
State Law reference— Uniform fiscal year for all cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500.  
Sec. 12-2. - System of accounts. 
The system of accounts and procedures employed with respect to funds of the city shall conform to regulations promulgated by the chief financial officer in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2509. 
(Code 1973, § 11-2; Code 1988, § 12-2; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
State Law reference— Uniform system of bookkeeping and accounting, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2509.  
Sec. 12-3. - Certification as to availability of funds. 
No appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be made unless the chief financial officer or his duly appointed assistant shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriated and available funds. 
(Code 1973, § 11-3; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-4. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Appropriations, to the extent they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered, shall lapse at the end of the period for which they were made. Grant appropriations made as a result of the operating budget shall lapse upon termination of the grant period, which shall include any extensions granted subsequent to the date of appropriation. 
(Code 1973, § 11-5; Code 1988, § 12-4; Ord. No. 1998-19, § 1, 4-28-1998)  
Sec. 12-5. - Transfers of appropriations. 
(a)  The chief financial officer may, at any time, transfer any encumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof within the same general classification of expenditures or within an office, department or agency. 
(b)  Should the city council make appropriations for an emergency contingency fund, the city manager may thereafter transfer any or all of the unencumbered portion thereof to any item of expense contained in the city budget, reporting such action and reason therefor to the city council at its next regular meeting. 
(c)  The city manager may, at any time during the fiscal year, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance not to exceed $100,000.00 from one department, project, program or purpose to another department, project, program or purpose within the same accounting fund. The city manager shall make a monthly report to the city council of all transfers greater than $50,000.00. 
(Code 1973, § 11-6; Code 1988, § 12-5; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 1997-25, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-6. - Depositories and security for city funds other than funds of the department of public utilities. 
(a)  All funds of the city, except funds of the department of public utilities, shall be deposited to the credit of the city in such banks of the city as may from time to time be designated. 
(b)  All deposits of funds of the city, except funds of the department of public utilities, shall be secured in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Virginia Security of Public Deposits Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4400 et seq. 
(Code 1973, § 11-7; Code 1988, § 12-6) 
State Law reference— Security for deposits act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4400 et seq.  
Sec. 12-7. - Withdrawal of city funds. 
Funds placed in city depositories pursuant to section 12-6 shall be withdrawn only as appropriated by the city council. The city treasurer, or designee, shall sign automated vendor checks. Such checks shall be drawn only upon a payment voucher approved by the department heads, constitutional officers and appointed officials, or their designees, stating the particular fund and appropriation to which the same is chargeable and the vendor to whom payable. The city treasurer or his designee shall sign all payroll checks. The city treasurer and the chief financial officer, or their designees, shall sign all manual checks. 
(Code 1973, § 11-8; Code 1988, § 12-7; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-8. - Depositories and security for funds of the department of public utilities. 
(a)  All funds of the city received by or on behalf of the department of public utilities shall be deposited to the credit of the department in such bank as may be designated by the council from time to time. 
(b)  All deposits of funds of the city received by or on behalf of the department of public utilities shall be secured in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Virginia Security of Public Deposits Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4400 et seq. 
(Code 1973, § 11-9; Code 1988, § 12-8)  
Sec. 12-9. - Duty of persons collecting city revenue. 
Every officer and employee of the city that collects or receives any moneys due the city shall remit such moneys over to the city treasurer at such times as may be directed by the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city or by the city manager. At the time of remittance to the city treasurer, such officer or employee shall submit a report to the city treasurer of each transaction. 
(Code 1973, § 11-11; Code 1988, § 12-10; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-10. - Port Facilities and Economic Development Fund. 
All funds received by the city pursuant to paragraph 6 of the Port Unification Agreement dated March 30, 1971, as amended by an addendum thereto dated April 18, 1973, shall be transferred and paid over into a separate fund known as the "Port Facilities and Economic Development Fund." Such funds shall be applied as appropriated from time to time, by the city council for any of the following purposes: 
(1)  Debt service on and retirement of an outstanding bond issue for the construction of a terminal facility as referred to and required by paragraph 6 of the addendum of the Port Unification Agreement. 
(2)  Economic development of the city through purchase of land and capital improvements. 
(Code 1973, § 11-12.1; Code 1988, § 12-11)  
Sec. 12-11. - Setoff of indebtedness due city. 
Before disbursing funds of the city all indebtedness owed to the city shall be deducted from any payments. 
(Code 1973, § 11-13; Code 1988, § 12-12)  
Sec. 12-12. - Notes to meet appropriations for current year—Authorized. 
The city manager and the chief financial officer are authorized to make notes, through the proper officers, to borrow money for the purpose of meeting appropriations made for the then current year in anticipation of the collection of the taxes and revenues of such fiscal year, and within the amount of such appropriations, and to renew any such notes becoming due, when such renewals are necessary. Such loans shall mature and be paid within one year from the date of their issue. Provisions shall be made in the annuals budget of each year for the payment of all unpaid loans predicated upon the taxes and revenues of the previous fiscal year. No extension of such notes shall be valid and no additional notes shall be issued under this section until all notes issued under this section during preceding fiscal years shall have been paid. 
(Code 1973, § 11-14; Code 1988, § 12-13; Ord. No. 1991-65, § 1, 6-25-1991; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
State Law reference— Notes to meet appropriations for current year, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2629.  
Sec. 12-13. - Same—Accompanying certificate. 
The following certificate shall accompany each note for the borrowing of funds issued pursuant to section 12-12. Such certificate shall be, as appropriate in either of the following forms: 
Portsmouth, Va., _______ 20___ 
The City Treasurer is hereby instructed by the City Manager and the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia, to make notes in the amount of $_______ for _______ days, to meet current expenses of the City; said amount to be repaid from the revenues of the City within one year. 
This instruction is given in accordance with section 12-12 of the Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia (2006). 
___________ 
City Manager 
___________ 
Chief Financial Officer 
Portsmouth, Va., _______ 20___ 
The City Treasurer is hereby instructed by the City Manager and the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia, to renew notes in the amount of $_______ due _______; said amount to be repaid from revenues of the City within one year from the date of the original note. 
This instruction is given in accordance with section 12-12 of the Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia (2006). 
___________ 
City Manager 
___________ 
Chief Financial Officer 
(Code 1973, § 11-15; Code 1988, § 12-14; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-14. - Notes in anticipation of bond issue—Authorized. 
(a)  In anticipation of the issuance of bonds and of the receipt of the proceeds of the sale of such bonds, the city manager and the chief financial officer are authorized to make notes, through the proper officers, to borrow money for the purposes for which such bonds have been authorized and within the maximum authorized amount of the bond issue, and to renew any such notes becoming due, when such renewals are necessary. Each such loan shall mature and be paid within two years from the date of its original issue; provided that on or after such maturity any loan now outstanding or hereafter made may be extended from time to time; provided, further, that no such extension shall mature and be paid later than one year from the date of the renewal of said loan. 
(b)  Any such loans may be retired by means of current revenues, special assessments or other funds, in lieu of retiring them by means of bonds; provided, that the maximum amount of bonds that has been authorized shall be reduced by the amount of such loans retired in such manner. 
(Code 1973, § 11-16; Code 1988, § 12-15; Ord. No. 1991-65, § 2, 6-25-1991; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
State Law reference— Authority to issue notes which mature and be paid within five years, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2626.  
Sec. 12-15. - Same—Accompanying certificate. 
The certificate hereinafter set shall accompany each note for the borrowing of funds issued pursuant to section 12-14 above. Such certificate shall be, as appropriate, in either of the following forms: 
Portsmouth, Va., _______ 20___ 
The City Treasurer is hereby instructed by the City Manager and the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia, to make notes in the amount of $_______ for _______ days, to be repaid by the City within two years. 
This instruction is given in accordance with section 12-14 of the Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia (2006). 
___________ 
City Manager 
___________ 
Chief Financial Officer 
Portsmouth, Va., _______ 20___ 
The City Treasurer is hereby instructed by the City Manager and the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia, to renew notes in the amount of $_______ due _______; said amount to be repaid from revenues of the City within one year from the date of the original note. 
This instruction is given in accordance with section 12-14 of the Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia (2006). 
___________ 
City Manager 
___________ 
Chief Financial Officer 
(Code 1973, § 11-17; Code 1988, § 12-16; Ord. No. 1990-99, § 1, 9-18-1990; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-16. - Disposition of certain paid and cancelled bonds and interest coupons. 
(a)  All bonds and interest coupons which have been paid and cancelled for more than ten years which are surrendered on bonds registered both as to principal and interest, shall be destroyed by the chief financial officer in the presence of two witnesses. A certificate, signed by the chief financial officer and the witnesses, showing the numbers and amounts of the bonds and coupons and the date of issue shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  The city council, by resolution, may approve the retention of certain paid and cancelled bonds which have historical significance for display, presentation and distribution purposes. Such resolution shall set forth the type, issue date and serial number of the bonds to be retained as well as the purpose for such retention. The chief financial officer shall certify prior to the release from his custody of any such bonds that all such bonds have been cancelled by perforation. 
(Code 1973, § 11-19; Code 1988, § 12-17; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 3, 2-13-2001) 
State Law reference— Destruction of bonds and coupons after payment in full, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2622.  
Sec. 12-17. - Compensation of jurors. 
A juror may direct in writing that compensation due him for his services as a juror be paid to the Portsmouth Behavioral Healthcare Services, the Portsmouth Department of Social Services, or the Portsmouth Juvenile and Domestic Relations District Court Services Unit, or to any combination of these agencies. 
(Code 1988, § 12-18; Ord. No. 1991-83, § 1, 8-27-1991) 
State Law reference— Compensation of jurors, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-619.  
Sec. 12-18. - Delinquencies; penalty and interest imposed. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by contract or agreement, in the event any payment on delinquent accounts due the city is not made when due, there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the unpaid payment due or $10.00, whichever is greater, but the penalty shall not exceed the amount of the unpaid payment due. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code or by contract or agreement, any person failing to pay any sum of money due the city by the date due shall incur, in addition to a penalty thereon, interest on that sum plus interest on any penalty assessed. Interest at a rate of ten percent per annum from the first day following the day such sum is due and said penalty is assessed shall be collected upon the principal and penalties of all such amounts due but remaining unpaid, and shall continue to accrue and be due until such sums are paid in full. 
(c)  Any provision of this Code notwithstanding, there is hereby imposed upon each person chargeable with a delinquent account, fees to cover the administrative costs and reasonable attorney's or collection agency's fees actually contracted for. The attorney's or collection fees shall not exceed 20 percent of the delinquent sum so collected. The administrative costs shall be in addition to all other penalties and interest, and shall be as set forth in Appendix A to this Code for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to 30 or more days after notice of delinquency but prior to the taking of judgment with respect to such delinquent account, and as set forth in Appendix A to this Code for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to judgment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-68, § 1, 6-26-2007, eff. 7-1-2007)  
Secs. 12-19—12-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 12-41. - Established; functions. 
There is hereby established a department of the city government known and designated as the department of finance, which shall include the functions of budgeting, accounting and retirement, and such other functions as may be provided by the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city or by order of the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 11-31; Code 1988, § 12-41)  
Sec. 12-42. - Documents in office subject to examination. 
The financial records, payment vouchers, contracts, bonds, cash receipts and other documents maintained in the department of finance shall be subject to the examination of the members of the city council, the city manager and the city's external auditors. 
(Code 1973, § 11-32; Code 1988, § 12-42)  
Secs. 12-43—12-61. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 
 
Sec. 12-62. - Appointment and control. 
The city manager shall designate a chief financial officer who shall be subject to his direction and control. 
(Code 1973, § 11-42; Code 1988, § 12-62; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 3, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-63. - Absences of the chief financial officer. 
Whenever from sickness or other cause, the chief financial officer is absent from his office or otherwise not able to perform the duties thereof, the chief financial officer may designate persons who shall be authorized to sign whatsoever documents the chief financial officer would be required to sign if present for duty. 
(Code 1973, § 11-49; Code 1988, § 12-63; Ord. No. 1995-77, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-64. - General powers and duties. 
(a)  Functions. The chief financial officer shall have authority and shall be responsible for the department of finance in order to discharge the following functions: 
(1)  Revenue and expense estimates. Compile the revenue and expense estimates for the budget and appropriation ordinances for the city manager. 
(2)  Capital estimates. Compile the capital estimates for the budget and appropriation ordinances for the city manager. 
(3)  Administer disbursements. Administer the disbursement of all moneys and exercise control over all expenditures to ensure that appropriations are not exceeded. 
(4)  Accounting system. Maintain an accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; maintain financial records for and exercise financial and budgetary control over each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for the items of expense contained in the city budget, which shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid thereon, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; and require reports of cash receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the city government to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient. 
(5)  Quarterly statement. Submit to the city council through the city manager a quarterly statement of all receipts, disbursements and encumbrances of funds in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city. 
(6)  Annual statements and reports. Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete set of financial statements and reports. 
(b)  Powers of chief financial officer. The chief financial officer shall have the power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Prescribing forms. Prescribe the forms of reports, cash receipts, payment vouchers, invoices or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and agencies of the city government. 
(2)  Examination, approval of documents. Examine and approve all contracts, purchase orders and other documents by which the city government incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that funds have been appropriated and will be available when the obligation shall become due and payable. 
(3)  Review and approval of claims. Review and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidences of claims, demands or charges against the city government and, with the advice of the city attorney, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges. 
(4)  Uncollectible taxes and receivables. Write off uncollectible taxes and other uncollectible receivables owed to the city up to the sum of $300.00 or which have been owed for more than three years for each such sum owed; in accordance with the procedures in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3910 et seq. 
(5)  Internal audits and reviews. Make periodic internal audits or reviews of all funds and all departments for proper charges, appropriations and expenditures and of all departments, officers and agencies collecting charges, fees, fines and other revenues for the city. These periodic internal audits or reviews shall be accomplished in such a manner and with such frequency as to ensure compliance with general law and adherence to internal control policies and procedures. In case of any discrepancies, the chief financial officer shall report any material discrepancies to the city manager and the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 11-43; Code 1988, § 12-64; Ord. No. 1995-77, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 1995-113, § 1, 11-28-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 3, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-65. - Duty regarding officers receiving revenue. 
It shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to monitor the receipt of revenues or moneys pursuant to section 12-9. 
(Code 1973, § 11-44; Code 1988, § 12-65; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-66. - Recovery from officers failing to make proper settlement. 
If any officer required by section 12-65 to submit reports, with vouchers and receipts, shall neglect to make an adjustment of his accounts when so required, and to pay over such moneys so received, it shall be the duty of the chief financial officer to issue notice in writing, directed to such officer and his sureties, requiring him, or them, within ten days, to make settlement of his account with the chief financial officer, and to pay over the balance of the money found to be due and in his hands belonging to the city according to the city's accounting records as overseen by the chief financial officer. In case of the refusal or neglect of such officer to adjust his accounts or pay over the balance to the city treasurer, as required, it shall then be the duty of the chief financial officer to make report of the delinquency of such officer to the mayor and the city manager, the latter of whom shall suspend him at once from office, proceed forthwith to institute the necessary proceedings for the removal of such officer from office, and immediately on his removal institute suit in the name of the city against him and his sureties to recover the balance of moneys so found to be due and belonging to the city. 
(Code 1973, § 11-45; Code 1988, § 12-66; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-67. - Duties as to leases and ground rents. 
The chief financial officer shall keep a list of all leases and ground rents and shall charge the amount of the same to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 11-46; Code 1988, § 12-67; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-68. - Maintenance of schedules generally. 
The chief financial officer shall keep a complete schedule of all mortgages, contracts, judgments, notes, bonds and other indebtedness belonging to the city and confided to his custody. 
(Code 1973, § 11-47; Code 1988, § 12-68; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-69. - Schedule of bad checks, drafts and debits; fee to be charged. 
The city treasurer shall maintain a complete list of all checks or drafts issued, published or passed to the city, and legally authorized debits, for payment of taxes or sums due which are subsequently returned because of insufficient funds, no account or account closed. The person issuing, publishing or passing such check or draft, or authorizing a debit to his account, shall, in addition to the sum due and all civil liabilities incurred by reason of said check, draft or legally authorized debt, pay to the city a fee not to exceed that authorized by the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106. 
(Code 1973, § 11-47.1; Code 1988, § 12-69; Ord. No. 1990-101, § 1, 9-25-1990; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 1998-36, § 1, 7-28-1998) 
Cross reference— Giving bad check for payment of taxes, § 35-16. 
State Law reference— Authority for above fee, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106.  
Sec. 12-70. - Preservation of effects of office; succession. 
The financial records and schedules supplied to the chief financial officer shall be maintained in an orderly and systematic manner and, at the expiration of his term of service, shall be turned over to the custody of his successor. 
(Code 1973, § 11-48; Code 1988, § 12-70; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 3, 2-13-2001)  
Secs. 12-71—12-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY TREASURER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Election, term and general duties of city treasurer, §§ 6.01, 6.03. 
Cross reference— Nuisance abatement lien docket book to be maintained in city treasurer's office, § 23-5. 
 
Sec. 12-116. - Office established. 
The office of city treasurer is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 11-72; Code 1988, § 12-116)  
Sec. 12-117. - Deputy treasurers. 
The city treasurer shall have in his office one or more deputy city treasurers who, in the absence or disability of the city treasurer, shall act in his stead. The city treasurer and his sureties shall be responsible for the acts of such deputies while in the performance of such duties. 
(Code 1973, § 11-76; Code 1988, § 12-117)  
Sec. 12-118. - Collection of revenue. 
Subject to the supervision of the chief financial officer in all matters pertaining to funds of the city, the city treasurer shall collect and receive all taxes, levies, assessments, license taxes, fees, accounts, claims, fines, costs and all other revenue or moneys accruing to the city, except as may otherwise especially provided by the provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 11-73; Code 1988, § 12-118; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-119. - Deposit of funds. 
All money received by the city treasurer shall be deposited daily intact by the city treasurer as promptly as practical after its receipt in a bank or savings institution authorized to act as depository therefore and he shall obtain from the bank two deposit certificates, one of which shall be filed with the chief financial officer. All deposits made pursuant to this provision shall be made in the name of the city. The treasurer may designate any bank or savings and loan association authorized to act as a depository to receive any payments due to the city directly, either through a processing facility or through a branch office. 
(Code 1973, § 11-74; Code 1988, § 12-119; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995)  
Sec. 12-120. - Record of cash receipts and disbursements. 
The city treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all cash receipts and disbursements and shall not make payment of any sums except in accordance with the provisions of section 12-7. The system of accounts, receipt forms and procedures employed with respect to funds of the city shall conform to regulations promulgated by the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1973, § 11-75; Code 1988, § 12-120; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 12-121. - Fee for the construction, renovation or maintenance of the courthouses, jail or court-related facilities. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed for the construction, renovation or maintenance of the courthouses or jail and court-related facilities an assessment in the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code, as part of the costs incident to civil, criminal or traffic cases filed in the circuit court and district courts located within the boundaries of the city. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed and remitted to the treasurer. Disbursements shall be as authorized by the city council for the construction, renovation or maintenance of courthouses or jail and court-related facilities and to defray increases in the cost of heating, cooling, electricity and ordinary maintenance. 
(b)  The Virginia Department of General Services, having certified that the city circuit and district courthouses in operation between January 1, 2008, and September 21, 2012, were not in compliance with the safety and security guidelines contained in the Virginia Courthouse Facility Guidelines, an additional fee as set out in appendix A shall be assessed as part of the costs in each civil action filed in the district or circuit courts and in each criminal or traffic case in the district or circuit courts. Such additional fee shall not be assessed in any civil action if the amount in controversy is $500.00 or less. Any assessment so collected shall be expended solely for the construction, reconstruction, renovation, or adaptive reuse of a structure or structures to replace the courthouses so certified as not in compliance. 
(c)  The assessments provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are in addition to the amount of clerk's fees or court costs already imposed or assessed for traffic or criminal cases and shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. 
(Code 1988, § 12-121; Ord. No. 1991-44, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1992-45, § 1, 6-9-1992; Ord. No. 2010-17, § 1, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. 2012-65, § 1, 11-13-2012)  
Sec. 12-122. - Local criminal justice training academy fee imposed on certain individuals. 
(a)  In addition to any other fee prescribed by law, the clerks of the circuit court and general district court, shall charge and collect a local criminal justice training academy fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code each time a fee is charged pursuant to Virginia Code, §§ 16.1-69.48:1, 17.1-275.1, 17.1-275.2, 17.1-275.3, 17.1-275.4, 17.1-275.7, 17.1-275.8 or 17.1-275.9, as each may be amended. 
(b)  Each such clerk shall remit such fees to the city treasurer. 
(c)  The treasurer shall hold such fees subject to disbursements authorized by the city council. All funds from such fee shall support the city's criminal justice training academy. 
(Code 1988, § 12-122; Ord. No. 2003-43, § 1, 7-22-2003)  
Secs. 12-123—12-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-90 , § 1, adopted September 22, 2009, repealed art. IV, §§ 12-141—12-151. Former art. IV pertained to the Municipal Finance Commission and derived from the Code of 1973, the Code of 1988; Ord. No. 1990-129, adopted December 11, 1990; Ord. No. 1995-81, adopted June 27, 1995; Ord. No. 1995-112, adopted November 28, 1995; Ord. No. 2001-03, adopted January 23, 2001; Ord. No. 2001-07, adopted February 13, 2001; Ord. No. 2004-18, adopted March 23, 2004; and Ord. No. 2006-64, adopted July 25, 2006. 
 
Secs. 12-141—12-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC PROCUREMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4300 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 12-171. - Purpose of article. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to increase public confidence in purchasing by the city, to encourage competition in public purchasing among vendors and contractors, to administer fairly and equitably purchasing policies among bidders, and to obtain high quality goods and services for the city at reasonable cost. 
(b)  It is the intent of the general assembly that competition be sought to the maximum feasible degree, that procurement procedures involve openness and administrative efficiency, that individual public bodies enjoy broad flexibility in fashioning details of such competition, that the rules governing contract awards be made clear in advance of the competition, that specifications reflect the procurement needs of the purchasing body rather than being drawn to favor a particular vendor, and that the purchaser and vendor freely exchange information concerning what is sought to be procured and what is offered. Public bodies may consider best value concepts when procuring goods and nonprofessional services, but not construction or professional services. The criteria, factors, and basis for consideration of best value and the process for the consideration of best value shall be as stated in the procurement solicitation. 
(Code 1973, § 11-100; Code 1988, § 12-171; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002)  
Sec. 12-172. - Application of article; compliance with federal or state law or terms of grant, gift, etc. 
(a)  This article applies to contracts for the procurement of goods, services, insurance and construction entered into by the city and the school board of the city involving every expenditure for public purchasing irrespective of its source. This article also applies to any other public body whose situs is in the city and whose board or commission elects to be included hereunder (hereinafter referred to as "city"). 
(b)  When the procurement involves the expenditures of federal or state assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any applicable mandatory federal or state laws and regulations which are not reflected in this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest which are otherwise consistent with law. 
(Code 1973, § 11-101; Code 1988, § 12-172)  
Sec. 12-173. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best value, as predetermined in the solicitation, means the overall combination of quality, price, and various elements of required services that in total are optimal relative to a public body's needs. 
Brand name or equal specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturer's names or catalog numbers to describe the standard quality, performance and other salient characteristics needed to meet the requirements of the city and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
Brand name specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturer's names or catalog numbers. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, or sole proprietorship operated for profit, or any other private legal entity. 
Construction means building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any structure, building or highway, and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. 
Contract means all types of city agreements, regardless of what they might be called, for the procurement of goods, services, insurance or construction. 
Contract modification means any written alteration in specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provision of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties of the contract. 
Contractor means any person having a contract with the city or a using agency thereof. 
Goods means all material, equipment, supplies, printing and automated data processing, hardware and software. 
Informality means a minor defect or variation of a bid or proposal from the exact requirements of an invitation to bid, or the request for a proposal, which does not affect the price, quantity, quality or delivery schedule for the goods, services or construction being procured. 
Insurance means a contract whereby, for a stipulated consideration, one party undertakes to compensate the other for loss on a specified subject by specified perils. 
Invitation for bids means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. 
Job order contracting means a method of procuring construction services by establishing a book of unit prices and then obtaining a contractor to perform work as needed using the prices, quantities, and specifications in the book as the basis of its pricing. The contractor may be selected through either competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation depending on the needs of the city. A minimum amount of work may be specified in the contract. The contract term and the project amount shall not exceed the limitations specified in Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4302.2 or 2.2-4303, as amended, restated or moved from time to time. 
Life cycle costing means an evaluation that takes into account all costs incidental to the planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance, and disposal of a system or facility calculated in terms of present value or annual owning and operating costs. 
Nonprofessional services means any services not specifically identified as professional services in this article. 
Professional services means work performed by an independent contractor within the scope of the practice of accounting, actuarial services, architecture, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, dentistry, medicine, optometry, pharmacy, or professional engineering. 
Public body means any legislative, executive, or judicial body, agency, office, department, authority, post, commission, committee, institution, board, or political subdivision created by law to exercise some sovereign power or to perform some governmental duty and empowered by law to undertake the activities described in this article. 
Request for proposals means all documents, including addendums and amendments, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals for goods or services. 
Responsible bidder or offeror means a person who has the capability, in all respects, to perform fully the contract requirements and the moral and business integrity, and reliability, which will assure good faith performance, and who has been prequalified, if required. 
Responsive bidder means a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation to bid. 
Reverse auctioning means a procurement method wherein bidders are invited to bid on specified goods or nonprofessional services through real-time electronic bidding, with the award being made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. During the bidding process, bidders' prices are revealed and bidders shall have the opportunity to modify their bid prices for the duration of the time period established for bid opening. 
Services means any work performed by an independent contractor wherein the service rendered does not consist primarily of acquisition of equipment or materials, or the rental of equipment, materials and supplies. 
Specification means any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or the nature of a good, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a good, service or construction item for delivery. 
(Code 1973, § 11-104; Code 1988, § 12-173; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 2, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 1, 9-13-2016) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 12-174. - Establishment of purchasing system; designation of purchasing administrator. 
There is hereby created a purchasing system to operate under the direction and supervision of the purchasing administrator. If no employee holds the title of purchasing administrator, the city manager may designate a responsible person to perform the duties of the purchasing administrator of the city, subject to the direction of the chief financial officer. 
(Code 1973, § 11-105; Code 1988, § 12-174; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 2, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-175. - General powers and duties of purchasing administrator. 
(a)  The purchasing administrator shall serve as the principal public purchasing official for the city and shall be responsible for the procurement of goods, services, insurance and construction in accordance with this article, as well as the management and disposal of supplies. 
(b)  In accordance with this article, and subject to the supervision of the chief financial officer, the purchasing administrator shall: 
(1)  Purchase or supervise the purchasing of all goods, services, insurance and construction by the city. 
(2)  Consistent with this article and with the approval of the chief financial officer, adopt operational procedures relating to the execution of his duties. 
(3)  Establish a procedure for the disposal of surplus property which shall provide that competition is ensured as practicable under the circumstances. 
(c)  With the approval of the chief financial officer, the purchasing administrator may delegate authority to purchase certain supplies, services and construction items to other officials of the city, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items. 
(Code 1973, § 11-105; Code 1988, § 12-175; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 3, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-176. - Program to facilitate participation in procurement transactions by small businesses and businesses owned by women and minorities. 
(a)  The purchasing administrator shall establish a program consistent with this article to facilitate the participation of small businesses, businesses owned by women, minorities, and service disabled veterans, and employment services organizations in procurement transactions. The program established shall be in writing and shall comply with the provisions of any enhancement or remedial measures authorized by the city manager pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-965.1, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, and shall include specific plans to achieve any goals established therein. Such program may include cooperation with the commonwealth, the United States of America, and other public and private agencies. Such program shall also include procedures for soliciting contracts from a list of businesses provided by the state department of small business and supplier diversity, or any successor state agency or department. 
(b)  A small, women-owned or minority-owned business that is certified by the department of small business and supplier diversity pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.2-1606, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, shall not be required to obtain any additional certification to participate in any program designed to enhance the participation of such businesses as vendors or to remedy any documented disparity. 
(c)  In awarding a contract for services to a small, women-owned or minority-owned business that is certified in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 2.2-1606, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, or to a business identified by a public body as a service disabled veteran-owned business where the award is being made pursuant to an enhancement or remedial program as provided in subsection (a), the city shall include in every such contract of more than $10,000.00 the following language: 
"If the contractor intends to subcontract work as part of its performance under this contract, the contractor shall include in the proposal a plan to subcontract to small, women-owned, minority-owned, and service disabled veteran-owned businesses." 
(d)  As used in this section 12-176, the following words, terms and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection (d): 
Employment services organization means an organization that provides community-based employment services to individuals with disabilities that is an approved Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF) accredited vendor of the department for aging and rehabilitative services. 
Minority individual means an individual who is a citizen of the United States or a legal resident alien and who satisfies one or more of the following definitions: 
1.  African American means a person having origins in any of the original peoples of Africa and who is regarded as such by the community of which this person claims to be a part. 
2.  Asian American means a person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, or the Pacific Islands, including but not limited to Japan, China, Vietnam, Samoa, Laos, Cambodia, Taiwan, Northern Mariana Islands, the Philippines, a U.S. territory of the Pacific, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, or Sri Lanka and who is regarded as such by the community of which this person claims to be a part. 
3.  Hispanic American means a person having origins in any of the Spanish-speaking peoples of Mexico, South or Central America, or the Caribbean Islands or other Spanish or Portuguese cultures and who is regarded as such by the community of which this person claims to be a part. 
4.  Native American means a person having origins in any of the original peoples of North America and who is regarded as such by the community of which this person claims to be a part or who is recognized by a tribal organization. 
Minority-owned business means a business that is at least 51 percent owned by one or more minority individuals who are U.S. citizens or legal resident aliens, or in the case of a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity, at least 51 percent of the equity ownership interest in the corporation, partnership, or limited liability company or other entity is owned by one or more minority individuals who are U.S. citizens or legal resident aliens, and both the management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more minority individuals, or any historically black college or university as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-1604, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, regardless of the percentage ownership by minority individuals or, in the case of a corporation, partnership or limited liability company or other entity, the equity ownership interest in the corporation, partnership, or limited liability company or other entity. 
Service disabled veteran means a veteran who (i) served on active duty in the United States military ground, naval, or air service, (ii) was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable, and (iii) has a service-connected disability rating fixed by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. 
Service disabled veteran owned-business means a business that is at least 51 percent owned by one or more service disabled veterans or, in the case of a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company or other entity, at least 51 percent of the equity ownership interest in the corporation, partnership, or limited liability company or other entity is owned by one or more individuals who are service disabled veterans and both the management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more individuals who are service disabled veterans. 
Small business means a business, independently owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are U.S. citizens or legal resident aliens, and together with affiliates, has 250 or fewer employees, or annual gross receipts of $10,000,000.00 or less averaged over the previous three years. One or more of the individual owners shall control both the management and daily business operations of the small business. 
Women-owned business means a business that is at least 51 percent owned by one or more women who are U.S. citizens or legal resident aliens, or in the case of a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company or other entity, at least 51 percent of the equity ownership interest is owned by one or more women who are U.S. citizens or legal resident aliens, and both the management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more women. 
(Code 1973, § 11-105; Code 1988, § 12-176; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 4, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Duty to establish above program, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4310B.  
Sec. 12-177. - Cooperative procurement. 
(a)  To the maximum extent practicable and possible, the purchasing administrator may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer a joint procurement agreement on behalf of or in conjunction with one or more other public bodies, or public agencies or institutions or localities of the several states, of the United States or its territories, the District of Columbia, the U.S. General Services Administration, or the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, for the purpose of combining requirements to increase efficiency or reduce administrative expenses in any acquisition of goods, services, or construction. 
(b)  In addition, a public body may purchase from another public body's contract or from the contract of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments even if it did not participate in the request for proposals or invitation to bid, if the request for proposals or invitation to bid specified that the procurement was a cooperative procurement being conducted on behalf of other public bodies, except for: 
(1)  Contracts for architectural or engineering services; or 
(2)  Construction, except for the installation of artificial turf and track surfaces, including all associated and necessary construction, which shall not be subject to the limitations prescribed in this subsection. 
(3)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit sole source or emergency procurements awarded pursuant to sections 12-217 or 12-219 of this chapter. 
(c)  Items so procured under a cooperative agreement with other jurisdictions or public bodies shall be exempted from the provisions of this article and any policies or procedures established by the city pursuant thereto; provided such procurements are the result of competition whenever practicable. 
(Code 1973, § 11-107; Code 1988, § 12-177; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 5, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-178. - City not to discriminate in soliciting invitations to bid and requests for proposals or awarding contracts. 
(a)  In the solicitation or awarding of contracts, the city shall not discriminate because of race, religion, faith-based organization, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, or any other basis prohibited by state law. 
(b)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4343.1(C) and (D), the city shall not discriminate against a faith-based organization. The city shall ensure that all invitations to bid, requests for proposals, contracts, and purchase orders display a nondiscrimination statement indicating that the city does not discriminate against faith-based organizations. 
(Code 1973, § 11-132; Code 1988, § 12-178; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002) 
State Law reference— Discrimination prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4310.  
Sec. 12-179. - Nondiscrimination provisions required in certain contracts. 
Every contract in excess of $10,000.00 shall include the following provisions: 
(1)  During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees: 
a.  That the contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, religion, color, sex, national origin, age, disability, or any other basis prohibited by state law relating to discrimination in employment, except where there is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the contractor. The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
b.  The contractor, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, will state that such contractor is an equal opportunity employer. 
c.  Notices, advertisements and solicitations placed in accordance with federal law, rule or regulation shall be deemed sufficient for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section. 
(2)  The contractor will include the provision of the foregoing paragraphs in every subcontract or purchase order over $10,000.00 so that the provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
(Code 1973, § 11-132; Code 1988, § 12-179; Ord. No. 1993-78, § 1, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 1-23-2001) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4311.  
Sec. 12-180. - Contract pricing arrangement. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, public contracts may be awarded on a fixed price or cost reimbursement basis, or on any other basis that is not prohibited. 
(b)  Except in the case of emergency affecting public health, safety or welfare, no public contract shall be awarded on the basis of a cost-plus a percentage of cost. A policy or contract of insurance or prepaid coverage having a premium computed on the basis of claims paid or incurred, plus the insurance carrier's administrative cost and retention stated in whole or in part as a percentage of such claims, shall not be prohibited by this section. 
(Code 1973, § 11-121; Code 1988, § 12-180; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 6, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4331.  
Sec. 12-181. - Multiterm contracts. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for goods, services or insurance may be entered into for any period of time not to exceed five years deemed to be in the best interest of the city provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefor. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be cancelled. 
(Code 1973, § 11-122; Code 1988, § 12-181)  
Sec. 12-182. - Progress payments, retainage, and penalty on construction contracts. 
(a)  In any contract for construction which provides for progress payments in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion, the contractor shall be paid at least 95 percent of the earned sum when payment is due, with not more than five percent being retained to assure faithful performance of the contract. All amounts withheld may be included in the final payment. 
(b)  Any subcontract for a public project which provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to the same limitations. 
(c)  Any contract for the sum of $200,000.00 or more for construction of highways, roads, streets, bridges, parking lots, demolition, clearing, grading, excavating, paving, pile driving, miscellaneous drainage structures, and the installation of water, gas, sewer lines and pumping stations where portions of the contract price are to be retained shall include in the bid proposal an option for the contractor to use an escrow account procedure as set out in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4334, for utilization of the retainage funds by so indicating in the bid documents. In the event the contractor elects to use the escrow account procedure, the escrow agreement form included in the bid documents and contract shall be executed and submitted to the city within 15 calendar days after notification of award of the contract. If the escrow agreement form is not submitted within the 15-day period, the contractor shall forfeit his rights to use the escrow account procedure. 
(d)  In any contract for construction with the city which includes a payment of interest on retained funds, the city may require a provision whereby the contractor, exclusive of reasonable circumstances beyond the control of the contractor, as determined by the purchasing administrator and stated in the contract, shall pay a specified penalty for each day exceeding the completion date stated in the contract. 
(Code 1988, § 12-182; Ord. No. 1995-77, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2002-22, §§ 1, 3, 5-14-2002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4333, 2.2-4334.  
Sec. 12-183. - Contract modification. 
(a)  A contract may include provision for modification of the contract during performance, but no fixed price contract may be increased by more than 25 percent of the amount of the contract or $50,000.00, whichever is greater, without advance approval of the city council. In no event may the amount of any contract, without adequate consideration, be increased for any purpose, including, but not limited to, relief of an offeror from the consequences of an error in his bid or offer. 
(b)  Any public body may extend the term of an existing contract for services to allow completion of any work undertaken but not completed during the original term of the contract, as permitted under Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4309(B). 
(Code 1973, § 11-123; Code 1988, § 12-183; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 1-23-2001; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4309.  
Sec. 12-184. - Performance and payment bonds generally. 
(a)  Upon the award of any public construction contract exceeding $500,000.00 awarded to any prime contractor, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4337, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, such contractor shall furnish to the city the following bonds: 
(1)  A performance bond in the sum of the contract amount conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract in strict conformity with the plans, specifications and conditions of the contract. 
(2)  A payment bond in the sum of the contract amount. Such bond shall be for the protection of claimants who have fulfilled contracts to supply labor or materials to the prime contractor to whom the contract was awarded, or to any subcontractors, in the furtherance of the work provided for in such contract, and shall be conditioned upon the prompt payment for all such material furnished or labor supplied or performed in the prosecution of the work. "Labor or materials" shall include public utility services and reasonable rentals of equipment, but only for periods when the equipment rented is actually used at the site. 
(b)  Each bond required by this section shall be executed by one or more surety companies selected by the contractor which are legally authorized to do business in the commonwealth. Such bonds shall be filed with and payable to the city. 
(c)  Nothing shall preclude the purchasing administrator from requiring payment or performance bonds for construction contracts below $500,000.00. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall preclude such a contractor from requiring each subcontractor to furnish a payment bond with surety thereon in the sum of the full amount of the contract with such subcontractor conditioned upon the payment to all persons who have and fulfill contracts which are directly with the subcontractor for performing labor and furnishing materials in the prosecution of the work provided for in the subcontract. 
(e)  In lieu of a bid bond or performance or payment bond required by this section, the bidder or contractor may furnish a certified check, cashier's check or cash escrow. A bidder or contractor may provide a personal bond, property bond, or bank or savings and loan institution letter of credit on certain designated funds in the face amount required for the bid, payment bond or performance bond, subject to the approval of the city attorney. Approval shall be granted only upon a determination that the alternative form of security proffered affords protection to the city equivalent to a corporate surety's bond. 
(Code 1973, §§ 11-125, 11-126; Code 1988, § 12-184; Ord. No. 1989-64, § 3, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 1992-57, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 7, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4337, 2.2-4338.  
Sec. 12-185. - Unauthorized purchases. 
No official elected or appointed, or any employee shall purchase or contract for any goods, services, insurance or construction within the purview of this article other than by and through the provisions of this article, and any purchase, order or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof is not approved and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(Code 1973, § 11-106; Code 1988, § 12-185)  
Sec. 12-186. - Public access to procurement information. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, all proceedings, records, contracts, and other public records relating to procurement transactions shall be open to the inspection of any citizen, or any interested person in accordance with the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq., as amended, restated or moved from time to time). Cost estimates relating to a proposed procurement transaction prepared by or for the city shall not be open to public inspection. 
(b)  Any competitive sealed bidder or offeror, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect bid and proposal records within a reasonable time after the opening of all bids but prior to award, except in the event that the city decides not to accept any of the bids and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, bid and proposal records shall be opened to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(c)  Any competitive negotiation bidder or offeror, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect bid and proposal records within a reasonable time after the evaluation and negotiations of proposals are completed, but prior to award, except in the event that the city decides not to accept any of the bids or proposals and to reopen the contract. 
(d)  Any inspection of procurement transaction records under this section shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. 
(e)  Trade secrets or proprietary information submitted by the bidder, offeror, or contractor in connection with a procurement transaction shall not be subject to public disclosure under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act; however, the bidder, offeror, or contractor, must invoke the protection of this section prior to or upon submission of the data or other materials, and must identify the data or materials to be protected and state the reasons why protection is necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 11-131; Code 1988, § 12-186; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 8, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4342.  
Sec. 12-187. - Prompt payment by city; notice of defects; late payment charges. 
(a)  The city shall promptly pay for the completed delivered goods or services by the required payment date. The required payment date shall be either: 
(1)  The date on which payment is due under the terms of the contract for the provision of such goods or services; or 
(2)  If such date is not established by contract, not more than 45 days after goods or services are received or not more than 45 days after the invoice is rendered, whichever is later, except in the instances where the source of the funding for the contract is the state or federal government. In such instances, the payment date shall not exceed 30 days. Separate payment dates may be specified for contracts under which goods or services are provided in a series of partial executions or deliveries to the extent that the contract provides for separate payment for partial execution or delivery. 
(b)  Within 20 days after receipt of the invoice for goods or services, the city shall notify the business concern of any defect or impropriety which would prevent payment by the payment date. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided under the terms of the contract for the provision of goods or services, if the city fails to pay by the payment date there shall be assessed any finance charges assessed by the business concern; provided, however, that such finance charge shall not exceed one percent per month. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the late payment provisions in any public utility tariffs or public utility negotiated contracts. 
(Code 1973, § 11-133; Code 1988, § 12-187; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 9, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4352.  
Secs. 12-188—12-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 12-211. - General requirements. 
All public contracts with nongovernmental contractors for the purchase or lease of goods or the purchase of services, insurance, or construction shall be awarded after competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation as provided by this article, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(Code 1973, § 11-108; Code 1988, § 12-211) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303(A).  
Sec. 12-212. - Requirements for certain state-aid construction contracts. 
(a)  No contract for the construction of any building or for an addition or improvement of an existing building for which state funds of not more than $30,000.00 in the aggregate or for the sum of all phases of a contract or project either by appropriation, grant-in-aid or loan are used or to be used for all or part of the cost of the construction shall be let except after competitive sealed bidding; except that competitive negotiation may be used for construction contracts in the following instances, upon a determination made in advance by the purchasing administrator and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not physically advantageous to the public, which writing shall document the basis for this determination: 
(1)  For the construction of highways and any drainage, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property; or 
(2)  As otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4308, as amended, restated or moved from time to time. 
(3)  As otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4308. 
(b)  The procedure for advertising for bids or for proposals and for letting of the contract shall conform, mutatis mutandis, to this article. A person who has been engaged as an architect or engineer for the same project under a separate contract shall not be eligible to bid on or submit a proposal for any such contract or to have the contract awarded to him. 
(Code 1973, § 11-108; Code 1988, § 12-212; Ord. No. 1989-64, § 4, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 10, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4303(C), 2.2-4305.  
Sec. 12-213. - Prequalification of bidders or offerors. 
(a)  The purchasing administrator is authorized to prequalify bidders or offerors prior to any solicitation of bids or proposals in accordance with the procedure set out in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4317(B), whether for goods, services, insurance or construction, by requiring prospective bidders or offerors to submit such information as the purchasing administrator shall deem appropriate, including samples, financial reports, and references; provided, however, that opportunity to prequalify shall be given to any prospective bidder or offeror who has not been suspended or debarred from bidding or submitting proposals for city contracts. 
(b)  The purchasing administrator may refuse to prequalify any prospective contractor in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4317(B), provided that written reason for such refusal to prequalify shall be made a part of the record in each case. The decision of the purchasing administrator shall be final. 
(c)  Prequalification of a bidder or offeror shall not constitute a conclusive determination that the bidder or offeror is responsible, and such bidder or offeror may be rejected as nonresponsible on the basis of subsequently discovered information. 
(d)  Failure of a bidder or offeror to prequalify with respect to a given procurement shall not bar the bidder or offeror from seeking prequalification as to future procurements, or from bidding on procurements which do not require prequalification. 
(Code 1973, § 11-130; Code 1988, § 12-213; Ord. No. 1995-77, § 1, 6-27-1995) 
State Law reference— Prequalification of prospective contractors, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4317.  
Sec. 12-214. - Cancellation or rejection of invitations and other solicitations and bids and proposals. 
An invitation to bid, a request for proposals or other solicitation provided for in this article may be cancelled, or all bids or proposals may be rejected, in whole or in part, when the purchasing administrator, with the approval of the chief financial officer, determines that it is in the best interest of the city to do so. The reasons therefor shall be made a part of the solicitation file. 
(Code 1973, § 11-114; Code 1988, § 12-214; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 11, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4319.  
Sec. 12-215. - Exemptions from requirements of competitive bidding or competitive negotiation—Generally. 
(a)  The requirements of this article for competitive bidding or competitive negotiation shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Purchases procured under the supervision of the Virginia Department for the Blind and Vision Impaired or from employment services organizations that offer transitional or supportive employment services serving individuals with disabilities. 
(2)  The acquisition of facilities by an industrial development authority under the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4900 et seq., as amended, restated or moved from time to time), and facilities for use by the city, the Commonwealth and its agencies, or other governmental organizations; provided, that any such facilities owned by the city, the Commonwealth or its agencies or other public bodies subject to the Virginia Public Procurement Act shall not be exempt from competitive procurement requirements. 
(3)  The procurement of legal services or the procurement of expert witnesses and other services associated with litigation or regulatory proceedings. 
(4)  Extending the term of an existing contract or services to allow completion of any work undertaken or not completed during the original term of the contract. 
(5)  Purchases for special police work when the chief of police certifies to the purchasing administrator that goods are needed for undercover police work. 
(6)  The procurement of perishable food; provided; however, that the using agency or department shall document the prevailing list prices as of the time of the purchase as part of the contract file. 
(7)  Procuring goods or personal services for direct use by recipients of public assistance programs as defined in Code of Virginia, § 63.2-100, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, the fuel assistance program, or programs operated by community services boards as defined in Code of Virginia, § 37.2-100, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, or purchasing services under the Children's Services Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.2-5200 et seq., as amended, restated or moved from time to time). Contracts for the bulk procurement of goods or services for the use of recipients shall not be exempted from the requirements of this article. 
(8)  Contracts for certain essential election materials and services, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4346, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, are exempted from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  A contract may be awarded without sealed bids or competitive negotiation on the basis of an existing contract previously awarded by the commonwealth, other local governments, or the United States of America, or agencies thereof, for the purchase of goods or services. 
(Code 1973, § 11-129; Code 1988, § 12-215; Ord. No. 1991-65, § 4, 6-25-1991; Ord. No. 1992-45, § 2, 6-9-1992; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 12, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4344—2.2-4346.  
Sec. 12-216. - Same—Sole source procurement. 
A contract may be awarded without sealed bids or competitive negotiation when the purchasing administrator determines in writing, after conducting a good faith review of the available sources, that there is only one source for the required goods, service, insurance or construction item. The purchasing administrator shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery and terms. A record of the sole source procurement shall be maintained that includes each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, a listing of the item procured under each contract, and the identification number of such contract file. The purchasing administrator shall issue a written notice stating that only one source was determined to be practically available, and identifying that which is being procured, the contractor selected, and the date on which the contract was or will be awarded. This notice shall be posted in a designated public area on the day the contract is awarded or the decision is made to award the contract, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1973, § 11-129; Code 1988, § 12-216) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303.  
Sec. 12-217. - Same—Purchases at public auction. 
(a)  Upon determination made in advance by the city manager or city manager's designee and set forth in writing that the purchase of goods, products or commodities from a public auction sale is in the best interests of the public, such items may be procured at the auction. The basis for such determination shall be documented in writing. 
(b)  The purchase of goods or nonprofessional services, but not construction or professional services, may be made by reverse auctioning. For the purposes of this section, the term "reverse auctioning" means a procurement method wherein bidders are invited to bid on specified goods or nonprofessional services through real-time electronic bidding, with the award being made to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. During the bidding process, bidders' prices are revealed and bidders shall have the opportunity to modify their bid prices for the duration of the time period established for bid opening. However, bulk purchases of commodities used in road and highway construction and maintenance and aggregates shall not be made by reverse auctioning. 
(Code 1988, § 12-217; Ord. No. 1988-63, 6-28-1988; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 13, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303.  
Sec. 12-218. - Same—Goods or services for legislative activities of council. 
The purchase of goods or services for legislative activities of the city council may be exempt from the requirement of sealed bids or competitive negotiation. Such exemption shall be made in writing by the city clerk prior to the purchase and kept on file in the offices of the city clerk and the purchasing administrator. 
(Code 1988, § 12-218; Ord. No. 1988-71, § 1, 7-12-1988)  
Sec. 12-219. - Same—Emergencies. 
(a)  In case of emergency, a contract may be awarded without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiations; provided, however, that such procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, an emergency shall be deemed to exist when a breakdown in machinery or equipment or a threatened termination of essential services or a dangerous condition develops, or when an unforeseen circumstance arises causing curtailment or diminution of an essential service or where materials or services are needed to prevent loss of life or property or where there is a threat to public health, welfare or safety. 
(c)  The purchasing administrator shall issue a written notice stating that the contract is being awarded on an emergency basis, and identifying that which is being procured, the contractor selected, and the date on which the contract was or will be awarded. This notice shall be posted in a designated public area on the day of the contract award or on the day the decision to award is made, whichever occurs first, or as soon thereafter as is practicable. 
(Code 1973, § 11-129; Code 1988, § 12-219) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303.  
Sec. 12-220. - Same—Small purchases. 
(a)  A contract may be made in accordance with small purchase procedures developed by the purchasing administrator if the aggregate or sum of all phases or terms is not expected to exceed $100,000.00 in the case of goods and services (other than professional services) or non-transportation construction; $25,000.00 in the case of transportation-related construction; or $60,000.00 in the case of a single or term contract for professional services; provided, however, that contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. Purchases under this section that are expected to exceed $30,000.00 shall require the written informal solicitation of a minimum of four bidders or offerors. Awards shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The name of the business submitting the quotation and the date and the amount of such quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a part of the contract file. 
(b)  A single quotation or term contract may be accepted from any one source in contracts which do not exceed $5,000.00. 
(Code 1973, § 11-129; Code 1988, § 12-220; Ord. No. 1989-64, § 5, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 1991-65, § 5, 6-25-1991; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 1-23-2001; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 14, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303.  
Sec. 12-221. - Same—Construction. 
Construction may be procured only by competitive sealed bidding, except that competitive negotiation may be used in the following instances upon a determination made in advance by city council and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public, which writing shall document the basis for this determination: 
(1)  For the construction of highways and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property; or 
(2)  At any time that the city has a population in excess of 100,000, provided that the city has the personnel, procedures, and expertise to enter into a contract for construction on a fixed price or not-to-exceed price design-build or construction management basis and shall otherwise be in compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable law governing design-build or construction management contracts for public bodies other than the Commonwealth. The procedure established by the city for fixed price or not-to-exceed price design-build or construction management contracts must be consistent with the two-step competitive negotiation process established under Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4302.2, as amended, restated or moved from time to time; or 
(3)  As otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4308, as amended, restated or moved from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 15, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-222. - Design-build or construction management contracts: eligibility requirements; award of contract. 
(a)  The city may enter into a contract on a fixed price or not-to-exceed price design-build or construction management basis provided the city complies with the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4308, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, and has implemented procedures consistent with the procedures adopted by the state secretary of administration for utilizing design-build or construction management contracts. 
(b)  Prior to making a determination as to the use of design-build or construction management for a specific construction project, the city shall have in its employ or under contract a licensed architect or engineer with professional competence appropriate to the project who shall advise the city regarding the use of design-build or construction management for the project and who shall assist with the preparation of the request for proposals and the evaluation of proposals. 
(c)  Prior to issuing a request for proposals for any design-build or construction management contract for a specific construction project, city council shall have adopted, by ordinance or resolution, written procedures governing the selection, evaluation and award of design-build and construction management contracts. The procedures shall: 
(1)  Be consistent with the procedures described in this chapter for the procurement of nonprofessional services through competitive negotiation; 
(2)  Require requests for proposal to include and define the criteria for the construction project in areas such as site plans; floor plans; exterior elevations; basic building envelope materials; fire protection plans; structural, mechanical (HVAC), and electrical systems; special telecommunications; and such other requirements as the city determines appropriate for the particular construction project; 
(3)  For design-build construction projects, include a two-step competitive negotiation process consistent with the standards established by the division of engineering and buildings of the Virginia department of general services for state agencies; and 
(4)  For construction management projects, include selection procedures and required construction management contract terms consistent with the procedures adopted by the state secretary of administration. 
(d)  Prior to issuance of a request for proposals for any design-build or construction management contract, city council shall have documented in writing that, for the specific construction project: 
(1)  A design-build or construction management contract is more advantageous than a competitive sealed bid construction contract; 
(2)  There is a benefit to the city from using a design-build or construction management contract; and 
(3)  Competitive sealed bidding is not practical or fiscally advantageous. 
(e)  A design-build or construction management contract shall be awarded to the fully qualified offeror who submits an acceptable proposal determined to be the best value in response to the request for proposals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 16, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-223. - Job order contracting; limitations. 
(a)  A job order contract may be awarded for multiple jobs using either competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation, provided: 
(1)  The jobs require similar experience and expertise; 
(2)  The nature of the jobs is clearly identified in the solicitation; and 
(3)  The contract is limited to a term of one year or when the cumulative total project fees reach the maximum authorized in this section, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  Job order contracts may be renewable for up to two additional one-year terms at the option of the city. The fair and reasonable prices as negotiated shall be used in determining the cost of each job performed, and the sum of all jobs performed in a one-year contract term shall not exceed $5,000,000.00. Individual job orders shall not exceed $500,000.00. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, any unused amounts from one contract term shall not be carried forward to any additional term. 
(d)  Order splitting with the intent of keeping a job order under the maximum dollar amounts prescribed in subsection (b) is prohibited. 
(e)  No job order under a job order contract shall be issued solely for the purpose of receiving professional architectural or engineering services that constitute the practice of architecture or the practice of engineering as those terms are defined in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400, as amended, restated or moved from time to time. However, professional architectural or engineering services may be included on a job order where such professional services: 
(1)  Are incidental and directly related to the job; 
(2)  Do not exceed $25,000.00 per job order; and 
(3)  Do not exceed $75,000.00 per contract term; 
(f)  Job order contracting shall not be used for construction, maintenance, or asset management services for a highway, bridge, tunnel or overpass. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 16, 9-13-2016)  
Secs. 12-224—12-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COMPETITIVE BIDDING 
 
Sec. 12-241. - Notice of invitation to bid; soliciting bids. 
Public notice of the invitation to bid shall be given at least ten days prior to the date set for a receipt of bids by posting such notice on the state department of general services electronic procurement website or other appropriate websites. In addition, notice may be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall include a general description of the articles or services to be purchased, shall state where bid information or specifications may be obtained, and shall state the time and place for opening bids. The purchasing administrator may also solicit sealed bids from other responsible prospective suppliers who have requested bid information. 
(Code 1973, § 11-109; Code 1988, § 12-241; Ord. No. 1992-45, § 3, 6-9-1992; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 18, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-242. - Request for submission of unpriced proposals in certain cases. 
When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced technical proposals. Such invitation shall set forth the criteria for determining acceptability of the technical proposals. Those bidders whose technical proposals have been deemed to be acceptable under the criteria set forth shall then be invited to submit a priced offer based on the technical proposal. 
(Code 1973, § 11-120; Code 1988, § 12-242)  
Sec. 12-243. - Effect of use of brand name in invitation to bid. 
Unless otherwise provided in the invitation to bid, the name of a certain brand, make or manufacturer does not restrict bidders to the specific brand, make or manufacturer. It conveys the general style, type, character and quality of the article desired, and any article which the city in its sole discretion determines to be the equal of that specified, considering quality, workmanship, economy of operation and suitability for the purpose intended, shall be accepted. 
(Code 1973, § 11-110; Code 1988, § 12-243) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4315.  
Sec. 12-244. - Prebid conferences. 
For complex equipment, supplies or repair, prebid conferences with prospective bidders may be desirable after draft specifications have been prepared. Such conferences shall be for the purpose of detecting unclear provisions and to facilitate wider competition by removing unnecessary restrictive language in the specifications. Such conferences shall be arranged with prospective bidders at the direction of the purchasing administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 11-111; Code 1988, § 12-244) 
State Law reference— Duty to establish procedure for receipt of comments or specifications, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4316.  
Sec. 12-245. - Bid bonds—Construction contracts. 
(a)  Except in cases of emergency, all bids or proposals for construction contracts in excess of $500,000.00, shall be accompanied by a bid bond from a surety company selected by the bidder which is legally authorized to do business in the state as a guarantee that if the contract is awarded to such bidder, that bidder will enter into the contract for the work specified in the bid. The amount of the bid bond shall not exceed five percent of the amount of the bid. Bid bonds may be required for construction contracts of less than $500,000.00 in the discretion of the purchasing administrator. 
(b)  No forfeiture under a bid bond shall exceed the lesser of the difference between the bid for which the bond was written and the next low bid or the face amount of the bid bond. 
(Code 1973, § 11-112; Code 1988, § 12-245; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 19, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4336.  
Sec. 12-246. - Bid bonds—Other contracts. 
(a)  At the discretion of the purchasing administrator, bidders may be required to submit with their bid a bond, in an amount to be determined by the purchasing administrator and specified in the invitation to bid. 
(b)  The purchasing administrator may require successful bidders to furnish a performance bond or a payment bond at the expense of the successful bidder, in amounts to be determined by the purchasing administrator and specified in the invitation to bid, to ensure the satisfactory completion of the work for which the contract or purchase order is awarded. 
(c)  Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety when the purchasing administrator has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the purchasing administrator upon failure on his part to enter a contract within ten days after the award. 
(Code 1973, § 11-113; Code 1988, § 12-246; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 20, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-247. - Security in lieu of bid bond. 
(a)  In lieu of a bid bond, a bidder may furnish a certified check, cashier's check or cash escrow in the face amount required for the bond. 
(b)  If approved by the city attorney, a bidder may furnish a personal bond, property bond, or bank or savings and loan institution letter of credit on certain designated funds in the face amount required for the bid bond. Approval shall be granted only upon a determination that the alternative form of security proffered affords protection to the city equivalent to the corporate surety bond. 
(Code 1973, § 11-126; Code 1988, § 12-247; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 21, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4338.  
Sec. 12-248. - Waiver of bid informalities. 
The city may waive informalities in bids. 
(Code 1973, § 11-118; Code 1988, § 12-248) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4319.  
Sec. 12-249. - Submission and opening of bids. 
All bids shall be submitted in sealed envelopes addressed to the purchasing administrator and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place designated in the invitation to bid. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as the purchasing administrator deems appropriate, together with the name of each bidder shall be recorded and made public. 
(Code 1973, § 11-115; Code 1988, § 12-249; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 22, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-250. - Withdrawal of bid due to error. 
(a)  A bidder for a public construction contract, other than a contract for construction or maintenance of public highways, may withdraw his bid from consideration if the price bid was substantially lower than the other bids due solely to a mistake therein, provided the bid was submitted in good faith, and the mistake was a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake, and was actually due to an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of a bid, which unintentional arithmetic error or unintentional omission can be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from an inspection of original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. If a bid contains both clerical and judgment mistakes, a bidder may withdraw his bid from consideration if the price bid would have been substantially lower than the other bids due solely to the clerical mistake, that was an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of a bid which shall be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection of original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. 
(b)  The procedure of the bid withdrawal shall be stated as follows in the advertisement for bids: "The bidder shall give notice in writing of his claim of right to withdraw his bid within two business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure and shall submit original work papers with such notice." The work papers shall be delivered by the bidder in person or by registered mail. In either instance, such work papers, documents and materials may be considered as trade secrets or proprietary information subject to the conditions of Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4342, as amended, restated or moved from time to time. The contract shall not be awarded by the public body until the two business day period has elapsed. Such mistake shall be proved only from the original work papers, documents, and materials delivered as herein required. 
(c)  No bid may be withdrawn under this section when the result would be the awarding of the contract to another bid of the same bidder or of another bidder in which the ownership of the withdrawing bidder is more than five percent. 
(d)  If a bid is withdrawn pursuant to this section, the lowest remaining responsive and responsible bidder shall be deemed to be the low bidder. 
(e)  No bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid pursuant to this section shall, for compensation, supply any material or labor to or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for the person or firm to whom the contract is awarded or otherwise benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project for which the withdrawn bid was submitted. 
(f)  If the purchasing administrator denies the withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of this section, he shall notify the bidder in writing stating the reasons for his decision and award the contract to such bidder at the bid price, provided such bidder is a responsible and responsive bidder. 
(g)  Procedure for the withdrawal of bids for other than construction contracts shall be the same as provided by this section for construction contracts when deemed applicable. 
(Code 1973, § 11-116; Code 1988, § 12-250; Ord. No. 1995-77, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 1999-17, § 1, 6-22-1999; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 23, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4330.  
Sec. 12-251. - Bid evaluation. 
Evaluation of bids shall be based upon the requirements set forth in the invitation, which may include special qualifications of potential contractors, life cycle costing, value analysis, and any other criteria such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose, the quality of performance of a bidder on previous contracts, the sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the services, the ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract and the character, integrity, reputation, judgment and experience of the bidder, or such other factors as may be deemed in the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 11-117; Code 1988, § 12-251) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4302.1.  
Sec. 12-252. - Bid award generally. 
(a)  Bids shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. When the terms and conditions of multiple bids are so provided in the invitation to bid, awards may be made to more than one bidder. 
(b)  Unless cancelled or rejected, a responsible bid from the lowest responsible and responsive bidder shall be accepted as submitted except that if the bid from the lowest responsible and responsive bidder exceeds available funds, the city may negotiate with the apparent low bidder to obtain a contract price within available funds. 
(c)  When the award is not to the apparent low bidder, a full and complete statement for the reasons for making the award to other than the apparent low bidder shall be prepared by the using department and must be approved by the purchasing administrator in writing. The approved statement shall be filed with the other papers relating to the bid award. 
(d)  Any bidder or offeror who desires to protest an award or the announcement of a decision to award shall submit the protest in writing to the purchasing administrator no later than ten days after the public notice of an award or the announcement of the decision to award. No protest shall be received for a claim that the selected bidder or offeror is not a responsible bidder or offeror. The written protest shall include the basis for the protest and the relief sought. The purchasing administrator shall issue a decision in writing within ten days of receiving the written protest and the purchasing administrator's decision shall be final, unless appealed within ten days to the circuit court in the city, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4364, as amended, restated or moved from time to time. 
(Code 1973, § 11-118; Code 1988, § 12-252; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 2, 1-23-2001; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 24, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsection (b), Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4318; provisions similar to subsection (d), Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4360 et seq.  
Sec. 12-253. - Tie bids. 
(a)  In the case of a tie bid, preference shall be given first to goods, services and construction produced or provided by a local bidder from the city. 
(b)  In the case of a tie bid to which subsection (a) of this section is inapplicable, preference shall be given to goods produced in Virginia, and goods or services or construction provided by Virginia persons, firms or corporations. Otherwise the tie shall be decided by lot. 
(Code 1973, § 11-119; Code 1988, § 12-253; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4324.  
Sec. 12-254. - Public construction contract provisions barring damages for unreasonable delays declared void. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4335, any provision contained in any public construction contract that purports to waive, release, or extinguish the rights of a contractor to recover costs or damages for unreasonable delay in performing such contract, either on his behalf or on behalf of his subcontractor if and to the extent the delay is caused by acts or omissions of the public body, its agents or employees and due to causes within their control shall be void and unenforceable as against public policy. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed to render void any provision of a public construction contract that: 
(1)  Allows a public body to recover that portion of delay costs caused by the acts or omissions of the contractor, or its subcontractors, agents or employees; 
(2)  Requires notice of any delay by the party claiming the delay; 
(3)  Provides for liquidated damages for delay; or 
(4)  Provides for arbitration or any other procedure designed to settle contract disputes. 
(c)  A contractor making a claim against a public body for costs or damages due to the alleged delaying of the contractor in the performance of its work under any public construction contract shall be liable to the public body and shall pay it for a percentage of all costs incurred by the public body in investigating, analyzing, negotiating, litigating and arbitrating the claim, which percentage shall be equal to the percentage of the contractor's total delay claim that is determined through litigation or arbitration to be false or to have no basis in law or in fact. 
(d)  A public body denying a contractor's claim for costs or damages due to the alleged delaying of the contractor in the performance of work under any public construction contract shall be liable to and shall pay such contractor a percentage of all costs incurred by the contractor to investigate, analyze, negotiate, litigate and arbitrate the claim. The percentage paid by the public body shall be equal to the percentage of the contractor's total delay claim for which the public body's denial is determined through litigation or arbitration to have been made in bad faith. 
(Code 1988, § 12-254; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 3, 5-14-2002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4335.  
Sec. 12-255. - Actions on payment bonds; waiver of right to sue. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, any claimant who has performed labor or furnished material in accordance with the contract documents in furtherance of the work provided in any contract for which a payment bond has been given, and who has not been paid in full before the expiration of 90 days after the day on which the claimant performed the last of the labor or furnished the last of the materials for which he claims payment, may bring an action on the payment bond to recover any amount due him for the labor or material. The obligee named in the bond need not be named a party to the action. 
(b)  Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with any subcontractor from whom the contractor has not required a subcontractor payment bond under Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4337(G), as amended, restated or moved from time to time, but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with the contractor, may bring an action on the contractor's payment bond only if he has given written notice to the contractor within 90 days from the day on which the claimant performed the last of the labor or furnished the last of the materials for which he claims payment, stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the person for whom the work was performed or to whom the material was furnished. Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with a subcontractor from whom the contractor has required a subcontractor payment bond under Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4337(G), as amended, restated or moved from time to time, but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the subcontractor's payment bond. Notice to the contractor shall be served by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to such contractor at any place where his office is regularly maintained for the transaction of business. Claims for sums withheld as retainages with respect to labor performed or materials furnished, shall not be subject to the time limitations stated in this subsection. 
(c)  Any action on a payment bond shall be brought within one year after the day on which the person bringing such action last performed labor or last furnished or supplied materials. 
(d)  Any waiver of the right to sue on the payment bond required by this section shall be void unless it is in writing, signed by the person whose right is waived, and executed after such person has performed labor or furnished material in accordance with the contract documents. 
(Code 1988, § 12-255; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 3, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 25, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4341.  
Secs. 12-256—12-275. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - COMPETITIVE NEGOTIATIONS 
 
Sec. 12-276. - Negotiation for other than professional services generally. 
(a)  Upon a determination made in advance by the purchasing administrator and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public, goods, services or insurance may be procured by competitive negotiation. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
(b)  Proposals shall be solicited from potential contractors by request for proposals which shall be in writing and shall indicate in general terms that which is sought to be procured, specifying the factors which will be used in evaluating the proposal, indicating whether a numerical scoring system will be used in evaluation of the proposal, and containing or incorporating by reference the other applicable contractual terms and conditions, including any unique capabilities, specifications or qualifications that will be required. In the event that a numerical scoring system will be used in the evaluation of proposals, the point values assigned to each of the evaluation criteria shall be included in the request for proposals or posted at the location designated for public posting of procurement notices prior to the due date and time for receiving proposals. No request for proposals for construction authorized by this article shall condition a successful offeror's eligibility on having a specified experience modification factor. 
(c)  At least ten days prior to the date set for receipt of proposals, public notice shall be given by posting the request for proposals on the state department of general services electronic procurement website or other appropriate websites. In addition, proposals shall be published in a publication or newspaper of general circulation in the city. In addition, a proposal may be solicited directly from potential contractors. 
(d)  Selection shall be made of two or more offerors deemed to be fully qualified and best suited among those submitting proposals, on the basis of the factors involved in the request for proposals, including price if so stated in the request for proposal. Negotiations shall then be conducted with each of the offerors so selected. Price shall be considered, but need not be the sole determining factor. After negotiations have been conducted with each offeror or offerors so selected, the purchasing administrator shall select the offeror which, in his opinion, has made the best proposal, and shall award the contract to that offeror or offerors. When the terms and conditions of multiple awards are so provided in the request for proposals, awards may be made to more than one offeror. Should the purchasing administrator determine in writing and in his sole discretion that only one offeror is fully qualified, or that one offeror is clearly more highly qualified than the others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining the best and final offers. In conducting discussions, evaluations, and negotiations there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(e)  Awards shall be made to the responsible offeror or offerors whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain a statement in writing of the basis on which the award was made. 
(Code 1973, § 11-127; Code 1988, § 12-276; Ord. No. 1989-64, § 6, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 26, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4301, 2.2-4303, 2.2-4346.  
Sec. 12-277. - Negotiation for insurance. 
Upon a written determination made in advance by the city council that procurement by competitive negotiation for professional services is either not practicable or fiscally advantageous, insurance may be procured through a licensed agent or broker selected in the manner provided for competitive negotiation as set forth in section 12-276. The basis for this determination shall be documented in writing. 
(Code 1988, § 12-277; Ord. No. 1988-63, 6-28-1988; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 27, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4303, 2.2-4346.  
Sec. 12-278. - Negotiation for professional services. 
(a)  Professional services shall be procured by competitive negotiation when the cost of the professional services is expected to exceed $60,000.00. The purchasing administrator and representative of the using department or agency shall engage in individual discussions with two or more offerors deemed fully qualified, responsible and suitable on the basis of initial responses, with emphasis on professional competence, to provide the required services. Repetitive informal interviews shall be permissible. Such offerors shall be encouraged to elaborate on their qualifications and performance data or staff expertise pertinent to the proposed project, as well as alternative concepts. The request for proposals shall not, however, request that offerors furnish estimates of man-hours or cost for services. At the discussion stage, nonbinding estimates of total project cost, including, where appropriate, life cycle costing and nonbinding estimates of prices for services, may be discussed. Proprietary information from competing offerors shall not be disclosed to the public or to competitors. At the conclusion of discussion outlined herein, on the basis of evaluation factors published in the request for proposal and all information developed in the selection process to this point, the purchasing administrator shall select, in the order of preference, two or more offerors whose professional qualifications and proposed services are deemed most meritorious. Negotiations shall then be conducted, beginning with the offeror ranked first. If a contract satisfactory and advantageous to the city can be negotiated at a price considered fair and reasonable, the award shall be made to that offeror. Otherwise, negotiations with the offeror ranked first shall be formally terminated and negotiations conducted with the offeror ranked second, and so on until such a contract can be negotiated at a fair and reasonable price. When the terms and conditions of multiple awards are so provided in the request for proposals, awards may be made to more than one offeror. Should the purchasing administrator determine in writing that, in his sole discretion, only one offeror is fully qualified or that one offeror is clearly more highly qualified and suitable than the others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. 
(b)  A contract for architectural or professional engineering services relating to multiple construction projects may be negotiated by a public body, provided: (i) the projects require similar experience and expertise, (ii) the nature of the projects is clearly identified in the request for proposal, and (iii) the contract term is limited to one year or when the cumulative total project fees reach the maximum cost authorized in this paragraph, whichever occurs first. Such contract may be renewable for four additional one-year terms at the option of the public body. Under such contract: (a) the fair and reasonable prices, as negotiated, shall be used in determining the cost of each project performed, (b) the sum of all projects performed in one contract term shall not exceed $6,000,000.00; and (c) the project fee of any single project shall not exceed $1,500,000.00. Any unused amounts from the first contract term shall not be carried forward to the additional term. Competitive negotiations for such contracts may result in awards to more than one offeror provided: (1) the request for proposal so states, and (2) the public body has established procedures for distributing multiple projects among the selected contractors during the contract term. Such procedures shall prohibit requiring the selected contractors to compete for individual projects based on price. 
(Code 1973, § 11-128; Code 1988, § 12-278; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 1-23-2001; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2010-41, § 1, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 28, 9-13-2016) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4301, 2.2-4303.  
Sec. 12-279. - Negotiation of certain contracts for schools. 
The school board may authorize any of its schools in the division to enter into contracts providing that caps and gowns, photographs, class rings, yearbooks and graduation announcements will be available for purchase or rental by students, parents, faculty or other persons using nonpublic money through the use of competitive negotiation as provided in this article, competitive sealed bidding not necessarily being required for such contracts. 
(Code 1973, § 11-129; Code 1988, § 12-279) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-4301, 2.2-4303, 2.2-4346.  
DIVISION 5. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Ethics in public contracting law, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4367 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-280. - Applicability of state ethics in public contracting law. 
The provisions of this division 5 of article V of chapter 12 of the code are derived from article 6 of the Virginia Public Procurement Act (Ethics in Public Contracting) (Virginia Code, § 2.2-4367 et seq., as amended, restated or moved from time to time). In accordance with Virginia Code, § 2.2-4367, the provisions of article VI of the Virginia Public Procurement Act and the provisions of this division 5 supplement, but shall not supersede, other provisions of state law, including, but not limited to, the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act (Virginia Code, § 2.2-3100 et seq.), the Virginia Governmental Frauds Act (Virginia Code, § 18.2-498.1 et seq.), and articles 2 (Virginia Code, § 18.2-438 et seq.) and 3 (Virginia Code, § 18.2-446 et seq.) of chapter 10 of title 18.2 of the Virginia Code, in each case as the said laws may be amended, restated or moved from time to time. 
The provisions of this division 5 shall apply notwithstanding the fact that the conduct described may not constitute a violation of the State and Local Conflict of Interests Act. 
(Code 1988, § 12-280; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 3, 1-23-2001; Ord. No. 2002-22, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 31, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-281. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division 5, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Immediate family means a spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters, and any other person living in the same household as the employee. 
Official responsibility means administrative or operating authority, whether intermediate or final, to initiate, approve, disapprove or otherwise affect a procurement transaction, or any claim resulting therefrom. 
Pecuniary interest arising from the procurement means a personal interest in a contract as defined in the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act (Virginia Code, § 2.2-3100 et seq., as amended, restated or moved from time to time). 
Procurement transaction means all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any goods, services or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
Public employee means any person employed by a public body, including elected officials or appointed members of governing bodies. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 32, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-282. - Proscribed participation by public employees in procurement transactions. 
Except as may be specifically allowed by subdivisions A.2, A.3 and A.4 of Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3112, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, no public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall participate in that transaction on behalf of the public body when the employee knows that: 
(1)  The employee is contemporaneously employed by a bidder, offeror or contractor involved in the procurement transaction; 
(2)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family holds a position with a bidder, offeror or contractor such as an officer, director, trustee, partner or the like, or is employed in a capacity involving personal and substantial participation in the procurement transaction, or owns or controls an interest of more than five percent; 
(3)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family has a pecuniary interest arising from the procurement transaction; or 
(4)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family is negotiating, or has an arrangement concerning, prospective employment with a bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 33, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-283. - Disclosure of subsequent employment. 
No public employee or former public employee having official responsibility for procurement transactions shall accept employment with any bidder, offeror or contractor with whom the employee or former employee dealt in an official capacity concerning procurement transactions for a period of one year from the cessation of employment by the public body unless the employee or former employee provides written notification to the public body, or a public official if designated by the public body, or both, prior to commencement of employment by that bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 34, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-284. - Prohibition on solicitation or acceptance of gifts; gifts by bidders, offerors, contractors or subcontractors prohibited. 
(a)  No public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept from a bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal or minimal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. The public body may recover the value of anything conveyed in violation of this subsection. 
(b)  No bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor shall confer upon any public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 35, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-285. - Kickbacks. 
(a)  No contractor or subcontractor shall demand or receive from any of his suppliers or his subcontractors, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order, any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(b)  No subcontractor or supplier shall make, or offer to make, kickbacks as described in this section. 
(c)  No person shall demand or receive any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of value in return for an agreement not to compete on a public contract. 
(d)  If a subcontractor or supplier makes a kickback or other prohibited payment as described in this section, the amount thereof shall be conclusively presumed to have been included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the public body and shall be recoverable from both the maker and the recipient. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 36, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-286. - Participation in bid preparation; limitation on submitting bid for same procurement. 
No person who, for compensation, prepares an invitation to bid or request for proposals for or on behalf of a public body shall (1) submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or any portion thereof or (2) disclose to any bidder or offeror information concerning the procurement that is not available to the public. However, a public body may permit such person to submit a bid or proposal for that procurement or any portion thereof if the public body determines that the exclusion of the person would limit the number of potential qualified bidders or offerors in a manner contrary to the best interests of the public body. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 37, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-287. - Purchase of building material, etc., from architect or engineer prohibited. 
(a)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for a public body shall be sold or purchased from any person employed as an independent contractor by the public body to furnish architectural or engineering services, but not construction, for such building or structure or from any partnership, association or corporation in which such architect or engineer has a personal interest as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3101, as amended, restated or moved from time to time. 
(b)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for a public body shall be sold by or purchased from any person who has provided or is currently providing design services specifying a sole source for such materials, supplies or equipment to be used in the building or structure to the independent contractor employed by the public body to furnish architectural or engineering services in which such person has a personal interest as defined in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3101, as amended, restated or moved from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 38, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-288. - Certification of compliance required; penalty for false statements. 
(a)  Public bodies may require public employees having official responsibility for procurement transactions in which they participated to annually submit for such transactions a written certification that they complied with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Any public employee required to submit a certification as provided in subsection (a) who knowingly makes a false statement in the certification shall be punished as provided in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4377, as amended, restated or moved from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 39, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-289. - Misrepresentations prohibited. 
No public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall knowingly falsify, conceal, or misrepresent a material fact; knowingly make any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations; or make or use any false writing or document knowing it to contain any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 40, 9-13-2016)  
Sec. 12-290. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person convicted of a willful violation of any provision of this division 5 shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Upon conviction, any public employee, in addition to any other fine or penalty provided by law, shall forfeit his employment. 
(Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 41, 9-13-2016)  
DIVISION 6. - PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS 
 
Sec. 12-300. - Procedures established. 
Pursuant to the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 56-575.1 et seq., the Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, as amended, restated or moved from time to time, the procedures for the consideration and approval of projects for public use involving the creation of public-private partnerships shall be as adopted by the city council on December 14, 2010, and set out in the document entitled "Public-Private Education and Infrastructure Act of 2002 - Guidelines of the City of Portsmouth (December, 2010)." A copy of said procedures shall be maintained on file for public review and copying in the city purchasing office and also on the city's website. 
(Code 1988, § 12-290; Ord. No. 2003-71, § 2, 12-16-2003; Ord. No. 2010-97, § 1, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 29, 9-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-67, §§ 29, 30, adopted September 13, 2016, renumbered §§ 12-290—12-295 as §§ 12-300—12-314. 
State Law reference— Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, Code of Virginia, § 56-575.1 et seq.  
Secs. 12-301—12-309. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - DEBARMENT 
 
Sec. 12-310. - Debarment authorized. 
The purchasing administrator may, in his discretion and for the purposes of protecting the integrity of the city's procurement process, debar a contractor for any of the causes in section 12-311, using the procedures in section 12-312, and with the right of appeal as set forth in section 12-313. 
The purpose of debarment is to protect the city and its taxpayers from risks associated with awarding contracts to persons or firms that have exhibited an inability or unwillingness to fulfill contractual requirements, and to protect the integrity of the city's procurement process by preventing individuals or firms who have displayed improper conduct or unsatisfactory performance from participating in competition for city contracts. 
Prospective contractors may be debarred from contracting for particular goods, services, insurance or construction for specified periods of time, whether or not actually bidding on a proposed contract at the time. Debarment of a contractor shall include any other business entity with substantially the same principals or owners as a debarred contractor. 
( Ord. No. 2011-67, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 30, 9-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 12-291. See editor's note, § 12-300. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4321.  
Sec. 12-311. - Causes for debarment. 
(a)  The purchasing administrator may debar a contractor for any of the following causes, or any combination thereof: 
(1)  The contractor or any of its principals being convicted of a felony bearing some reasonable relation to business integrity or business honesty. 
(2)  The contractor or any of its principals engaging in fraud or any criminal activity in connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public contract or subcontract; including but not limited to embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, making false statements, or receiving stolen property. Conviction of a crime based on such activities shall not be a requirement of this subsection, so long as there is credible evidence sufficient for the purchasing administrator to conclude that such conduct occurred. 
(3)  Violation of any material term of a government contract or subcontract with any governmental entity, including but not limited to failure to perform and/or a history of failure to perform; and also failure to honor a binding bid. This subsection shall apply to past contracts and to present contracts. The government entity's need to call on a performance bond or completion bond shall be prima facie evidence of such a violation. 
(4)  Debarment by any other governmental entity. 
(5)  Failure to honor the letter or spirit of a bond or a hold harmless or indemnification agreement with the city, or litigiousness with the city. 
(6)  Any other cause that is of so serious or compelling a nature that it materially affects the contractor's present responsibility or ability to perform, or such that hiring the contractor could adversely affect the city's reputation for responsible contracting. 
(b)  The purchasing administrator shall give fair consideration to the seriousness of the contractor's wrongful acts or omissions, the ability and willingness of the contractor to act reasonably to correct problems, any mitigating factors, and the public interest. 
( Ord. No. 2011-67, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 30, 9-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 12-292. See editor's note, § 12-300.  
Sec. 12-312. - Procedures for debarment. 
(a)  If the purchasing administrator concludes that there is cause under section 12-311 for debarring a contractor, he may in his discretion debar the contractor using the procedures set forth in this section. Debarment shall be for a specified period of time, up to and including permanency, that is reasonably commensurate with the seriousness of the cause for same. 
(b)  Prior to debarring a contractor, the purchasing administrator shall obtain the written concurrence of the city manager or his designee and the approval of the city attorney or his designee for form and legality. 
(c)  The existence of a cause for debarment does not require that the contractor be debarred. If cause does exist, the purchasing administrator may debar at any time up to two years after having actual knowledge thereof. Failure to debar forthwith upon learning of cause shall not comprise a waiver of the right to debar at a later time; and a contractor may be awarded a contract but put on terms to avoid a possible future debarment. 
(d)  If a contractor engages in unacceptable conduct that could, in consideration with other future acts, be a basis for debarment, the purchasing administrator may, in his discretion, notify the contractor in writing that the misconduct, unsatisfactory performance, or failure to perform, if aggravated by future acts, could result in debarment. 
(e)  If the decision is made to debar, written notice shall be provided to the contractor. The notice shall: 
(1)  State the reasons for the debarment in terms sufficient to put the contractor on notice of the basis for the decision and the period of time for the debarment; 
(2)  State the procedures the contractor may take to examine the information or evidence supporting the debarment; and 
(3)  Inform the contractor of the right to appeal in writing to the city manager within ten days of issuance of the written notice. 
(f)  If a contractor is debarred, the debarment shall also apply to any other business entity formed with the same resources, owners, principals, or stockholders as the debarred contractor. 
(g)  The purchasing administrator shall have the discretion to rescind or modify a debarment, if he concludes in his sole discretion, based on credible evidence, that the contractor has been rehabilitated and that it would be in the public interest to take such action. 
(h)  The purchasing administrator shall maintain an up-to-date list showing the status of all debarred contractors. The list shall be made available for prompt review to any council member, upon request. 
( Ord. No. 2011-67, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 30, 9-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 12-293. See editor's note, § 12-300.  
Sec. 12-313. - Appeals. 
(a)  The contractor may appeal the debarment decision to the city manager in writing received by the city manager within ten days of issuance of the written debarment decision. The notice shall state with reasonable clarity the basis for the appeal. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a proper and timely appeal, the city manager shall schedule a hearing. The city manager may, in his sole discretion: 
(1)  Conduct the hearing himself; 
(2)  Have the hearing conducted by a designee who is a city employee; or 
(3)  Have the hearing conducted by a qualified and neutral mediator selected by the city manager, with the cost of the mediator to be borne by the contractor. If the contractor does not agree to pay said cost, the city manager may dismiss the appeal forthwith, and there shall be no further appeal from that decision. 
(c)  The hearing shall be informal, and it shall be conducted in private unless by agreement of the parties. The contractor shall be given a fair opportunity to present evidence and to try and explain why the debarment decision is not justified or proper, but strict rules of evidence and formal courtroom procedures shall not apply. 
(d)  If the city manager does not conduct the hearing himself, he shall receive a written or oral report from the person who did conduct it. He shall thereafter render a written decision. He shall have authority to affirm, reverse, or modify the debarment decision appealed from. 
(e)  The contractor shall have the right to appeal the city manager's decision to circuit court, except for the circumstances set forth in subsection (b)(3) above, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The appeal must be filed within 30 days of the city manager's decision. 
(2)  The appeal shall be based solely on the written record of the debarment procedure, and no new evidence shall be introduced or considered, nor shall witnesses be called to testify. 
(3)  The city manager's decision shall be affirmed unless there is no rational basis for it. 
( Ord. No. 2011-67, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 30, 9-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 12-294. See editor's note, § 12-300.  
Sec. 12-314. - Bonds and indemnification. 
In addition to having debarment authority, the purchasing administrator shall have the authority to reject or to disqualify any company providing coverage for a bond or indemnification obligation of a contractor, if in the purchasing administrator's sole discretion there is a reasonable basis for doing so. Upon such a decision, reasonable oral or written notice shall be provided to the contractor. There shall be no right of appeal. 
( Ord. No. 2011-67, § 1, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 2016-67 , § 30, 9-13-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 12-295. See editor's note, § 12-300.  
Chapter 13 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Appointment, powers and duties of fire marshals, § 5.02(d). 
Cross reference— Building regulations, ch. 7; housing and community development, ch. 17; prohibition against weeds or debris constituting fire hazard, § 23-26(c); fire protective measures in parks, §§ 25-110, 25-111; security alarms, ch. 31; removal of debris from streets after fire, § 32-11; unauthorized opening of fire hydrants, § 38-4; water service for fire protection, § 38-55; annual charge for use of fire hydrants, § 38-56; protective devices for fire service systems, § 38-174. 
State Law reference— Fire protection, Code of Virginia, § 27-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Fire suppression systems required for certain buildings. 
Fire suppression systems shall be installed and maintained in full operating condition in buildings 50 feet or more in height for which building permits are issued after July 1, 1986. 
(Code 1973, § 12-29; Code 1988, § 13-1) 
Cross reference— Building regulations, ch. 7.  
Sec. 13-2. - Setting fire whereby property of another is damaged or jeopardized. 
If any person carelessly, negligently or intentionally sets any woods or marshes on fire, or sets fire to any stubble, brush, straw, or any other substance capable of spreading fire on lands, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire. 
(Code 1973, §§ 12-4, 21-134; Code 1988, § 13-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-88.  
Sec. 13-3. - Allowing fire to spread to land of another. 
Any person who intentionally sets or procures another to set fire to any woods, brush, leaves, grass, straw or any other inflammable substance capable of spreading fire, and who intentionally allows the fire to escape to lands not his own, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire. 
(Code 1973, §§ 12-4, 21-133; Code 1988, § 13-3; Ord. No. 1988-58, § 1, 6-14-1988) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-87.  
Sec. 13-4. - Calling firefighting apparatus without just cause; malicious activation of fire alarm in public building. 
Any person who, without just cause therefor, calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any firefighting apparatus, or any person who maliciously activates a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building used for public assembly or for other public use, including, but not limited to, schools, theaters, stores, office buildings, shopping centers and malls, coliseums and arenas, regardless of whether fire apparatus responds or not, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-164; Code 1988, § 13-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.  
Sec. 13-5. - Unlawful use of fire alarm key. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person other than the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services and such persons as may be authorized by him to make use of a fire alarm key for any purpose, except to turn in an actual alarm of fire. 
(Code 1973, § 12-3; Code 1988, § 13-5; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 13-6. - Cutting off electricity during fire. 
During the progress of a fire, the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services may require any company owning or using wires for the furnishing of electricity to cut off electric current from such wires during the fire. Upon the failure of such company to do so, the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services or the assistant in charge may have such wires cut whenever he regards them as interfering with the proper management of a fire. When the current is so cut off or wires cut, the city shall release such company from its obligation to furnish electricity until the current can be turned on or the wire reconnected. The city shall not hold such company responsible for any injury or loss to person or property that may occur while such current properly remains cut off or the wires remain cut, whenever the loss or injury is caused by the absence of electricity. 
(Code 1973, § 12-6; Code 1988, § 13-7; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-7. - Burning operations. 
(a)  The burning of wrecked or discarded vehicles, or any parts thereof, junk, any waste materials, rubbish, debris, dead and dying trees or limbs, leaves or other natural growth is prohibited. 
(b)  Any person convicted of any such violation shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 13-8; Ord. No. 1989-109, § 1, 11-21-1989)  
Secs. 13-8—13-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF FIRE, RESCUE, AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Application of civil service system to employees of fire department, § 2-136; representative from fire department to attend meetings of emergency medical service advisory commission, § 2-691; authority of fire department officers to direct traffic in vicinity of fire, § 22-8; fire and police retirement system, § 30-151 et seq.; automatic security alarms programmed to dial fire department, § 31-26 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-31. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a department of fire, rescue and emergency services, which shall be composed of the fire companies located throughout the city, headed by a chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services. 
(Code 1973, § 2-177; Code 1988, § 13-31; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 3, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-32. - Appointment of chief. 
The chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 2-178; Code 1988, § 13-32; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-33. - Departmental rules and regulations. 
The chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services, with the approval of the city manager, shall make rules and regulations concerning the operation of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services, the conduct of the officers, employees and members thereof and, their uniforms, equipment, training and procedures. 
(Code 1988, § 13-33; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 3, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-34. - Composition and service areas of fire companies generally. 
(a)  The fire companies shall consist of such officers, employees and members as shall be provided by the city manager or the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services. 
(b)  The fire companies shall serve such areas as shall be designated by the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services. 
(Code 1988, § 13-34; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 3, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-35. - Fees established. 
The fees for the services of the department of fire, rescue, and emergency services shall be as established in Appendix A of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2009-43 , § 1, 5-12-2009)  
Secs. 13-36—13-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OFFICE OF THE FIRE MARSHAL 
 
Sec. 13-56. - Established. 
An office of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services to be known as the fire marshal is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 12-41; Code 1988, § 13-56; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-57. - Assignment of inspectors. 
The chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services is hereby authorized to assign to the office of the fire marshal as chief inspector a properly qualified member of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services, who shall, ex officio, have the rank of battalion chief or captain. This person may also be designated by the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services, as the fire official. Other members of such division may be assigned as deputy fire marshal or assistant fire marshal when so authorized and provided by the city manager or the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services. In the absence of the fire marshal, deputy and assistant fire marshals shall have the powers and perform the duties of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1973, § 12-42; Code 1988, § 13-57; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 1, 3-28-2017)  
Sec. 13-58. - Oaths; general powers, duties of fire marshal. 
(a)  The fire marshal and all deputy and assistant fire marshals, before entering upon their duties, shall respectively take an oath before any officer authorized to administer oaths, faithfully to discharge the duties of such office; the certificate of oath shall be returned to and preserved by the city clerk on behalf of the city council. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall be under the general supervision of the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services and it shall be his duty to supervise and direct the work of the deputy and assistant fire marshals and by appropriate inspections to enforce all state laws and city ordinances relating to the prevention of fires, the storage and use of explosives and inflammables, the installation and maintenance of fire extinguishing equipment, the maintenance, regulation, location and construction of fire escapes, the means and adequacy of exits in case of fire, panic or accidents from factories, apartment houses, schools, lodginghouses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters, and all other places in which a number of persons work, live or congregate from time to time for any purpose and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires. 
(c)  The fire marshal and the deputy and assistant fire marshals shall have the authority to arrest, to procure and serve warrants of arrest, and to issue summons in the manner authorized by general law, for violation of fire prevention and fire safety laws and ordinances. The authority granted in this subsection (c) shall not be exercised by the fire marshal or any deputy or assistant until such person has satisfactorily completed a training course for fire marshals and their assistants, which course shall be approved by the state fire services board. 
(d)  The fire marshal and his designated deputies and assistants shall have the same powers as a sheriff, police officer, or law enforcement officer. The fire marshal or his designees shall investigate alleged offenses pursuant to Title 27 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and this chapter. The police powers granted in this section shall not be exercised by the fire marshal or any deputy or assistant until such person has satisfactorily complete a training course for fire marshals with police powers approved by the state fire services board. In addition, such person with police powers shall continue to exercise those police powers only upon participation in and satisfactory completion of such in-service and advanced courses as shall be required and approved by the state fire services board. 
(e)  The fire marshal and his deputies and assistants shall have such other powers and perform such other duties incident to his office as are set forth in this division or the ordinances of the city or as may be conferred or imposed upon him from time to time by law. 
(Code 1973, § 12-43; Code 1988, § 13-58; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 2017-16 , § 2, 3-28-2017)  
Sec. 13-59. - Inspection, approval of facilities prerequisite to issuance of certain licenses, permits. 
Before a license or a permit may be issued for the keeping, storage, use, manufacture, sale, handling, transportation or other disposition of highly inflammable materials and rubbish, crude petroleum or any of its products, gun or blasting powder, dynamite or explosives of any kind, including fireworks, firecrackers and signaling explosives, the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services or the fire marshal shall first inspect and approve the receptacles, building or storage place to be used for such purpose before a license or permit may be issued. 
(Code 1973, § 12-44; Code 1988, § 13-59; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-60. - Right of entry to investigate. 
The fire marshal shall have the right to enter upon any property from which a release of any hazardous material, hazardous waste or regulated substance, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 or Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.34:8, has occurred or is reasonably suspected to have occurred and which has entered into the groundwater, surface water or soils of the city in order to investigate the extent and cause of any such release. If in undertaking such an investigation, the fire marshal makes an affidavit under oath that the origin or cause of any such release is undetermined and that he has been refused admittance to the property or is unable to gain permission to enter the property, any magistrate of the city may issue an inspection warrant to the fire marshal authorizing him to enter such property for the purpose of determining the origin and source of the release. If the fire marshal, after gaining access to any property pursuant to such investigation warrant, has probable cause to believe that the release was caused by any act constituting a criminal offense, he shall discontinue the investigation until a search warrant has been obtained or consent to conduct the search has otherwise been given. 
(Code 1988, § 13-61; Ord. No. 1992-61, § 1, 7-14-1992) 
State Law reference— Inspection warrant, Code of Virginia, §§ 19.2-393—19.2-397; search warrants, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-52 et seq.  
Sec. 13-61. - Evacuation of buildings. 
(a)  For any emergency incident in which there is imminent danger or the actual occurrence of fire, explosion, the release of hazardous materials, radiation, chemical or biological agent, or other danger of like kind, the fire officer in charge shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Maintain order at such emergency incident or its vicinity; 
(2)  Require the evacuation of any affected building; 
(3)  Keep bystanders or other persons at a safe distance from the incident and from emergency equipment; 
(4)  Until the arrival of a police officer, direct and control the movement of traffic and pedestrians; and 
(5)  Determine when any or all of said emergency control measures should be lessened or terminated. 
(b)  If a police officer is the first to arrive at an emergency incident, he may, if authorized by the police chief, the deputy police chief, or the shift commander, exercise any or all of the powers set forth in subsection (a) of this section until the arrival of a fire official, at which time the fire officer shall be in command of the emergency incident. 
(c)  When an emergency incident involves a suspected bomb or explosive device, it shall be the responsibility of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services to notify state or federal bomb disposal authorities and to establish command of the emergency incident. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey an order of a police or fire marshal displaying a badge of authority and acting pursuant to this section, and any such person may be arrested forthwith by any police or fire marshal who witnesses the violation. 
(e)  The authority granted under this section may not be exercised so as to inhibit or to obstruct members of law enforcement agencies or emergency services personnel from performing their lawful duties at such emergency incidents. 
(Code 1988, § 13-62; Ord. No. 1998-4, § 1, 1-27-1998; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Secs. 13-62—13-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL AMBULANCE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 13-71. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, evaluation, treatment, and ambulance transport services shall be as defined and employed by the United States Health Care Financing Administration and any successor thereto. The term "health care facilities" is defined to include, but not be limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, advanced care facilities, psychiatric facilities, out-patient care facilities, minor emergency care centers, physicians' offices or any other facility where licensed or certified health care professionals are routinely present and provide medical treatment for patients. The term "loaded mileage" means the number of miles the patient is transported in the ambulance vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 13-71; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2015-23, § 1, 5-12-2015 )  
Sec. 13-72. - Fees; responsibility for payment. 
Payment of all charges for ambulance services, including evaluation, assessment, treatment or ambulance transport, established in this division shall be the responsibility of the patient or the parent, guardian, or other legally responsible party in the case of a minor or an incompetent. 
(Code 1988, § 13-72; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2015-23, § 2, 5-12-2015 )  
Sec. 13-73. - Fees established. 
The fees for ambulance services, including evaluation, assessment, treatment, and ambulance transport shall be as established in section 13-74. 
(Code 1988, § 13-73; Ord. No. 2001-22, § 1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2005-72, § 1, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 2015-23, § 3, 5-12-2015 )  
Sec. 13-74. - Ambulance services fees established. 
Fees are established for the following ambulance services as set forth in appendix A to this Code, including evaluation, assessment, treatment, and ambulance transport: 
(1)  Nonemergency incident response and ambulance transport with basic life support services. 
(2)  Emergency incident response and ambulance transport with basic life support services. 
(3)  Nonemergency incident response and ambulance transport with advanced life support Level 1 services. 
(4)  Emergency incident response and ambulance transport with advanced life support Level 1 services. 
(5)  Emergency incident response and ambulance transport with advanced life support Level 2 services. 
(6)  Emergency incident response and ambulance transport with specialty care transport services. 
(7)  The fee for ground transport mileage shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code per loaded mile in addition to the service charges set out in subsections (1) through (6) of this section. 
(8)  Emergency incident response and patient assessment with a medical assessment and/or treatment performed but no transport to a health care facility. 
(9)  Emergency incident response with a medical assessment and/or treatment performed where the patient is determined to be deceased at the scene by a medical provider. This fee shall only apply if the Informed Consent to Refuse EMS Care form indicates (a) patient treated and refused transport or (b) patient refused care, but an assessment completed. 
(10)  Patient care reports. 
(Code 1988, § 11.1-6; Ord. No. 2005-72, § 2, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 2015-23, § 4, 5-12-2015 )  
Sec. 13-75. - Exemption for city employees or auxiliaries in certain instances. 
No fee under section 13-74 shall be imposed on any City of Portsmouth employee or any City of Portsmouth auxiliary officer or other first responder meeting the definition of employee under Code of Virginia, § 65.2-101(l) for any work-related illness or injury compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act. 
( Ord. No. 2015-23, § 5, 5-12-2015 )  
Secs. 13-76—13-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 13-81. - Adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the protection of life and property from hazards of fire or explosion, that certain code known as the "Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code," and the amendments thereto, and the same are hereby adopted as the fire prevention code of the city, as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 12-18; Code 1988, § 13-81; Ord. No. 1988-19, § 2, 2-23-1988) 
State Law reference— Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code Act, Code of Virginia, § 27-94.  
Sec. 13-82. - Fire codes incorporated. 
Unless specifically provided for in other ordinances or codes, the standards and recommended practices set forth in the volumes of the National Fire Codes, the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, and all amendments and editions published by the National Fire Protection Association are incorporated in this article by reference as a part of the fire prevention code adopted by section 13-81 as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1973, § 12-31; Code 1988, § 13-82; Ord. No. 1992-61, § 2, 7-14-1992; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-83. - Enforcement. 
The fire prevention code adopted in this article and the standards and recommended practices set forth in the fire codes incorporated in such fire prevention code shall be enforced by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1973, § 12-27; Code 1988, § 13-83; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-84. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article, or shall fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within reasonable time. 
(b)  The imposition of the penalty for a violation referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1973, § 12-30; Code 1988, § 13-84) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 13-85. - Conflicts between code and other ordinances. 
In the event of conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article and the provisions of other ordinances of the city, the more stringent provisions shall control. 
(Code 1973, § 12-25; Code 1988, § 13-85)  
Sec. 13-86. - Fire reports and charges therefor. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the department of fire, rescue and emergency services is hereby authorized to furnish copies of fire reports to persons having a legitimate interest therein. The charge for copies of such fire reports shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. The chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services shall distribute, without charge, copies of such fire reports to officials of the city or to other governmental agencies who require the same. 
(Code 1973, § 12-26; Code 1988, § 13-86; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-87. - Establishment of limits of areas where storage of explosives and blasting agents prohibited. 
The limits referred to in section F-2601.2 of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, in which the storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, shall be all areas within the corporate limits of the city except such areas as are covered by a valid use permit issued pursuant to the zoning ordinance as set out in chapter 40 of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 12-24; Code 1988, § 13-87) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, ch. 40.  
Sec. 13-88. - Modifications. 
The chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1973, § 12-28; Code 1988, § 13-88; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-89. - Additional standards. 
The fire prevention code is adopted in section 13-81 and these additional standards are adopted as follows: 
(1)  Inspection by others. The fire marshal may designate such other persons as he deems necessary to make fire safety inspections. Such persons shall use this chapter as the basis for such inspections. 
(2)  Impersonations. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use a badge, uniform or any other credential so as to gain access to any building, structure, marine vessel, vehicle or premises or to otherwise falsely identify himself as the fire marshal or his authorized representative. 
(3)  Right of entry. 
a.  Whenever necessary for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or whenever the fire marshal has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any condition which makes such structure or premises unsafe, the fire marshal may enter such structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the fire marshal by this chapter; provided, that if such structure or premises is occupied, the fire marshal shall first present proper credentials and request entry. 
b.  Any person, including the owner, lessee, manager, operator or occupant of any structure or premises, who shall interfere in any way with or deny entry to the fire marshal or his designated representative while in lawful performance of his duty shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
c.  When such entry is refused, the fire marshal shall have recourse to any other remedy provided by law or equity to secure entry. 
(4)  Investigation of fires. 
a.  The fire marshal shall investigate or cause to be investigated any reported fire or explosion causing a loss of life or severe injury, or extensive destruction or damage to property, and all offenses involving fires, fire bombings, bombings, attempts or threats to commit such offenses, false alarms relating to such offenses and possession and/or manufacture of explosive devices, substances and fire bombs occurring within the jurisdiction. Such investigation shall be pursued until its conclusion. 
b.  The fire marshal or any investigator shall immediately take charge of any physical evidence relating to the cause and origin of such fire or explosion and preserve such physical evidence until it has been properly processed. 
(5)  Unsafe conditions. The fire official or fire officer in charge shall order the sealing of (thereby preventing the use of) any existing device or appliance including, but not limited to, those of heating, electrical or mechanical nature and components of fuel transportation, storage, distribution and utilization systems, or any other device or appliance found to be defective or in violation of this chapter's requirements for existing appliances after giving notice to this effect to any person, owner, firm, agent or operator in charge of same. The fire official or fire officer in charge may seal any device or appliance without notice when inspection shows the existence of an immediate fire hazard or a condition which may imperil human life. The sealed defective appliance shall remain withdrawn from service until all necessary repairs or alterations have been made. The "sealing" referred to herein shall be accomplished by the placing of a red tag or other notice on the defective device or appliance. 
(6)  Unauthorized use of sealed device or appliance. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person or user, firm or agent to continue the use of any device or appliance which has been sealed or ordered sealed under subsection (5) of this section, unless authority to remove said seal is given by the fire marshal. 
b.  Unauthorized removal or breakage of said seal, tag or notice shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(7)  Correction of violation required. The imposition of the penalties herein described shall not prevent the fire marshal from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct business or use of a building or structure in or about any premises. 
(8)  Failure to correct violations. If the notice of the violation is not complied with within the time specified by the fire marshal, the fire marshal shall request the city attorney of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure and violations of the provisions of this Code or of any order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(9)  Storage or display in roof-over malls. No combustible goods, merchandise or decorations or vehicles shall be displayed or stored in a roofed-over mall unless approved by the fire marshal. 
(10)  Coniferous trees. The use of live or cut coniferous trees shall be prohibited in all occupancies or structures, except one-family and two-family dwellings, unless approved by the fire marshal. 
(11)  Artificial trees. Artificial trees may be used if they have been satisfactorily listed as being fire resistant or retardant by a nationally recognized laboratory or agency and/or meet with the approval of the fire marshal. 
(12)  Signs and markings. Signs and markings to designate fire lanes as required by the fire marshal shall be provided, installed and maintained by the property owner or his agent in a method and manner approved by the fire marshal. 
(13)  Illegal use. This section may be enforced by the fire marshal, his deputies and/or assistants, and by the city police department. 
(14)  General provisions. Any person engaged in the business of selling, servicing and installing portable fire extinguishers, fixed fire extinguishing systems or fire warning and detection systems in this city shall be registered with the fire prevention bureau. Every applicant for registration shall furnish the fire marshal with satisfactory proof of their qualifications to perform any and all functions for which they have requested registration. 
(15)  Storage areas. The markings of means of egress through storage areas may be required as deemed necessary and appropriate by the fire marshal. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent or the occupant to mark and maintain such aisles as required. 
(16)  Fire personnel required. In every theater, opera house or other building, or on premises used for concerts, theatrical or operatic purposes, the seating capacity of which exceeds 500 persons, at least one experienced fire inspector, or as many as may be required by the fire marshal, whose competence shall be approved by the fire chief, shall be on duty during each performance and in charge of the fire protection equipment and maintenance of exitways required in such buildings or on such premises. All costs and expenses relating to this duty shall be the responsibility of the operator, sponsor or promoter of such event. Failure to comply with the requirement of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 13-89; Ord. No. 1989-109, § 2, 11-21-1989; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Secs. 13-90—13-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate or prohibit sale, use, etc., of fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-113; permits for public display, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-974; fireworks, Code of Virginia, §§ 27-95—27-98, 27-100.1. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "fireworks" shall mean and include any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, model rockets, Roman candles, Daygo bombs, sparklers, or other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap manufactured in accordance with the department of transportation regulations for packing and shipping as provided therein, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 12-55; Code 1988, § 13-101) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-102. - Exemptions from article. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any resident wholesaler, dealer or jobber to sell at wholesale such fireworks as are not herein prohibited; or the sale of any kind of fireworks provided the same are to be shipped directly out of state in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations covering the transportation of explosives and other dangerous articles by motor vehicle, rail and water; or the use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military organizations. Such wholesalers, dealers, and jobbers shall store their supplies of fireworks in accordance with the fire prevention code adopted in article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 12-54; Code 1988, § 13-102)  
Sec. 13-103. - Enforcement of article. 
The provisions of this article may be enforced by any member of the office of the fire marshal or the police department. 
(Code 1973, § 12-60; Code 1988, § 13-103; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-104. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 13-104) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 13-105. - General prohibition against manufacture, sale and discharge. 
(a)  The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the city. 
(b)  Except as provided in division 2 of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to store, to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 12-56; Code 1988, § 13-105) 
Cross reference— Discharging fireworks in city cemetery, § 9-55.  
Sec. 13-106. - Seizure and destruction of certain fireworks. 
Any law enforcement officer arresting any person for a violation of this article shall seize any fireworks in the possession or under the control of the person so arrested and shall hold the same until final disposition of any criminal proceedings against such person. If a judgment of conviction is entered against such person, the court shall order destruction of such fireworks upon expiration of the time allowed for appeal of such judgment of conviction. 
(Code 1973, § 12-59; Code 1988, § 13-106) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 27-100.1.  
Secs. 13-107—13-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC DISPLAYS 
 
Sec. 13-116. - Permit—Authority to grant; application. 
(a)  The chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services may adopt reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this division, for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of individuals. 
(b)  A permit referred to in subsection (a) of this section may be granted by the fire marshal upon application therefor and the filing of the bond required by section 13-117. The application shall be made in writing at least 30 days in advance of the date of the display. 
(Code 1973, § 12-56; Code 1988, § 13-116; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for above permit, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-974.  
Sec. 13-117. - Same—Applicant's bond and proof of financial responsibility. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit under this division shall be required to give a bond, in a sum not less than $1,000,000.00, conditioned on compliance with the provisions of this division and the regulations adopted hereunder; provided, however, that no governmental agency shall be required to file such bond. 
(b)  Before any permit shall be issued under this division, the person making application therefor shall furnish proof of financial responsibility to satisfy claims for damages to persons or property arising out of any act or omission on the part of such person or any agent or employee thereof, in such amount, character and form as the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services shall determine to be necessary for the protection of the public. 
(Code 1973, § 12-57; Code 1988, § 13-117; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-118. - Same—Effect; not transferable. 
After a permit has been granted pursuant to this division, the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for the display authorized thereby shall be lawful for that purpose only. No such permit shall be transferable. 
(Code 1973, § 12-56; Code 1988, § 13-118)  
Sec. 13-119. - Competency of operator; location, composition, etc. 
Every display authorized by a permit granted under this division shall be handled by a competent operator licensed or certified as to competency by the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services and shall be of such composition, character and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services, after proper inspection, not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. 
(Code 1973, § 12-56; Code 1988, § 13-119; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-120. - Standards for sale, possession, etc., of fireworks for display purposes. 
The sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for display purposes shall be conducted so as to be reasonably safe to persons and property. Evidence that the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for display purposes has been conducted in accordance with the applicable standard specified for this division in article 27 of the fire prevention code adopted by article III of this chapter shall be evidence that such sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for display purposes provide reasonable safety to persons and property. 
(Code 1973, § 12-56; Code 1988, § 13-120)  
Sec. 13-121. - Disposal of unfired fireworks. 
Any fireworks that remain unfired after a display is concluded pursuant to this division shall be immediately disposed of in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks remaining. 
(Code 1973, § 12-58; Code 1988, § 13-121)  
Secs. 13-122—13-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SMOKE DETECTORS 
 
Sec. 13-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Smoke detector means a mechanical device powered by batteries or alternating current capable of sounding an audible alarm upon sensing visible or invisible products of combustion and which meet the specifications contained in the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, a copy of which is on file in the office of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1973, § 12-67; Code 1988, § 13-131; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 13-132. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 13-132) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 13-133. - Article not exemption from compliance with building code and other ordinances. 
Nothing in this article shall excuse any owner of a building from compliance with all applicable provisions of the building code and other ordinances of the code pertaining to buildings and building regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 12-71; Code 1988, § 13-133) 
Cross reference— Building code, § 7-96 et seq.  
Sec. 13-134. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
The chief of the department of fire, rescue and emergency services is authorized to administer and enforce this article. 
(Code 1973, § 12-70; Code 1988, § 13-134; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 2, 2-10-2004)  
Sec. 13-135. - Where required. 
Smoke detectors shall be installed in all of the following structures or buildings: 
(1)  Any building containing one or more dwelling units. 
(2)  Any hotel or motel regularly used, offered for or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations for one or more persons. 
(3)  Roominghouses regularly used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations. 
(Code 1973, § 12-66; Code 1988, § 13-135; Ord. No. 1990-77, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section and requirement for subsection (2), Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922.  
Sec. 13-136. - Installation. 
Appropriate permits and inspections, as required by the building code, must be secured for the installation of smoke detectors powered by alternating current, with the fees prescribed in chapter 7 of this Code being charged for the permit. The installation shall conform to all applicable provisions of the building code. 
(Code 1973, § 12-68; Code 1988, § 13-136) 
Cross reference— Building code, § 7-96 et seq. 
State Law reference— Installation to conform to building code, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922; responsibility of landlord, Code of Virginia, § 55-248.13; responsibility of tenant, Code of Virginia, § 55-248.16.  
Sec. 13-137. - Capabilities. 
Smoke detectors installed pursuant to this article must be capable of sensing visible or invisible products of combustion and, when activated, the detectors shall provide an alarm suitable to warn the occupants of the building. Smoke detectors installed in dwelling units need only sound an alarm suitable to warn occupants within the individual dwelling unit. 
(Code 1973, § 12-68; Code 1988, § 13-137)  
Sec. 13-138. - General responsibility of owners and tenants of multifamily buildings. 
(a)  The owner or agent of the owner of a multifamily residential building shall provide smoke detectors as required by this article in hallways, stairwells and other public or common areas and shall maintain them in good working order. The tenant shall be responsible for reasonable care of smoke detectors in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 55-248.16, and for interim testing and providing written notice to the owner for the repair of any malfunctioning detector. In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 55-248.13, the owner shall be obligated to provide and pay for service, repair or replacement of any malfunctioning smoke detector. Such service, repair or replacement must occur within five days of receipt of written notice from the tenant that a smoke detector is in need of repair or replacement. 
(b)  The owner or agent of the owner of a dwelling unit which is rented or leased in a multifamily building shall provide written notification to the tenant of the responsibilities and duties imposed on the tenant by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 12-69; Code 1988, § 13-138)  
Sec. 13-139. - Owner to furnish tenant of dwelling unit with certification concerning detectors. 
The owner or agent of the owner of a dwelling unit which is rented or leased shall furnish the tenant, at the beginning of each tenancy and at least annually thereafter, with written certification that all smoke detectors required by section 13-135 are present, have been inspected and are in good working order. 
(Code 1973, § 12-69; Code 1988, § 13-139) 
State Law reference— Requirement for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922.  
Chapter 14.1 - FLOOD PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions found in Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), adopted June 9, 2015 , will take effect August 3, 2015. 
Cross reference— Building regulations, ch. 7; erosion and sediment control, excavation, ch. 11; housing and community development, ch. 17; zoning, ch. 40.1. 
State Law reference— Flood Protection and Dam Safety Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-600 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14.1-1. - Purpose and statutory authorization. 
(a)  Statutory authorization [44 CFR 59.22(a)(2)]. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the statutory authority granted to localities by Code of Virginia § 10.1-600, et seq. 
(b)  Findings of fact. The flood hazard areas of Portsmouth are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
Trends in tide data over the last 100 years suggest that Portsmouth is facing an increased danger of flooding caused by both sea level rise and subsidence. The data also suggest that Portsmouth may experience a rise in base flood elevations greater than four feet in the next 100 years. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to reduce the loss of life and property; to reduce the creation of health and safety hazards; to reduce the disruption of commerce and governmental services; to reduce the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief; and to reduce the impairment of the tax base by: 
(1)  Regulating uses, activities and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and development, will cause damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies. 
(2)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating within districts subject to flooding. 
(3)  Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur in flood-prone districts to be protected and/or flood-proofed against flooding and flood damage. 
(4)  Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(5)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
(6)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-2. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all privately and publicly owned lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Portsmouth and (a) identified as areas of special flood hazard according to the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) that is provided to the City of Portsmouth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and dated August 3, 2015 or any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto or (b) otherwise deemed special flood hazard areas pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-3. - Compliance and liability. 
(a)  No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
(b)  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study, but does not imply total flood protection. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as excessive rainfall, ice jams, and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district or that land use within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall not impose liability on the City of Portsmouth or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-4. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this chapter or any order of the floodplain administrator or his designee, or any authorized employee shall be guilty of the appropriate violation and subject to the penalties therefore. Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this chapter or any order of the floodplain administrator or his designee or any other authorized employee shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action seeking equitable relief for the proper enforcement of this chapter by the floodplain administrator or his designee or other authorized employee. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, the provisions of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance so as to permit it to continue, and all violations shall be corrected or remedied within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in noncompliance of this chapter may be declared by the City of Portsmouth to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance and/or certificates of occupancy may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-5. - Specific definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Appurtenant or accessory structure means an accessory structure not to exceed 200 square feet. 
Base flood means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means one percent annual chance water surface elevation designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's flood insurance rate map. For the purposes of this ordinance, the base flood is the one percent annual chance flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Board means the board of zoning appeals. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral-loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Coastal high-hazard area means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. 
Design flood elevation (DFE) means the higher of: 
(1)  The base flood elevation at the depth of peak elevation (including wave height) which has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled in any given year plus 3.0 feet; or 
(2)  The elevation of the base flood associated with the area designated on a flood hazard map adopted by the community, or otherwise legally designated plus 3.0 feet. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the placement of manufactured homes, streets, mining, dredging filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials, or the subdivision of land. For purposes of this chapter the date of development is considered the date of land disturbance or the date of issuance of a land disturbance permit, whichever is earlier. 
Elevated building/structure means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the most recent FIRM (August 3, 2015). "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or 
c.  Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph b. of this section and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result or erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1) of this section. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of the city on which FEMA has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM). 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means a report by FEMA that examines, evaluates, and determines flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation, and determination of mudflow and flood-related erosion hazards. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source and subject to special restrictions as defined in section 14.1-10 and 14.1-11. 
Floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water, and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above the base flood elevation for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or 
(3)  Individually listed by the commonwealth in an inventory of historic places. 
Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis means analysis performed by a professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation and FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles. 
Letter of map change (LOMC) means an official FEMA determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective FIRM or FIS. Letters of map change include LOMAs, LOMRs, and CLOMRs, which are defined as follows: 
(1)  Letter of map amendment (LOMA) means an amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area (SFHA). A LOMA amends the current effective FIRM and establishes that a land as defined by metes and bounds or a structure is not located in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
(2)  Letter of map revision (LOMR) means a revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) means a formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of SFHAs. A CLOMR does not revise the effective FIRM or FIS. 
Limit of moderate wave action (LiMWA) means a boundary that identifies the landward location of the 1.5 foot wave height delineating a zone called the "Coastal A Zone." 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44 CFR Section 60.3. 
Manufactured home means, for purposes of this chapter, a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days, but does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Manufactured home park/subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value means the city assessment value of the building as prepared by the city assessor. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD88) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the FIRM are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after December 31, 1974, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management ordinance adopted by the city, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
NFIP means the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Post-FIRM structure means a structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974. 
Pre-FIRM structure means a structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974. 
Primary frontal dune means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss structure means a structure covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood related damage on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred or $10,000.00, whichever is less. 
Severe repetitive loss structure means a structure that: (a) is covered under a contract for flood insurance made available under the NFIP; and (b) has incurred flood related damage — (i) For which four or more separate claims payments have been made under flood insurance coverage with the amount of each such claim exceeding $5,000.00, and with the cumulative amount of such claims payments exceeding $20,000.00; or (ii) For which at feast two separate claims payments have been made under such coverage, with the cumulative amount of such claims exceeding the market value of the insured structure before the damage occurred. 
Shallow flooding area means a special flood hazard area with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by pending or sheet flow. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined as set forth in this ordinance. These areas are designated as AE, AO, A, and VE on the FIRM. 
Start of construction means the date of issuance of the building permit, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either: 
(1)  The first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or 
(2)  The placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. 
Start of construction (Coastal Barriers Act) means, for other than new construction and substantial improvement, under the Coastal Barriers Resource Act (P.L.- 97-348), the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term "permanent construction" does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure when the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. A structure that has been damaged two or more times by flood events during any consecutive ten-year period with a cumulative building loss equal to or exceeding 50 percent of the market value before the damage shall also be considered a substantial damaged structure. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code requirements and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, historic structures undergoing work that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, shall comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places shall be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the provisions of this ordinance. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
VA USBC means the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended and supplemented from time to time. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitude and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial lake, river, creek, stream. ditch, channel, waterway, gully ravine, swale, or wash in which water flows, either continuously, periodically, or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed, or banks. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-6. - Description of district. 
(a)  Description of special flood hazard areas. The various special flood hazard districts shall include the special flood hazard areas (SFHAs). The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study (FIS), and flood insurance rate map (FIRM) prepared for the City of Portsmouth by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated August 3, 2015, and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. The City of Portsmouth may identify and regulate local flood hazard or pending areas that are not delineated on the FIRM. These areas may be delineated on a "Local Flood Hazard Map" using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record, historic high water marks or approximate study methodologies. 
The boundaries of the SFHA Districts are established as shown on the FIRM, which is declared to be a part of this ordinance and which shall be kept on file at the City of Portsmouth floodplain administrator's office, and which may include the following districts: 
(1)  The floodway district is in an AE Zone and is delineated, for purposes of this chapter, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one percent annual chance flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. The areas included in this district, if any, are shown on the FIRM. Currently, according to the above-referenced FIRM (August 3, 2015),there are no floodways designated in the latest Portsmouth FIS. 
(2)  The AE or AH Zones on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas for which one percent annual chance flood elevations have been provided and the floodway has not been delineated. 
(3)  The A Zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the one percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated. 
(4)  The AO Zone on the FIRM accompanying the FIS shall be those areas of shallow flooding identified as AO on the FIRM. 
(5)  The Coastal A Zone shall be those areas, as defined by the VA USBC, that are subject to wave heights between one and one-half and three feet, and identified on the FIRM as areas between the V zone and the limit of moderate wave action (LiMWA). 
(6)  The VE or V Zones on the FIRMs accompanying the FIS shall be those areas that are known as coastal high hazard areas, extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity (three-foot and higher) wave action. 
(b)  Overlay concept. 
(1)  The floodplain districts described above shall be in addition to and shall overlay all other zoning districts designated on the Official Zoning Ordinance Map as adopted by section 40.1 of this Code. The provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. 
(2)  In any conflict between the Code requirements for the floodplain districts and those for any underlying zoning district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply. 
(3)  In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-84 , § 1, 10-25-2016)  
Sec. 14.1-7. - Official zoning map. 
The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established as shown on the flood insurance rate map, which is declared to be a part of this chapter and which shall be kept on file in the office of the floodplain administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-84 , § 2, 10-25-2016)  
Sec. 14.1-8. - District boundary changes. 
The delineation of the floodplain districts may be revised by the Portsmouth City Council where natural or manmade changes have occurred, where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or where an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-9. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the floodplain administrator or his designee. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-84 , § 3, 10-25-2016)  
Sec. 14.1-10. - General provisions. 
(a)  Permit requirement. All uses and development occurring within any floodplain district, including placement of manufactured homes, shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of the appropriate permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable codes and ordinances as amended, including the VA USBC and the City of Portsmouth development ordinances. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the floodplain administrator shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and shall review all sites to assure they are reasonably safe from flooding. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(b)  Site plans and permit applications. All applications for development in any floodplain district and all building permits issued for activity in the floodplain district shall include the following information: 
(1)  The elevations of the "lowest floor" (including HVAC equipment and duct work), and the basement, or in Coastal A and V Zones, the lowest horizontal structural member (including HVAC equipment and duct work). 
(2)  For nonresidential structures to be flood-proofed, the elevation to which the structure will be flood-proofed. Such elevation shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation for the district. Floodproofing design must be certified by a Virginia registered professional engineer or architect. Documentation of certification by a registered professional engineer or architect of the design and methods of construction is required. 
(3)  The elevation of the base flood at the site. 
(4)  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(c)  Standards for manufactured homes. Section 14.1-11(e) prohibits the permanent placement of manufactured homes in floodplain districts. Manufactured homes may be temporarily placed in a floodplain district provided that: 
(1)  Manufactured homes placed in the floodplain district temporarily on individual lots or parcels, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the elevation and anchoring requirements in section 14.1-11 of this Code. 
(2)  Manufactured homes that are temporarily placed on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(3)  Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(4)  The length of time a manufactured home may be left on a lot and be considered temporary shall not exceed the time limitations provided in the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Standards for recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within floodplain districts shall be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. For the purposes of this chapter, a recreational vehicle shall be deemed ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-11. - District provisions. 
(a)  General standards. The following provisions shall apply to all permits: 
(1)  New construction, substantial improvements, and repairs for substantial damage shall be according to the VA USBC and this chapter, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  New construction, substantial improvements. and repairs for substantial damage shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage below the design flood elevation (DFE) in cases when those elements are allowed below the DFE. 
(3)  New construction, substantial improvements, and repairs for substantial damage shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be designed to current City of Portsmouth standards and shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(b)  Floodplain requirements. 
(1)  The following provisions shall apply within the floodway district of an AE zone: 
a.  Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
b.  Development activities which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies — with the City of Portsmouth's endorsement — for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR), and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
c.  If subsection 14.1-11(b)(1)a. is satisfied, all new construction and substantial Improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions in sections 14.1-10 and 14.1-11 of this Code. 
d.  The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) is prohibited except in an existing manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home is prohibited. 
(2)  The following provisions shall apply within an AE or AH zone [44 CFR 60.3(c)]. 
a.  Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as Zones A1-30 and AE or AH on the FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the City of Portsmouth. 
b.  Development activities in Zones A1-30 and AE or AH, on the City of Portsmouth's FIRM which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies — with the City of Portsmouth's endorsement — for a conditional letter of map revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(3)  The following provisions shall apply within an A zone [44 CFR 60.3(b)]. 
a.  The Approximated Floodplain District shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a 100-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as Zone A on the maps accompanying the FIS. For these areas, the base flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific one percent annual chance flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey Flood-Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this base flood elevation. For development proposed in the approximate floodplain the applicant must use technical methods that correctly reflect currently accepted non-detailed technical concepts, such as point on boundary, high water marks, or detailed methodologies hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator. 
b.  The floodplain administrator reserves the right to require a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for any development. When such base flood elevation data is utilized, the lowest floor shall be elevated to the design flood elevation (DFE). 
c.  During the permitting process, the floodplain administrator shall obtain: 
1)  The elevation of the lowest floor (including HVAC, all duct work, and the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and 
2)  If the structure is non-residential has been flood-proofed in accordance with the requirements of this article, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been flood-proofed. Residential structures shall not be flood-proofed. 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be obtained from other sources or developed using detailed methodologies comparable to those contained in a FIS for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(4)  The following provisions shall apply within an AO zone [44 CFR 60.3(c)]. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvement of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood depth specified on the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated no less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
1)  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood depth specified on the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
2)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to the specified flood level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
c.  Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(5)  The following provisions shall apply for the Coastal A Zone (limits of moderate wave action). Buildings and structures within this zone shall comply with V zone standards with the lowest supporting member elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 3.0 feet of freeboard, and must comply with the provisions in paragraph b.2. in this section (14.1-11) (provisions for zones AE or AH) and paragraphs a. and d. in this section (14.1-11). 
(6)  The following provisions shall apply for the VE or V Zones (Coastal High Hazard areas). 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements in Zones V and VE (V if no base flood elevation is available) shall be elevated on pilings or columns so that: 
1)  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (including all HVAC and duct work but excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated above the base flood level by at least three feet; and 
2)  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-percent annual chance). 
b.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of Section 14.1-11(b)(6)(a)(2) of this code. 
c.  The floodplain administrator shall obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (including all HVAC and duct work, but excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures in Zones V and VE. The floodplain management administrator shall maintain a record of all such information. 
d.  All new construction shall be located at least 50 feet landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
e.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood-lattice work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions: 
1)  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
2)  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
f.  The enclosed space below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be partitioned into multiple rooms, temperature-controlled, or used for human habitation. 
g.  The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited. When non-structural fill is proposed in a coastal high hazard area, appropriate engineering analyses shall be conducted to evaluate the impacts of the fill prior to issuance of a development permit. 
h.  The man-made alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands, which would increase potential flood damage, is prohibited. 
i.  All recreational vehicles placed in V-zones shall be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use or meet the same standards as for conventional housing in V-zones. 
(c)  Additional provisions for watercourse. 
(1)  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction, a permit shall be obtained from the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resource Commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, in riverine areas, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management), other required agencies, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)  The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. 
(d)  Elevation and construction standards. In all identified flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS or generated by a certified professional in accordance with subsection 14.1-11(b)(3) of this code the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) in Zones A1-30, AE, AH and A with detailed base flood elevations shall have the lowest floor including HVAC, duct work, and basement, elevated to at least the design flood elevation which is the BFE plus 3.0 feet. No floodproofing below the design flood elevation (DFE) of residential construction is allowed. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least three feet above the base flood level. 
Buildings located in all A1-30, AE, and AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the BFE plus three feet are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification, including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Space below the lowest floor. In zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-A30, fully enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall: 
a.  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles. building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
b.  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the design flood elevation which is the BFE plus three feet. 
c.  Include measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria; 
1)  Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2)  The total net area of all openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
3)  If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area must have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit. 
4)  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade. 
5)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
6)  Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  The following uses shall be specifically prohibited within all "A", "AE", "V" and "VE" floodplain districts: 
a.  Sanitary landfills, junkyards, outdoor storage of inoperative vehicles. 
b.  Manufactured homes (except as a temporary use in accordance with subsection 14.1-10(c)). 
c.  Surface mines and borrow pits. 
d.  Manufacture, bulk storage, transformation or distribution of petroleum (except for retail sales), chemicalor asphalt products or any hazardous materials as defined in either or both of the following: 
1)  Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act of 1986. 
2)  Identification and Listing of Hazardous Wastes, 40 CFR section 261 (1987). 
a.  Oil and oil products including petrochemicals. 
b.  Radioactive materials. 
c.  Any material transported or stored in large commercial quantities (such as 55-gallon drums) which is a very soluble acid or base, causes abnormal growth of an organ or organism, or is highly biodegradable, exerting a strong oxygen demand. 
d.  Biologically accumulative poisons. 
e.  Substances containing the active ingredients of poisons that are or were ever registered in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, as amended (7 USC 135 et seq.). 
f.  Substances highly lethal to mammalian or aquatic life. 
g.  Storage or land application of industrial wastes. 
h.  Outdoor storage of equipment, materials or supplies which are buoyant, flammable or explosive. 
(2)  Nonconforming uses of this chapter notwithstanding, no expansion of any of the above uses located within the floodplain district shall be permitted. 
(f)  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-12. - Design criteria for public improvements. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private package sewage treatment plants, including all pumping stations and collector systems, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and of discharges from the systems into the floodwaters. The facilities and plants shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and impairment. 
(b)  Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(c)  Drainage facilities. All storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without causing injury to persons or damage to property. The facilities shall ensure drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites. The city engineer may require a primary underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. 
(d)  Utilities. All utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems, being placed in floodprone areas should be located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flooding occurrence. 
(e)  Streets and sidewalks. Streets and sidewalks should be designed to minimize their potential for increasing and aggravating the levels of flood flow. Drainage openings shall be designed to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-13. - Variances; factors to be considered. 
(a)  Variances shall be issued only upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) after the board of zoning appeals has determined that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such variance will not result in (a) unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights, (b) additional threats to public safety, (c) extraordinary public expense; and will not (d) create nuisances, (e) cause fraud or victimization of the public, or (f) conflict with local laws or ordinances. While the granting of variances generally is limited to a lot size less than one-half acre, deviations from that limitation may occur. However, as the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing a variance increases. Variances may be issued by the board of zoning appeals for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the provisions of this section. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. In passing upon applications for variances, the board of zoning appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of the zoning ordinance and consider the following additional factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any floodway district that will cause any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(2)  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
(3)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
(4)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
(5)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(6)  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
(7)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
(8)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(9)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
(10)  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood. 
(11)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
(12)  The historic nature of a structure. Variances for repair or rehabilitation of historic structures may be granted upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(13)  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  The board of zoning appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
(c)  Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such will not result in (a) unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights, (b) additional threats to public safety, (c) extraordinary public expense; and will not (d) create nuisances, (e) cause fraud or victimization of the public, or (f) conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the variance will be the minimum required to provide relief. 
(e)  The board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance in writing that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation (a) increases the risks to life and property and (b) will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
(f)  A record shall be maintained of the above notification as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances that are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to the federal insurance administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-14. - Conditions for use of existing structures. 
(a)  A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed in the floodplain district before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain area to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent of its current market value during a consecutive ten-year period shall conform to the VA USBC and be elevated and/or flood-proofed to the greatest extent possible, as determined by the floodplain administrator. 
(2)  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a structure or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain area, to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its current market value during a consecutive ten-year period shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and shall require the entire structure to conform to the VA use. 
(3)  Additions must comply with subsection 14.1014(a)(1) and (2) above, as applicable, and meet the following requirements: 
a.  For additions that are less than 50 percent of the current market value of the existing building during a consecutive ten-year period, all parts of the addition to include duct work, HVAC equipment and electrical must be above the design flood elevation which is the BFE plus 3.0 feet. 
b.  For additions that are 50 percent or more of the current market value of the existing building during a consecutive ten-year period, the addition and the existing building must be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and both the addition and the existing building shall be required to conform to the VA USBC. 
(4)  Existing structures in the floodway area shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-15. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of a floodplain administrator. The City of Portsmouth Environmental Manager or other designee of the city manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may: 
(1)  Do the work themselves. In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the duties are conducted by the city manager or his designee. 
(2)  Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations in whole or in part to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees. 
(3)  Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another community or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. 
(4)  Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. Section 59.22. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Interpreting floodplain boundaries and providing available base flood elevation and flood hazard information. 
(2)  Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located in the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
(3)  Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the requirements of these regulations. 
(4)  Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from the federal, state, or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required; in particular, permits from state agencies for any construction, repair, or any alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts, structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the 100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing non-tidal waters of the state. 
(5)  Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent communities, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management), and other appropriate agencies (VADEQ, VIMS, VMRC, USACE) and have submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA. 
(6)  Advise applicants for new construction or substantial improvement of structures that are located within an area of the coastal barrier resources system established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act that Federal flood insurance is not available on such structures; areas subject to this limitation are shown on FIRMs as coastal barrier resource system areas (CBRS) or otherwise protected areas (OPA). 
(7)  Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areas if the provisions of this chapter have been met, or disapprove applications if the provisions of this chapter have not been met. 
(8)  Inspect or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for which permits have been issued to determine compliance with these regulations or to determine if non-compliance has occurred or violations have been committed. 
(9)  Review elevation certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be corrected. 
(10)  Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the city, within six months after such data and information becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations. 
(11)  Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the administration of these regulations, including: 
a.  Flood insurance studies, flood insurance rate maps (including historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps) and letters of map change; and 
b.  Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits, elevation certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been flood-proofed, other required design certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these regulations. 
(12)  Enforce the provisions of these regulations, investigate violations, issue notices of violations or stop work orders, and require permit holders to take corrective action. 
(13)  Advise the board of zoning appeals regarding the intent of these regulations, and for each application for a variance, prepare a staff report and recommendation. 
(14)  Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings. 
(15)  Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged. 
(16)  Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct, and prohibit the non-compliant repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to prevent additional damage. 
(17)  Undertake, as determined appropriate by the floodplain administrator due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit requests and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claims for increased cost of compliance coverage under NFIP flood insurance policies. 
(18)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the City of Portsmouth have been modified. 
(19)  Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to these regulations has either been assumed or relinquished through annexation. 
(20)  If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the city council for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA. 
(21)  Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning participation in the NFIP which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the SFHA, number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for development in the SFHA. 
(22)  It is the duty of the floodplain administrator to take into account flood, mudslide and flood-related erosion hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions relating to land management and use throughout the entire jurisdictional area of the community, whether or not those hazards have been specifically delineated geographically (e.g. via mapping or surveying). 
(c)  Use and interpretation of FIRMs. The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data: 
(1)  Where field survey topography indicates that adjacent ground elevations: 
a.  Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of these regulations; 
b.  Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the SFHA. 
(2)  In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified SFHAs, any other flood hazard data available from a federal, state, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used. 
(3)  Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reduced floodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations. 
(4)  Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs. 
(5)  If a preliminary flood insurance rate map and/or a preliminary flood insurance study has been provided by FEMA: 
a.  Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard data previously provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations. 
b.  Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available data pursuant to subsection 14.1-11(b)(3)(a) and used where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas are provided on the effective FIRM. 
c.  Prior to issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway areas exceed the base flood elevations and/or designated floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA. 
(d)  Jurisdictional boundary changes. 
(1)  The city floodplain ordinance in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the city for all annexed areas until the city adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. The city shall pass a resolution acknowledging and accepting responsibility for enforcing floodplain ordinance standards prior to annexation of any area containing identified flood hazards. If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in this ordinance, the city shall prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the city council for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA. 
(2)  In accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44 Subpart (B) Section 59.22(9)(v) all NFIP participating communities must notify the Federal Insurance Administration and optionally the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. 
(3)  In order that all flood insurance rate maps accurately represent the community's boundaries, a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority must be included with the notification. 
(e)  Submitting technical data. Base flood elevations in the City of Portsmouth may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the city shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and flood plain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(f)  Letters of map revision. When development in the floodplain causes a change in the base flood elevation, the applicant, including state agencies, must notify FEMA by applying for a conditional letter of map revision or a letter of map revision. Examples include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway. 
(2)  Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation. 
(3)  Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-84 , § 4, 10-25-2016)  
Sec. 14.1-16. - Records. 
Records of actions associated with administering this chapter shall be kept on file and maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 ; Ord. No. 2016-84 , § 4, 10-25-2016  
Sec. 14.1-17. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in the floodplain. Any ordinance, however, shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Sec. 14.1-18. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
( Ord. No. 2015-36, § 2(Exh. A), 6-9-2015 )  
Chapter 15.1 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15.1-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director means the director of the department of public health or his/her designee. 
Food service employee or food employee means any person who handles food or drink during storage, preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils or food service equipment, or who is employed in an area on the premises in which food or drink is stored, prepared or served. 
Food service manager means an operator or other person who has completed the requirements for, and obtained, a food service manager card issued by the director of public health or such director's authorized representatives. 
Operator means any person who, by contract, agreement or ownership, takes the responsibility for the operation of a food establishment. 
Risk assessment means an inspection of a food establishment and an evaluation thereof by the director to determine the potential for a foodborne illness to occur as a result of food manufactured, prepared, packed, stored, sold or distributed by the food establishment. Such an assessment may include an analysis on one or more occasions of food manufactured, prepared, packed, stored, sold or distributed by the food establishment. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-2. - Application of chapter generally. 
In addition to the places, entities and establishments specifically regulated elsewhere in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable, without limitation, to food-vending machines, trucks, pushcarts and wagons for the sale or display of food products, ice cream products or other ice confectionaries, delivery vehicles used in the delivery of meats and products of bakeries and confectioners and vehicles used in the transportation, sale or delivery of food. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the application of the provisions and requirements of this chapter to boarding houses, tourist homes, food establishments and itinerant restaurants. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-3. - Enforcement of chapter. 
The director of public health shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-4. - Violation of chapter generally. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-5. - Federal Model Food Code adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations chapters 1 through 8, inclusive, and all appendices and annexes of the United States Food and Drug Administration/Public Health Service 2009 Model Food Code ("FDA Model Food Code"), as adopted and promulgated by the United States Food and Drug Administration/Public Health Service ("FDA/USPHS"), including such chapters, appendices and annexes, as may hereafter be amended from time to time, but excepting those sections identified in section 15.1-6 of this chapter. The referenced provisions of the FDA Model Food Code are hereby adopted and incorporated in their entirety into this chapter as if fully set forth herein. In the event of conflict or inconsistency between this chapter and the FDA Model Food Code, the provisions of this chapter shall control. When used in the FDA Model Food Code, the term "health authority" shall mean the director. 
(b)  The director is hereby authorized to prepare and promulgate regulations consistent with this chapter that are designed to carry out the purposes and provisions and to assist in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. In promulgating regulations, the director shall consider accepted standards of health, hygiene, sanitation, safety and physical plant management. Any regulations prepared by the director shall not become effective until they have been presented to and approved by city council. The director may assess fees as appropriate to cover the administrative costs for implementation of programs. 
(c)  A certified copy of the FDA Model Food Code shall be maintained by the director at the main administrative office of the health department and shall be available for review by members of the public. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-6. - Modifications to FDA Model Food Code. 
(a)  The following sections of the FDA Model Food Code, as amended, are modified to read as follows: 
(1)  Section 1-201.10(35): "Food employee" means an individual working with unpackaged food, food equipment or utensils, food contact surfaces, or packaged potentially hazardous foods. 
(2)  Section 1-201.10(73): "Regulatory authority" means the local, state, or federal enforcement body or authorized representative having jurisdiction over the food establishment, including the director of public health. 
(3)  Section 3-302.12: Add to the end of the section the following sentence: Food containers shall be labeled in a language that is understood by the regulatory authority and by the employee. 
(4)  Section 3-306.14: Add to the end of the subsection the following subsection: 
(c)  There shall be no re-service of food on self-service food bars. 
(5)  Section 8-304.10(A): (A) At the time the permit is first issued, the regulatory authority shall make the permit holder aware of locations where the permit holder may review this code. 
(6)  Section 8-811.10(B) is amended as follows: 
A person who violates a provision of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine of not more than $1,000, or by confinement in jail not to exceed six months, or both; or 
(2)  If the person has been convicted previously of violating this Code or if a court finds that any violation occurred with intent to defraud or mislead, a fine of not more than $2,500.00 or confinement in jail not to exceed 12 months or both. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-7. - Future amendments to chapter. 
The director shall recommend amendments to this chapter consistent with the recommendations of the United States Public Health Service/ Food and Drug Administration and the needs of the City of Portsmouth. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Secs. 15.1-8—15.1-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15.1-11. - Application of article to temporary food establishments. 
A temporary food establishment shall comply with all sections of this article which are applicable to its operation; except, that the director may modify specific requirements for physical facilities when, in the director's opinion, no imminent health hazard will result. The director may augment the requirements of this article as to temporary food establishments when needed to assure the service of safe food and may prohibit the sale of certain potentially hazardous food at such establishments. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-12. - Submission and approval of plans and specifications for construction or alteration. 
Plans and specifications for the construction of new food establishments or of major alterations or additions in the construction or arrangement of the premises of any food establishment shall be submitted to the director. A plan review fee for new or extensively renovated food establishments and for minor renovations shall be paid to the health department. Approval in writing of such plans and specifications must be given by either the director, the director of health services or the director of environmental health. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-13. - Approval of structural alterations or additions. 
(a)  Any changes, alterations or additions in the structure or arrangement of the premises of a food establishment or of the equipment therein must be approved, in writing and after a personal inspection of the premises, by the director of public health or an authorized representative thereof. 
(b)  The maintenance and repair of premises or equipment necessary for sanitary operation are excluded from the provision of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-14. - Operating permit—Required; application; inspection prerequisite to issuance; refusal. 
(a)  No person shall operate a food establishment within the city who does not possess a permit issued by the director, wherein the applicant shall agree to conform to the ordinances, rules and regulations governing such places and to permit such examination and inspections as may be deemed necessary by the director. A permit fee shall be paid by the applicant to the health department. Application for such permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the director, wherein the applicant shall agree to conform to the ordinances, rules and regulations governing such places and to permit such examination and inspections as may be deemed necessary by the director of public health. Upon issuance, the permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place so that it may be viewed by the public. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director, prior to the issuance of a permit required by this section, to cause an inspection to be made of the premises in which the business is to be conducted and to refuse the permit if the conditions of the premises do not conform to the requirements of this chapter. The director may refuse such permit to an applicant with a past record of unsatisfactory compliance in the operation of a food establishment. If refused, the applicant will be granted a hearing before the director and if the permit is refused following the hearing, the applicant may appeal to the commissioner of public health if applying for a state permit and to the city council if applying for a city permit. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue shall not issue a license for the conduct of a food establishment without the applicant presenting a certificate of authorization from the director of public health. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-15. - Conducting food service establishment operation in room used for domestic purpose. 
None of the operations connected with a food service establishment shall be conducted in any room used for domestic purposes. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-16. - Operating permit—Not transferable. 
The permit to operate a food establishment is not transferable to another person or corporation or from one location to another. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-17. - Risk assessments. 
Each establishment shall have an analysis of its operation and menu conducted by the director to determine the potential for a foodborne illness to occur and, in turn, the frequency of inspection that shall be required. A fee for each risk assessment shall be paid by the applicant to the health department cooperative budget to defray administrative expenses. Only in the event of a change in the establishment's menu and /or operation shall a new risk assessment be required. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-18. - Periodic inspections and inspection reports. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director to cause inspections to be made of all food establishments in accordance with established frequency based on risk assessment classification. Following proper identification, the operator of a food establishment shall permit access to all parts of the establishment at any time it is open, upon request of the director of public health or his authorized representative. 
(b)  One copy of the inspection report shall be posted by the owner or operator so that it is readable by the employee(s) of the establishment. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-19. - Food service card. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to work or be employed in any capacity in any food establishment unless such person shall have first completed the requirements for, and obtained, a food service employee or food service manager card issued by the director of public health of the city or such director's authorized representatives. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to employ or permit another person to remain employed in any place or establishment referred to in subsection (a), above, unless such person holds a valid food service card issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Food service cards required by this chapter shall be issued by the director of public health only to food service employees and food service managers who shall furnish such information and laboratory specimens and submit to such physical examination and tests as the director may require and/or who have received such instructions in personal hygiene and food establishment sanitation as may be offered or required by the director; provided, however, that the director may, when in the director's judgment it seems proper, issue a temporary card to an applicant. Such temporary card shall be effective only for so many days as the director shall indicate thereon in writing, not to exceed 30 days. 
(d)  A food service card issued by another city, county or organization within the commonwealth shall be honored in the city until its expiration, provided that requirements to obtain such card were equal or greater than those set forth in this article. Determinations concerning such requirements shall be made by the director. 
(e)  Such fees as the director deems appropriate for each food service card shall be paid by the applicant to the health department cooperative budget to defray the necessary administrative expenses. 
(f)  Each food service card issued shall remain in force until date of expiration or until suspended or revoked by the director for cause. Temporary food service cards, referred to in subsection (c), above, and food service cards accepted by reciprocity as set forth in subsection (d), above, may also be suspended or revoked by the director for cause. 
(g)  A food service card issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be produced by the food service employee or food service manager for inspection upon the request of the director. 
(h)  Upon the expiration of the food service card, the holder thereof may renew the same by payment of the fee prescribed by subsection (e), above, and by successfully completing such training classes and/or tests as the director directs. The date, time and location of said classes or tests shall be determined by the director of public health. 
(i)  A food service card issued under this chapter shall not be transferred to or used by any person other than the person to whom it is issued. The food service card is the property of the employee. 
(j)  The director shall have the authority to waive the requirements of this section for special events of a temporary nature. Such waiver shall be in writing. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-20. - Food service manager; required, exemptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment unless such person currently employs a food service manager to supervise the establishment's food service employees; the operator shall post in a conspicuous place in the food establishment, in letters not less than one inch in size, the name of each food service manager currently employed. 
(b)  No owner or operator of a high risk food establishment shall employ one food service manager to supervise the food service employees of two or more food establishments. 
(c)  Unless deemed warranted after risk assessment and review of the records of establishment's operation by the director, the following food establishments are exempt from the provisions of this section: (i) food establishments that exclusively serve, sell or distribute prepackaged foods which are contained in securely sealed or wrapped bottles, cans, cartons or other similar containers; (ii) temporary food establishments in the discretion of the director following a risk assessment thereof; and (iii) such other food establishments designated by the director in his or her discretion following a risk assessment thereof. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Secs. 15.1-21—15.1-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 15.1-26. - Permit. 
(a)  Persons responsible for a mobile food facility are required to obtain a health department permit from the public health department before beginning operation. 
(b)  The permit is not transferable to another party. 
(c)  Issuance of a permit shall not relieve the recipient from any other applicable city or state requirement for operation. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-27. - Tracking decals. 
(a)  Tracking decals will be required by all food vendors using push-carts, and other mobile units (i.e. trailer and/or mobile trucks) within the city limits. 
(b)  Tracking decals shall be obtained prior to obtaining a business license from the commissioner of revenue's office. 
(c)  Prior to receiving a decal, new vendors shall: 
(1)  Complete a Commonwealth of Virginia permit application; and 
(2)  Pay the permit application fee and the plan review fee if applicable. 
(d)  Permitted vendors shall request a decal prior to March 31 of each year. Upon paying an administrative tracking fee the vendor will be issued a decal with a vendor's number. 
(e)  Each year mobile vendors will be required to pay the administrative tracking fee. A vendor coming into the system for six months or less will pay the full fee. 
(f)  Decals shall be clearly visible to the public on the push-cart and on the front right side of the vehicles bumper for mobile trucks. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, , § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-28. - Commissary. 
(a)  Commissary means a catering establishment, restaurant, or any other place in which food, food containers, or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged, or stored for distribution to satellite operations. Mobile food facilities shall operate only from a commissary which possesses a valid public health department permit. 
(b)  A commissary agreement is required and must be signed by the owner or operator of the facility being used as a commissary. 
(c)  Mobile food facilities shall report, at least daily, to such location for all cleaning and servicing. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-29. - Mobile food facilities selling packaged foods. 
Only food that is prepared and packaged in individual servings and beverages that are not potentially hazardous need not comply with those requirements for water, sewage, nor with those requirements for cleaning and sanitizing equipment if the required cleaning can be done at the commissary. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS AND GROUP HOMES 
 
Sec. 15.1-31. - Application. 
This article shall apply to bed and breakfast establishments and group homes. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-32. - Definitions. 
Bed and breakfast means an operation that prepares and offers food only to guests, is owner occupied, the number of available guest bedrooms does not exceed six, breakfast is the only meal offered, and the number of guests served does not exceed 18. 
Group home means a private or public institutional housing facility that provides living quarters and meals for 12 or fewer recipients. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Sec. 15.1-33. - Regulations. 
In addition to any other applicable regulations or Code provisions, the following requirements are applicable to all bed and breakfast establishments and group homes: 
(1)  The manual cleaning and drying of equipment and utensils shall include, as a minimum, thorough washing with adequate soap or detergent, thorough rinsing, and drying before storage or use. Drying may be by clean towels used for no other purpose. 
(2)  Home model dishwashers may be used in lieu of manual cleaning and drying of utensils. Home model dishwashers do not require a flow pressure device. 
(3)  A warewashing sink may be used for hand washing provided approved dispensers, soap, and single-use paper towels are provided. 
(4)  Floors, walls, and ceilings shall be in good repair and kept clean. 
(5)  Approved dispensers, soap and single-use paper towels shall be made available to accommodate hand washing. 
(6)  Live animals shall be allowed in the facility but shall not be fed using the same equipment or utensils that are used to feed humans. 
( Ord. No. 2011-48, § 2, 7-12-2011)  
Chapter 16 - GARBAGE AND REFUSE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Deposit of trash, debris, etc., in city waters, § 6-1; garbage and trash receptacles for food establishments, § 15-79; garbage and refuse disposal in mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, § 21-31; accumulation of debris constituting nuisances, § 23-26 et seq.; disposal of garbage and refuse in parks, § 25-100; trash receptacles required on mobile vending unit, § 32-179. 
State Law reference— Virginia Waste Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 et seq.; general authority of city relative to collection and disposal of garbage and refuse, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-927, 15.2-928. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in articles I and II of this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved container means a storage and collection receptacle or container required for the storage and collection of solid waste or recyclables issued by the city and used in the automated solid waste collection program. 
Automated refuse collection means collection service provided to residences equipped with a city-furnished 65-gallon or 105-gallon automated collection container. 
Bulk refuse means the term "bulk refuse" shall include bulky items such as household construction debris not generated by a contractor, household construction debris not generated by a contractor, furniture, tree trimmings, cuttings, shrubbery and the like. 
Business or commercial establishments means any premises wherein: 
(1)  There is carried on any business, profession or occupation subject to the license tax ordinance of the city; or 
(2)  There is carried on any broadcasting, publishing, manufacturing or commercial activity or process, including the renting of residential property; or 
(3)  There are multifamily units of four or more including condominium units. 
Construction site means any area in which construction of any type is conducted, including roads, buildings and all other places actively being constructed or renovated by public or private owners or the agent, employees or contractors thereof. 
Director shall mean the director of general services of the city or the director's authorized representative. 
Dwelling means any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. 
Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Hazardous wastes means those wastes that can cause serious injury or disease during the normal storage, collection of disposal process, including, but not limited to, flammable, explosive, pathological or infectious wastes, radioactive materials and dangerous chemicals. 
Industrial waste shall include building material waste resulting from erecting, removing, repairing, remodeling or razing buildings; used parts from vehicles and tires of a size 800 by 20 and greater; ashes from boilers, incinerators, or other trash or matter originating in a business or manufacturing establishment intended not for use or sale. 
Operator means the person operating any business or commercial establishment as distinguished from the owner of the premises involved. 
Recyclables means items, including but not limited to, newspapers, cardboard, junk mail, and catalogs, papers; clear glass bottles and jars; plastic containers #1 and #2; aluminum cans, aluminum foil and steel/tin food cans. 
Refuse means any putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body waste), including garbage, rubbish, trash, ashes and other similar wastes. 
Small dead animals means dead cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size. 
Tires shall mean a privately owned vehicle tire of a size less than 800 by 20. 
Trash means the accumulation of waste paper, rags, bottles, cans or other similar matter. 
White goods shall mean large household appliances such as refrigerators, water heaters and washing machines. 
Yard waste means material derived from leaves, shrubbery trimmings, and lawn trimmings. 
(Code 1973, § 14-1; Code 1988, § 16-1; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 2(14-1), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1992-14, § 1, 2-25-1992; Ord. No. 1992-84, § 1, 10-27-1992; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 3, 3-11-1997; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 1, 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 1, 5-28-2013 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-2. - Violations of chapter. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. Additionally, any person in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be liable for all damage, loss and expense suffered or incurred by the city as a result of such violations. 
(b)  When a violation of the refuse provisions of this chapter has occurred the person listed as responsible for payment of the refuse bill for that address shall be presumed to be the person causing the violation. Such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence as determined by the director of general services or his designee. 
(c)  In accordance with § 15.2-298 of the Code of Virginia, the first violation under this chapter excluding the provisions of section 16-35 shall result in a violation notice being sent to the owner or occupant of the property. For a second violation within 12 months, a fine of $25.00 shall be imposed and shall be added to the refuse bill. A third violation within 12 months shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00 which shall be added to the refuse bill. Further violations within 12 months shall be punishable by a fine of $100.00 which shall be added to the refuse bill. 
(d)  Dwellings or businesses that have been granted an exemption from the refuse bill in accordance with section 16-62 of this chapter are still subject to the penalties noted in section 16-2(c). For violations of this chapter, fines for violations shall be added to the refuse section of the water bill. In addition, the provisions of section 16-31 may also be applied. 
(Code 1988, § 16-2; Ord. No. 1996-68, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 2, 9-26-2006) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 16-3. - Unlawful disposal generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or dispose of any refuse in any place in the city except in a licensed private landfill or at a site designated for such purpose and operated by the Southeastern Public Service Authority of Virginia. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or dump any refuse generated outside of the corporate limits of the city at any place within the corporate limits of the city except such site as may be designated for such purpose and operated by the Southeastern Public Service Authority of Virginia. 
(Code 1973, §§ 14-2, 14-6; Code 1988, § 16-3) 
Cross reference— Deposit of trash in city waters, § 6-1.  
Sec. 16-4. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any garbage, trash or rubbish upon the floor or platform of buses, public elevators, public halls, or the floor or other interior portion of any public building in this city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop or deposit on any premises or vacant property within the city any waste, including, but not limited to, refuse, garbage, trash, ashes, rubbish, building rubbish, dead animals, putrescible matter and anything injurious to health; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to the deposit of waste not injurious to health on a public landfill where permission to make such deposit is granted by the director of general services and done in accordance with the regulations established by the director of general services pertaining to the use of such public landfills, nor to the filling in or grading of property with earth, mud, ashes, and similar materials. 
(Code 1973, § 14-7; Code 1988, § 16-4; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 3(14-7(b)), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997)  
Sec. 16-5. - Dumping trash, refuse, garbage, debris or other unsightly matter prohibited. 
(a)  Any person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor who shall dump or otherwise dispose of trash, garbage, refuse, debris or other unsightly matter on any public property, including a public highway or right-of-way and property adjacent to such highway or right-of-way, or on private property in the city without the written consent of the owner thereof or his agent. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00 or more than $2,500.00 and confinement in jail for not more than 12 months, either or both. In lieu of the imposition of confinement in jail, the court may order the defendant to perform community service in litter abatement activities. 
(b)  When any person is arrested for a violation of this section and the matter alleged to have been dumped or disposed of has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the arresting officer may comply with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936 in making such arrest. 
(c)  When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person and the matter dumped or disposed of has been ejected or removed from a motor vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the person ejecting or disposing such matter. Such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(d)  When a person is convicted of a violation this section, the court may suspend the imposition of any sentence upon such person, on the condition that the defendant volunteer his services for such period of time as the court may designate to remove trash, garbage, refuse, debris or other unsightly matter from public or private property as designated by the court. 
(e)  Police officers and fire marshals are authorized and designated to enforce the provisions in sections 16-3 and 16-5. 
(Code 1973, § 39-17; Code 1988, § 16-5; Ord. No. 2004-9, § 1, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Litter control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1414 et seq.; similar provisions and authority of city to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-346.  
Sec. 16-6. - Storage containers generally. 
(a)  Except as provided for in paragraph (b) herein, it shall be unlawful for garbage or trash to be placed, deposited or allowed to remain on any premises within the city unless same is placed or kept in covered containers or a rigid, tapered, galvanized steel or plastic receptacle. The cover on such receptacles or containers shall be kept on same at all times, except when the receptacle is being filled or emptied. Plastic or polyethylene bags shall be used only as liners in such receptacles and it shall be unlawful to use same as the sole means of storage of garbage or refuse on any premises within the city. 
(b)  For residences receiving automated refuse collection it shall be unlawful for garbage and trash to be placed, deposited or allowed to remain on any premises within the city unless same is placed in a 65- or 105-gallon container furnished by the city. The cover on such receptacle shall be kept on same at all times, except when the receptacle is being filled or emptied. Plastic or polyethylene bags shall be used only as liners in such receptacles and it shall be unlawful to use same as the sole means of storage of garbage or refuse on any premises within the city. 
(c)  For dwellings and businesses using dumpsters, it shall be unlawful for garbage or trash to be placed, deposited or allowed to remain on any premises within the city unless same is placed or kept inside the dumpster. The dumpster shall remain closed at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 14-3; Code 1988, § 16-6; Ord. No. 1992-14, § 2, 2-25-1992; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006)  
Sec. 16-7. - Litter receptacles in public places. 
(a)  As used in this section, a litter receptacle shall mean those containers acceptable to the director of general services and which may be standardized as to size, shape, capacity, color, and cover design which shall bear the state antilitter symbol. The term "litter" as used in this section shall mean paper, waste materials, bottles, and cans, but shall not include garbage, refuse, or bulk refuse. Large containers known as "dumpsters" may be used as receptacles for the deposit of litter if such use is approved by the director. 
(b)  Requirements. Litter receptacles shall be required in the following public places. The minimum number of litter receptacles for each public place shall be specified herein. Additional receptacles may be required by the building official or his representative as determined by the needs of a particular location. 
(1)  Sidewalks in business districts. The need for receptacles and their placement, and the responsibility for their maintenance and service, shall be controlled by the director or his representative. 
(2)  Shopping centers. Receptacles shall be located along pedestrian travel routes normally taken by persons using such facility. The number and placement of receptacles shall be determined by the operator, or group responsible for the operation of such facility; except no less than one receptacle shall be placed at each entrance to the building. All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide litter receptacles distributed within the parking area. 
(3)  Drive-in restaurants and fast food restaurants. One receptacle per establishment, plus additional receptacles as necessary to contain litter generated by the facility. 
(4)  Self-service refreshment areas. One receptacle for each separate area, provided each separate area contains two or more machines for dispensing, or serving food and/or drink. 
(5)  Gasoline service stations. One receptacle per service island. 
(6)  Construction sites. Receptacles sufficient to contain workmen's litter, plus those construction wastes capable of being spread by wind or water; the wind and water from hurricanes, tornados, and floods excepted. No less than one receptacle shall be placed at each site. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of construction or demolition, shall be immediately removed by the contractor. 
(7)  Marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations, public and private piers which are operated for public use. One receptacle on each pier plus additional receptacles as necessary to contain litter generated by the facility. 
(8)  Boat launching areas. At least one receptacle shall be placed as needed consistent with use of the area and the need for a litter deposit. 
(9)  Sporting events, fairgrounds, carnivals, circuses, festivals and other similar events. Receptacles shall be placed sufficient in number to contain the litter generated at such event and spaced so as to be reasonably accessible in those areas. The placement and need for such receptacles shall be determined by the operator, sponsor, or group operating such event; except no less than one receptacle shall be placed at each event. 
(10)  Public buildings, including schools. One receptacle at or reasonably near each entrance to each building. 
(11)  Trailer parks, recreational facilities and recreational areas, including parks, campgrounds, beaches and bathing areas. One receptacle for each facility or area at which food or drink is sold, plus additional receptacles as necessary to accommodate the need for litter depository. 
All litter containers shall be weighted or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or manager of the above-enumerated facilities to collect the refuse deposited and store material in an approved location and container for collection. 
(Code 1973, § 14-9; Code 1988, § 16-7; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006)  
Sec. 16-8. - Control of trash, etc., at construction sites. 
(a)  Construction sites shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent trash and construction-related debris from accumulating thereon unrestrained or being allowed to blow or be transported onto other property. A suitable trash receptacle shall be maintained on the site at all times during construction. 
(b)  Dirt, sand, gravel and similar construction materials shall be stored on construction sites in such a manner so as not to be deposited or tracked on public streets or rights-of-way. 
(c)  Any violation of this section may be abated in the manner prescribed by section 16-31. 
(Code 1973, § 14-29; Code 1988, § 16-8) 
Cross reference— Building regulations, ch. 7.  
Sec. 16-9. - Picking over, sorting, etc., garbage, refuse, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to sort or remove any garbage, trash, litter, refuse, or rubbish from trash or recycling receptacles on the streets of the city, or rake, pick, sort over or gather material from any place where garbage, trash or refuse is dumped or distributed in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 14-8; Code 1988, § 16-9; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 2, 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 16-10. - Refuse collection requirements. 
(a)  Refuse containers such as dumpsters or other approved receptacles shall be required for mobile home parks and for multifamily, commercial and industrial developments. The number, size, design, and location of such containers shall be approved by the director of general services or his designee. 
(b)  Refuse containers shall be located on a site so that service vehicles will have a convenient access to them while minimizing encroachment on parking places, vehicular circulation drives, sidewalks, and public right of ways. Dumpsters and their enclosure shall not be closer than 50 feet to any residential structure and shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the property line. 
(c)  Commercial high volume refuse generators on sites with sufficient outside area to accommodate refuse enclosures with adequate capacity shall provide for indoor refuse storage. Compaction devices may be a part of such an accommodation. 
(d)  Refuse containers shall be located on a paved area or concrete pad constructed in accordance with all applicable health department standards. They shall be hidden from general view by means of fencing, masonry walls, landscaping, or other such method deemed necessary and acceptable by the director of general services. 
(e)  All refuse containers shall be adequately sized to handle the needs of the facility or development. The director of general services may require a developer to demonstrate adequate refuse capacity by calculation using waste industry standards. Materials and waste which may be edible or attractive to rodents or insects shall only be stored in completely closed containers. 
(f)  If centralized refuse containers are used in residential developments, they shall be located in an area or areas conveniently accessible to all residents. The containers shall be enclosed on three sides by a solid wood or masonry wall with a solid opaque gate provided on the fourth side. Landscaping shall be incorporated to improve the visual appearance. Support posts, gate frames, hinges and latches should be of sufficient size and strength to allow gates to function without sagging or becoming an eyesore. 
(g)  If individual refuse containers are used for the units in a residential development, the site plan shall provide adequate storage space and outdoor access to such storage for the occupant or each residential structure to store the refuse container in a side or rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 2006-85, § 4, 9-26-2006)  
Secs. 16-11—16-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COLLECTIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-31. - Abatement of violations of division. 
If an owner or occupant fails, refuses or neglects to comply with any provision of this division after delivery or posting of reasonable notice of violation of this division, the director may invoke the provisions of sections 16-2 or 16-5, and/or cause the nuisance or the condition which is in violation of this division to be abated and may transmit to the city treasurer a statement of all costs incurred thereby. Included in such costs shall be a $150.00 fee to cover the administrative expense incurred and a fee of $250.00 per load or portion thereof for the use of the city's waste management vehicles and equipment. All such costs shall be added to the taxes assessed against the real estate on which the nuisance or condition in violation of this division existed or the real estate abutting the alley, sidewalk or street on which the nuisance or condition in violation of this division existed, for the ensuing tax year and shall be collected with such taxes by any manner prescribed by law for the collection of city taxes. All costs incurred thereby shall be docketed as a lien against such real property, in the nuisance abatement lien docket book maintained in the office of the city treasurer, which lien shall exist in the office of the city treasurer until removed by payment of such costs in full. 
(Code 1973, § 14-30; Code 1988, § 16-31; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 3(14-30), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1996-68, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006) 
Cross reference— Nuisances generally, ch. 23; nuisance abatement lien docket book, § 23-5.  
Sec. 16-32. - Type of containers required. 
(a)  For areas receiving automated refuse and recycling collection it shall be unlawful for garbage or trash to be set out for collection unless the same is placed in an approved container furnished by the city. 
(b)  In areas receiving automated refuse collection, as defined in section 16-1, yard waste must be set out for collection placed in clear plastic bags. Such bags must not exceed 40 gallons or 25 pounds each. Customers are limited to 20 bags per collection. Customers shall not mix any other form of trash, refuse or garbage with yard waste. Yard waste too bulky to be placed in clear plastic bags shall be included for collection as bulk refuse. 
(c)  The type of containers required in each area shall be determined by the director. 
(Code 1973, § 14-22; Code 1988, § 16-32; Ord. No. 1992-14, § 3, 2-25-1992; Ord. No. 1992-84, § 2, 10-27-1992; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 2, 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 16-33. - Substances permitted in containers. 
No substance other than garbage, trash or recyclables shall be placed in the approved containers required by section 16-32. 
(Code 1973, § 14-23; Code 1988, § 16-33; Ord. No. 1992-14, § 4, 2-25-1992; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 2, 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 16-34. - Preparation of certain materials for collection. 
(a)  Paper. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any paper for collection by the city without placing the same in a receptacle or refuse bag complying with section 16-32 or having the same securely bundled so that the paper cannot be blown or scattered about the street. 
(b)  Cartons, boxes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection by the city any empty or discarded corrugated cartons or paper or pasteboard boxes of any kind without first preparing them by flattening and securely tying them in bundles not exceeding 25 pounds in weight, with strong, stout cord. 
(c)  Yard waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection by the city, yard waste containing dirt, rocks or other material not included in the definition of yard waste. Material shall be placed in clear plastic bags complying with section 16-32. It shall be unlawful to rake, sweep or place yard waste into or onto the street, curb, gutter or drainage structure. 
(d)  Small dead animals. Small dead animals will be collected by the city during normal operating hours provided the body is placed in a properly sealed plastic or polyethylene refuse bag and placed as near to the curb as possible or between the sidewalk and the curb. 
(e)  Tires. Tires shall be placed as close to the curb as possible or between the sidewalk and the curb in accordance with section 16-36. A limit of four tires per 12-month period shall be collected. If more than four tires are placed out for collection within any 12-month period the property owner or occupant of the property shall be subject to a charge of $5.00 per additional tire and the provisions of section 16-31. All tires must be clean and rimless. 
(f)  White goods. White goods shall be placed as close to the curb as possible. Refrigerators and freezers must be empty and have the door removed before placed for collection. 
(Code 1973, § 14-24; Code 1988, § 16-34; Ord. No. 1992-14, § 5, 2-25-1992; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006)  
Sec. 16-35. - Collection of bulk refuse generally. 
Bulk refuse shall be picked up from residential dwellings at such time, and in accordance with such procedures as may be established by the director of general services. Such items shall not be placed for collection as part of the regular collection process for garbage, trash or refuse. Tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery and cuttings, or clippings and the like, which cannot be placed in receptacles or refuse bags as required under section 16-34(c), shall be cut into lengths of between four feet and six feet and stacked neatly at curbside in a pile not to exceed eight feet by ten feet by eight feet in height. Tree parts greater than 18 inches in diameter will not be picked up by the city and will be the responsibility of the home owner or tenant for disposal. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or tenant of the premises involved to remove all tree trimmings, cuttings, shrubbery and the like that do not meet these specifications or those contained in section 16-34(c). Tree and shrubbery branches, limbs and trimmings cut by landscape or tree service contractors will not be collected by the city. Owners or tenants placing items for collection cut by tree and landscape contractors will be subject to the charges and penalties of section 16-31 of this division. Bulk refuse shall not be collected by the city from vacant lots, business and commercial establishments, including multifamily residential complexes. 
(Code 1973, § 14-21; Code 1988, § 16-35; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 3(14-21), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1996-68, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006)  
Sec. 16-36. - Frequency, times and dates containers and bulk refuse to be placed for collection. 
(a)  Garbage and household trash accumulated at residences shall be collected by the city one (1) time each week, except when otherwise designated by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Recyclables shall be collected every other week on the same day as waste collection, except when otherwise designated by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  Normally, in the areas receiving automated refuse and recycling collection, residents may place the container for collection at any time after 5:00 p.m. the day before and by 7:00 a.m. on days of collection or as specified by the director. Such receptacles should be removed from the collection site as soon as possible after collection and stored beside or behind the dwelling or at a site acceptable to the director. Receptacles must be removed by the evening of collection day. Yard waste packaged in clear plastic bags shall be placed out for collection at the same time as the automated refuse container. 
(d)  Bulk refuse collection shall normally be on the same day as garbage collection. Residents may place bulk refuse for collection any time the day before scheduled collection but not after 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection, or as specified by the director. Tires, white goods, and cardboard set out for collection must be separated from bulk refuse. 
(Code 1973, § 14-25; Code 1988, § 16-36; Ord. No. 1992-14, § 6, 2-25-1992; Ord. No. 1996-68, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 2013-32, § 2, 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 16-37. - Positioning of materials for collection. 
All garbage, trash, paper, corrugated cartons, paper or pasteboard boxes, and other waste, to be removed by the city under this article shall be placed on the sidewalk as near to the curb as possible or between the sidewalk and the curb, except where public alleys are provided, in which instance, refuse for collection shall be placed in such alley. Bulk refuse shall always be placed as near to the curb as possible or between the sidewalk and the curb and shall not be placed in public alleys even where same are provided. Bulk refuse must be placed clear of water meters, TV cable boxes, power lines, utility poles and tree limbs. 
(Code 1973, § 14-261; Code 1988, § 16-37; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006)  
Sec. 16-38. - Receptacles from multifamily structures to be identifiable. 
Every rental dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for the storage of refuse and garbage, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling unit shall be responsible for supplying the necessary number of containers per residential dwelling unit and for marking on the receptacle the number of the residential dwelling unit that uses that specific receptacle. 
(Code 1973, § 14-27; Code 1988, § 16-38; Ord. No. 1992-84, § 1, 10-27-1992)  
Sec. 16-39. - Certain items unacceptable. 
The following items shall not be removed by the city and shall not be placed for collections. It shall be the responsibility of the person generating such items to transport and dispose of the same: 
(1)  Industrial wastes; 
(2)  Debris from construction, remodeling, razing and repair operations on residential and commercial buildings and other structures; or any material generated by a contractor; 
(3)  Hazardous wastes; and 
(4)  Large dead animals. 
(Code 1973, § 14-28; Code 1988, § 16-39; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006)  
Sec. 16-40. - Special pickup for moving. 
Special collection will be provided by the department of general services for residents either moving into or vacating a dwelling. In order to arrange such service, a 24-hour notice must be given to the waste management division of the department of general services of the city. Residents must separate bulk refuse from other garbage and trash. 
(Code 1988, § 16-40; Ord. No. 1992-14, § 7, 2-25-1992; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997)  
Secs. 16-41—16-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CHARGES 
 
Sec. 16-60. - Evictions. 
After 24 hours from the time of eviction a landlord shall remove material placed at the curb as a result of the eviction. If the landlord fails to remove these items, the city's waste management division may remove these items. The charges and fees in section 16-31 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-85, § 4, 9-26-2006)  
Sec. 16-61. - Imposed; responsibility for payment. 
(a)  The service charges prescribed in this division are imposed and shall be collected for all business and commercial establishments and for all dwelling units within the city. For business and commercial establishments, such charges shall be paid by the owner or operator, and for dwelling units, such charges shall be paid by the owner or tenant, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(b)  The charges prescribed in this division are imposed on any entity using the services and facilities of the city for the collection of garbage and trash, including specifically, but without limitation, the Portsmouth Redevelopment and Housing Authority. 
(Code 1973, §§ 14-36, 14-43; Code 1988, § 16-61) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 16-62. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The director may exempt a business or commercial establishment from the payment of the service charges prescribed by this division upon receipt of a written request therefor, if the establishment has an alternate method of transporting and disposing of garbage and refuse that is acceptable to the director. 
(b)  Industrial waste and similar refuse or garbage for which the city does not have the capability for collecting and disposing shall be excluded from the service charges of this division and it shall be the responsibility of the person generating such matter to transport and dispose of the same. 
(c)  No exemptions or refunds shall be granted for services not utilized. 
(Code 1973, § 14-37; Code 1988, § 16-62; Ord. No. 1992-84, § 1, 10-27-1992; Ord. No. 1996-68, § 1, 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006)  
Sec. 16-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-85, § 5, adopted September 26, 2006, repealed § 16-63, which pertained to basis of rates. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 16-64. - Monthly rates for collection and disposal of trash and garbage; generally. 
The service charge for the collection and disposal of trash and garbage shall be as set out in Appendix A to this Code and any subsequent amendments thereto. The charges imposed under this section shall be billed with the statement rendered for water and sewer charges. 
(Code 1973, § 14-39; Code 1988, § 16-64; Ord. No. 1988-44, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1989-34, § 1, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 1990-35, § 1, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1991-37, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1992-33, § 1, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1994-29, § 1, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1995-43, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1996-32, § 1, 4-23-1996; Ord. No. 1997-33, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2002-20, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 2007-05, § 1, 1-9-2007; Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2009-56 , § 1, 6-9-2009) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ord. No. 2009-56 , the rate set forth in § 16-64 shall take effect July 1, 2009.  
Sec. 16-65. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-33, § 2, adopted April 25, 2006 and Ord. No. 2006-85, § 5, adopted September 26, 2006, repealed § 16-65, which pertained to rates for standard containers. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 16-66. - Rates for automated containers in the downtown commercial business district. 
(a)  The downtown commercial business district shall be defined as the area north of Interstate 264, south of London Boulevard, east of Elm Avenue, and west of the Elizabeth River's Southern Branch. 
(b)  Where garbage and refuse are stored in automated 105-gallon refuse containers in the downtown commercial business district, the monthly rate charged for service shall be as set out in Appendix A to this Code and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(c)  For each additional pick-up, a charge shall be assessed, as set out in Appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 16-66; Ord. No. 1992-84, § 3, 10-27-1992; Ord. No. 1994-29, § 2, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1995-43, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1996-32, § 1, 4-23-1996; Ord. No. 1997-33, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 2000-11, § 1, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-21, § 1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2002-20, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 1, 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2009-56 , § 1, 6-9-2009) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to Ord. No. 2009-56 , the rate set forth in § 16-66 shall take effect July 1, 2009.  
Sec. 16-67. - Rates for disposal of small dead animals. 
Whenever small dead animals are to be disposed of by the city from business or commercial establishments, or from persons other than residents of the city, a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code, per animal delivered to the animal crematory or collected by the city, shall be charged. Such small dead animals shall be placed in a properly sealed plastic or polyethylene refuse bag or other suitable container. 
(Code 1973, § 14-42.1; Code 1988, § 16-67; Ord. No. 1989-38, § 1, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 1993-32, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 2002-38, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Sec. 16-68. - Billing procedure. 
The minimum service charges under sections 16-65 and 16-66 may be billed on a monthly or bimonthly basis. Where the service under sections 16-65 and 16-66 exceeds the minimum, additional bills will be rendered at the end of each month for the excess service. 
(Code 1973, § 14-45; Code 1988, § 16-68; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 4(14-45), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1992-84, § 1, 10-27-1992)  
Sec. 16-69. - Payment of bills; delinquent charges; discontinuance of service. 
(a)  All charges imposed in this division billed with the statement rendered for water and sewer charges are due and payable as provided for in section 38-93 of this Code. 
(b)  All other bills rendered under this division are due and payable at the office of the city treasurer upon presentation and shall be considered delinquent if not paid within 15 days of the date issued. If any bill is not paid within such 15-day period, an additional charge of one percent per billing period on the unpaid charges shall be added thereto and collected therewith to cover costs of collection. 
(c)  The director shall discontinue collecting refuse from a delinquent operator, owner or tenant after giving 15 days' written notice thereof. A copy of the notice shall be delivered to the city attorney, the health department, the city treasurer and the director of public utilities. The city treasurer shall include the delinquent charges with other taxes or fees to be collected from the operator, owner or tenant, and the director of public utilities may, in addition, discontinue water and sewer service to the delinquent operator, owner or tenant. 
(Code 1973, § 14-46; Code 1988, § 16-69; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 1, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006)  
Sec. 16-70. - Charges for automated refuse containers. 
The automated refuse containers issued by the city are the property of the city. The property owner or person paying the collection charge is responsible for the care of the container and shall purchase another container from an authorized vendor designated by the city if for any reason the container is unavailable for use or unusable. 
(Code 1988, § 16-70; Ord. No. 1992-84, § 3, 10-27-1992; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006)  
Secs. 16-71—16-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE 
 
Sec. 16-171. - Definitions. 
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following terms as used in this article shall have the meanings as respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
Person means any nonresidential generator of solid waste and any company, business or other party which collects, transports, processes or recycles solid waste. 
Recycle means to sell, donate or otherwise transfer solid waste material to any other person located outside of the city so that such waste material may be processed and used again as raw material for a product which may or may not be similar to the original product; or to process a given waste material at a location within the city so that such material may be used again as a raw material for a product which may or may not be similar to the original product. 
Solid waste means any garbage, refuse, sludge and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, commercial, residential, mining and agricultural operations, or community activities but does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or in industrial discharges which are sources subject to a permit from the state water control board, or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material, as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
(Code 1988, § 16-171; Ord. No. 1991-3, § 1(16-161), 1-8-1991)  
Sec. 16-172. - Annual recycling reports required. 
(a)  Any person located within the city who recycles solid waste shall submit an annual report to the director of general operations of the city or his designee. Each report shall cover the 12-month period beginning January 1 and ending December 31. Each report required hereunder shall be submitted not later than 30 days following the close of the 12-month period. 
(b)  Any person who recycles solid waste at or from locations both within and without the city and who is not reasonably able to identify the quantity of solid waste recycled at or from each location may submit a consolidated report to the city. Any such consolidated report shall state that it reflects quantities of solid waste recycled at or from all locations of the person within the city. 
(c)  Each annual report required to be submitted under this article shall include the name and address of the reporting person, the name and telephone number of the individual who may be contacted on behalf of the reporting person for the period covered by the report, and the total quantity of solid waste recycled by the reporting person during the period. 
(Code 1988, § 16-172; Ord. No. 1991-3, § 1(16-162), 1-8-1991)  
Sec. 16-173. - Quantities of solid waste to be measured by weight. 
All quantities of solid waste required to be reported under this article shall be measured by weight. When the reporting person is unable to accurately determine quantity by weight, such quantities shall be reported based upon carefully estimated data. Each reporting person shall identify in his report all information which is based upon estimated data. 
(Code 1988, § 16-173; Ord. No. 1991-3, § 1(16-163), 1-8-1991)  
Sec. 16-174. - Reporting forms. 
Any person required to submit a report under this article shall use forms prepared by the city. Any person desiring such forms may obtain them from the department of general operations. 
(Code 1988, § 16-174; Ord. No. 1991-3, § 1(16-164), 1-8-1991)  
Sec. 16-175. - Failure to furnish required reports. 
Failure to furnish any report required under this article shall be a class 1 misdemeanor for each such violation. 
(Code 1988, § 16-175; Ord. No. 1991-3, § 1(16-165), 1-8-1991)  
Sec. 16-176. - When report not required. 
Nothing under this article shall be construed to require any person to report information of a proprietary nature. Where any person fails to report any information otherwise required hereunder, based upon the determination that such information is of a proprietary nature, the person shall specify in his report the nature of the information withheld and the basis for his determination that such information is of a proprietary nature. 
(Code 1988, § 16-176; Ord. No. 1991-3, § 1(16-166), 1-8-1991)  
Secs. 16-177—16-186. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PRIVATE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-107, § 2, adopted November 27, 2007, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new Art. IV, §§ 16-167—16-171. Inasmuch as provisions already exist so designated, Ord. No. 2007-107 has been codified herein as Art. IV, §§ 16-187—16-191 at the discretion of the editor. Also, it should be noted that these provisions become effective January 1, 2008. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 16-187. - Permit required for private solid waste collection. 
No person shall operate a private solid waste collection business within the city without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2007-107, § 2, 11-27-2007)  
Sec. 16-188. - Private solid waste to be disposed of only at publicly owned and operated facilities. 
(a)  All solid waste generated or collected within the city shall be disposed of only at the facilities of the Southeastern Public Service Authority of Virginia or such other publicly owned and operated facilities designated in writing by the director of public works or his designee. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Solid waste generated, purchased or utilized by an entity engaged in the business of manufacturing, mining, processing, refining or conversion except for an entity engaged in the production of energy or solid waste-derived fuels for sale to a person other than any entity controlling, controlled by or under the same control as the manufacturer, miner, processor, refiner or converter. 
(2)  Recyclable materials, which are those materials that have been source-separated by any person or materials separated from solid waste by any person for utilization in both cases as a raw material to be manufactured into a product other than fuel or energy. 
(3)  Construction debris to be disposed of in a landfill. 
(4)  Waste oil. 
(c)  This section shall not prevent or prohibit disposal of solid waste at any facility which was issued a solid waste management facility permit by an agency of the Commonwealth on or before July 1, 1991, or for which a Part A permit application for a new solid waste management facility permit, including local governing body certification, was submitted to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality in accordance with Code of Virginia § 10.1-1408.1 B. on or before December 31, 1991. 
(Ord. No. 2007-107, § 2, 11-27-2007)  
Sec. 16-189. - Other disposal sites prohibited; revocation of permit. 
No person may dispose of solid waste generated or collected within the city at any place other than those designated pursuant to section 16-188. The director of public works or his designee following a hearing may revoke a permit to operate a private solid waste collection business obtained under section 16-187 for failure to comply with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-107, § 2, 11-27-2007)  
Sec. 16-190. - Operating without a permit unlawful. 
Operating a private solid waste collection business without a permit as required herein shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor. Upon conviction hereunder, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or such fine as may be fixed by Code of Virginia § 18.2-11 or any successor statute. Each day in violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-107, § 2, 11-27-2007)  
Sec. 16-191. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to the other remedies and penalties imposed under this article, the city shall have the power to seek injunctive relief from a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin continuing or future violations of section 16-189 and/or 16-190, without any requirement of showing irreparable harm. 
(Ord. No. 2007-107, § 2, 11-27-2007)  
Chapter 17 - HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations generally, ch. 7; special requirements for housing for the elderly, § 7-5; fire prevention and protection, ch. 13; smoke detectors for certain dwellings, § 13-131 et seq.; flood protection, ch. 14.1; garbage and refuse, ch. 16; license tax on persons engaged in business of renting residential property, § 20-79; mobile homes, ch. 21; subdivisions, ch. 33.1; swimming pools, ch. 34; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 38; zoning, ch. 40.1. 
State Law reference— Housing Authorities Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Dangerous buildings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for the owner or occupant of any land or lot in the city to permit any structure, house or dwelling place thereon to be habitually kept or maintained in such a manner as to be unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to human life, or which, in relation to existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. 
(b)  Whenever the code official shall find any structure, house or dwelling place or portion thereof to be unsafe as defined in subsection (a) of this section, he shall give the owner, agent for the owner or person in control of such building or structure, and lienholder in control of such building or structure, written notice. This notice shall require the owner, agent for the owner or person in control of such building within a stated time to complete improvements or demolish or remove the building, structure or portion thereof. The notice shall be in a form prescribed in section 105 of the Virginia Maintenance Code. For purposes of this section, written notice shall be mailed by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the property owner and published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1426 and 15.2-1427. No action shall be taken by the code official for at least 30 days following the later of the return of the receipt or newspaper publication. 
(c)  If an owner, agent for the owner or person in control of such building fails, refuses or neglects to comply with the notice provided for in subsection (b) of this section, the code official shall ascertain the cost to demolish and remove the building, structure or portion thereof and shall cause such building, structure or portion thereof to be demolished and removed from the lot or property. The code official shall thereafter transmit to the city treasurer a statement of all costs incurred including a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code to cover the administrative expenses of the code official, which costs shall be added to the taxes assessed against the real property on which the nuisance existed and shall be collected with such taxes by any manner prescribed by law for the collection of city taxes. Such costs shall also be docketed in the nuisance abatement lien docket book maintained in the office of the city treasurer as a lien against the real property on which the nuisance existed, and shall rank on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes, which lien shall exist until removed by payment of such costs in full. In lieu of causing the building, structure or portion thereof to be demolished, the director may institute legal proceedings as may be deemed necessary for the failure, refusal or neglect to comply with his order or notice. 
(d)  If any owner, agent for the owner, or person in control of such building or structure refuses, fails or neglects to complete improvements or demolish or remove the building, structure or portion thereof in compliance with the notice provided for in subsection (b) of this section, such failure shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. Additionally, if the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the Code. Unless otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of conviction. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-25—6-31; Code 1988, § 17-1; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 1(6-30), (6-31), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1992-53, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1995-49, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1995-76, § 1, 6-13-1995; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 2009-80 , § 1, 8-11-2009) 
Cross reference— Nuisances generally, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Authority to require removal, repair of buildings and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-906.  
Sec. 17-2. - Authority to require removal, repair, etc., of buildings that are declared to be derelict. 
(a)  Any owner of property located in the City of Portsmouth shall at such time or times as the city may prescribe submit a plan to demolish or renovate any building that has been declared a "derelict building." For purposes of this section, "derelict building" shall mean a residential or nonresidential building or structure, whether or not construction has been completed, that might endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare and for a continuous period in excess of six months, it has been (i) vacant, (ii) boarded up in accordance with the building code, and (iii) not lawfully connected to electric service from a utility service provider or not lawfully connected to any required water or sewer service from a utility service provider. 
(b)  If a building qualifies as a derelict building pursuant to this ordinance, the city shall notify the owner of the derelict building that the owners is required to submit to the city a plan, within 90 days, to demolish or renovate the building to address the items that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare as listed in the written notification provided by the city. Such plan shall be on a form provided by the city and shall include a proposed time within which the plan will be commenced and completed. The plan may include one or more adjacent properties of the owner, whether or not all of such properties may have been declared derelict buildings. The plan shall be subject to approval by the city. The city shall deliver the written notice to the address listed on the real estate tax assessment records of the city. Written notice sent by first-class mail, with the city obtaining a U.S. Postal Service Certificate of Mailing shall constitute delivery pursuant to this section. 
(c)  If the city delivers written notice and the owner of the derelict building has not submitted a plan to the city within 90 days as provided in subsection (b), the city may exercise such remedies as provided in this section or as otherwise provided by law. 
(d)  The owner of a building may apply to the city and request that such building be declared a derelict building for purposes of this section. 
(e)  The city upon receipt of the plan to demolish or renovate the building, at the owner's request, shall meet with the owner submitting the plan and provide information to the owner on the land use and permitting requirements for demolition or renovation. 
(f)  If the property owner's plan is to demolish the derelict building, and such plan is approved by the city, the building permit application of such owner shall be expedited. If the owner has completed the demolition within 90 days of the date of the building permit issuance, the city shall refund any building and demolition permit fees. This section shall not supersede any ordinance adopted relative historic districts. 
(g)  If the property owner's plan is to renovate the derelict building, and no rezoning is required for the owner's intended use of the property, and such plan is approved by the city, the site plan or subdivision application and the building permit, as applicable, shall be expedited. The site plan or subdivision fees may be refunded, all or in part, but in no event shall the site plan or subdivision fees exceed the lesser of 50 percent of the standard fees established by the ordinance for site plan or subdivision applications for the proposed use of the property, or $5,000.00 per property. The building permit fees may be refunded, all or in part, but in no event shall the building permit fees exceed the lesser of 50 percent of the standard fees established by the ordinance for building permit applications for the proposed use of the property, or $5,000.00 per property. 
(h)  Prior to the commencement of a plan to demolish or renovate the derelict building, at the request of the property owner, the real estate assessor shall make an assessment of the property in its current derelict condition. On the building permit application, the owner shall declare the costs of demolition, or the costs of materials and labor to complete the renovation. At the request of the property owner, after demolition or renovation of the derelict building, the real estate assessor shall reflect the fair market value of the demolition costs or the fair market value of the renovation improvements, and reflect such value in the real estate tax assessment records. Real estate taxes on an amount equal to the costs of demolition or an amount equal to the increase in the fair market value of the renovations shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of section 35-191 of the Code of the City of Portsmouth. 
(i)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the city may proceed to make repairs and secure the building under section 17-1 of the City Code, or the city may proceed to abate or remove a nuisance under Section 15.2-900, et seq., of the Code of Virginia. In addition, the city may exercise such remedies as may exist under the Uniform Statewide Building Code and such other remedies available under general and special law. 
( Ord. No. 2009-80 , § 2, 8-11-2009)  
Secs. 17-3—17-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES MAINTENANCE CODE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-21. - Declaration of policy and purpose. 
(a)  It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the city buildings and structures which are, or may become in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance; or further that such conditions including but not limited to structural deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior of premises, infestation, lack of essential heating, plumbing, storage or refrigeration equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities and facilities, existence of fire hazards, inadequate provisions for light and air, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the city. It is further found and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate the same, and that by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of buildings and structures; to establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical-components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators, and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of premises; to fix penalties for the violations of this article; and to provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use. This article is hereby declared to be essential for the public interest and it is intended that this article be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated herein. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-20, 6-21; Code 1988, §§ 17-102, 17-103)  
Sec. 17-22. - Applicability of article. 
Every building and structure and the premises on which it is situated shall comply with the provisions of this article, regardless of when such building was constructed, altered or repaired and irrespective of any permits or licenses which have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises, for the construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities. This article establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such buildings, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, equipment or facilities contained therein. 
(Code 1973, § 6-22; Code 1988, § 17-104)  
Sec. 17-23. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection: 
Accessory structure means a structure the use of which is incidental to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on the same premises. 
Board means the housing board of adjustments and appeals. 
Building means a structure adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy or use for public, institutional, business, industrial or storage purposes. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
Debris means dead or dying standing weeds, dead or dying standing trees, any tree or parts of a tree which have fallen due to natural causes or otherwise, trash, junk, discarded or abandoned parts of vehicles, appliances or machinery, and shall include, but not be limited to the open outdoor storage of personal property of any kind such as appliances or appliance parts, furniture, interior or exterior equipment or machinery, which is no longer used, including antiques, collectables, glassware and crockery, or any other material or substance which may provide a harbor for snakes or rats or anything or any condition which may be a fire menace or breeding place for mosquitoes, give off obnoxious or offensive odors or endanger the health or safety of the residents of the city. Debris shall not include any of the above property openly stored in a junkyard as defined and permitted pursuant to the zoning ordinance. 
Deterioration means the condition of a building or part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or excessive use. 
Director means the director of permits and inspections. 
Fire hazard means: 
(1)  Any device or condition likely to cause fire and which is so situated as to endanger either persons or property. 
(2)  The creation, maintenance or continuance of any physical condition by reason of which there exists a use, accumulation or storage of combustible or explosive material sufficient in amount or so located or in such a manner as to put in jeopardy, in event of ignition, either persons or property. 
(3)  The obstruction to or of fire escapes, ladders, stairways, aisles, exits, doors, windows, passageways or halls or other conditions that would likely interfere with the operations of the fire department or of the safe and ready egress of occupants. 
Garbage means all animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Infestation means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner. 
Plumbing means the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: Sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste or sewerage and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures thereon. 
Restroom means an enclosed space containing one or more toilets and one or more lavatories or fixtures serving similar purposes. 
Rubbish means all combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall include, but not be limited to, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, dust, crockery and abandoned automobiles. 
Structure means any combination of any materials, whether fixed or portable, forming a construction, including buildings. 
Ventilation means supply and removal of air to and from any space by natural or mechanical means. 
Ventilation, mechanical means ventilation by power-driven devices. 
Ventilation, natural means ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks with or without wind-driven devices. 
Virginia Maintenance Code means the code adopted by section 17-24. 
Weathering means deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the elements. 
(b)  The following words and terms, when used in the code adopted in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  The words "local governing body," "local government" or "enforcing agency" means the City of Portsmouth. 
(2)  The term "code official" or "housing official" means the director of permits and inspections. 
(3)  The word "debris" means dead or dying standing weeds, dead or dying standing trees, any tree or parts of a tree which have fallen due to natural causes or otherwise, trash, junk, discarded or abandoned parts of vehicles, appliances or machinery or any other material or substance which may provide a harbor for snakes or rats or anything or any condition which may be a fire menace or breeding place for mosquitoes, give off obnoxious or offensive odors or endanger the health or safety of the residents of the city. 
(4)  The term "director" shall refer to the director of permits and inspections. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-19, 17-19, 17-20; Code 1988, §§ 17-21, 17-101; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 5(17-19), (17-20), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1991-13, § 1, 2-12-1991; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1, 2-12-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 17-24. - Adopted; availability of copies. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the maintenance, rehabilitation, development and reuse of existing buildings and structures, that certain code known as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Part III, Maintenance, referred to as the Virginia Maintenance Code, and those additional maintenance codes which are incorporated by reference therein, and the accumulative supplements and the amendments thereto, save and except such portions as are hereinafter amended or deleted, as permitted in the enabling legislation, and building regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant thereto, and the same are hereby adopted and referred to herein as the Virginia Maintenance Code of the city as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Copies of the Virginia Maintenance Code adopted herein may be obtained from the department of permits and inspections. 
(Code 1973, § 17-16; Code 1988, § 17-22; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 5(17-16(b)), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1994-54, § 2, 6-14-1994) 
Cross reference— Adoption of Volume I of Uniform Statewide Building Code, § 7-96. 
State Law reference— Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.  
Sec. 17-25. - Conflicts with other ordinances. 
In the event that there is any conflict between any provision of the Virginia Maintenance Code and any other ordinance of the city, the more stringent provisions shall control. 
(Code 1973, § 17-17; Code 1988, § 17-23)  
Sec. 17-26. - Enforcement; rules and regulations of director. 
(a)  Generally. The director of permits and inspections is hereby designated as the code official and is authorized to enforce the Virginia Maintenance Code. The director, with the approval of the board, may make and adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the administration and enforcement of the Virginia Maintenance Code. Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with or an enlargement of any of the provisions of the Virginia Maintenance Code. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations so adopted. 
(b)  Compliance with other ordinances. No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this article shall constitute a defense to any violation of any other ordinance of the city applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any such other provision, nor any official of the city from enforcing any such other provision. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-25, 17-19, 17-20; Code 1988, §§ 17-25, 17-108; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 5(17-19), (17-20), 12-13-1988)  
Sec. 17-27. - Violations; procedures for abatement of nuisances. 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this article or the Virginia Maintenance Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each violation of a separate and distinct provision shall be a separate offense and each such offense shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the Code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five to ten years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten days and a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $5,000.00, either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this article, whenever in the judgment of the code official there exists upon any land or premises or in any dwelling unit any condition that constitutes a nuisance or menace to health that should be remedied, abated or removed immediately, the code official may proceed in accordance with the provisions of sections 2-425 and 2-426. 
(c)  Any owner or any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article relating to the removal or the covering of lead-based paint which poses a hazard to health of pregnant women or children under the age of six years who occupy the premises shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section. Upon a reasonable showing to the court by a landlord, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 55-248.4 that such landlord is financially unable to abate the lead-based paint hazard, the court shall order any rental agreement related to the affected premises terminated effective 30 days from the entry of the court order. For the purposes of the preceding sentence, termination of the rental agreement shall not be deemed noncompliance by the landlord pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 55-248.21. 
(Code 1973, § 17-23; Code 1988, § 17-26; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 5(17-22), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1991-66, § 1, 6-25-1991; Ord. No. 1992-53, § 2, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1992-85, § 1, 10-27-1992; Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-106.  
Sec. 17-28. - Occupants and families with children not to be evicted to avoid correction of violation of lead-based paint provisions of code. 
No owner or landlord found to be in violation of the provisions of the Virginia Maintenance Code relating to the use of lead-based paint may evict, or cause to be evicted, any person, occupant, occupant with children, or family or families with children for the purpose of avoiding corrective maintenance ordered by the director, a court or other appropriate authority to eliminate hazardous lead exposures. Any person, occupant, occupant with children, or family or families with children shall be permitted to continue their occupancy in accordance with their lease or rental agreement executed prior to discovery of the hazardous conditions or commencement of corrective action, unless otherwise ordered by a court as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 17-50; Code 1988, § 17-27; Ord. No. 1991-66, § 2, 6-25-1991)  
Sec. 17-29. - Sale of residential structure with lead-based paint; penalty. 
(a)  Whenever any property owner has been notified by any representative of the department of permits and inspections, the local building official, or any representative of the city health department that any residential premises has levels of lead-based paint in violation of the Uniform Statewide Building Code, such property owner shall notify prospective purchasers in writing of the presence of unacceptable levels of lead-based paint in such premises and the requirements concerning the removing of the same. Such notification shall include a copy of any notice the property owner received from any representative of the department of permits and inspections, the local building official, or any representative of the city health department advising of the presence of unacceptable levels of lead-based paint in such premises. 
(b)  The notice required herein shall be provided to prospective purchasers prior to the signing of a purchase or sales agreement or, if there is no purchase or sales agreement, prior to the signing of a deed. The requirement shall not apply to purchase and sales agreements or deeds signed prior to July 1, 1991. Transactions in which sellers have accepted written offers prior to July 1, 1991, but have not signed a purchase or sales agreement or a deed prior to July 1, 1991, shall be subject to these notice requirements. 
(c)  Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be liable for all damages caused by his failure to comply and shall, in addition, be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Code 1988, § 17-28; Ord. No. 1991-66, § 3, 6-25-1991) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-107.1.  
Sec. 17-30. - Police powers for enforcement of chapter. 
The director, the environmental safety coordinator, the code official, the zoning administrator, the zoning manager and all inspectors in the department of permits and inspections are hereby invested with such police powers as are necessary for the service of any summons for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 17-29; Ord. No. 1996-22, § 1, 3-26-1996)  
Sec. 17-31. - Obstructing or interfering with enforcement of chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or to interfere with any public official engaged in the enforcement of this chapter and any such person shall be subject to punishment in accordance with section 17-27 upon conviction. 
(Code 1988, § 17-30; Ord. No. 1996-22, § 1, 3-26-1996)  
Sec. 17-32. - Duties of owner, operator and occupant independent of each other; contrary agreements. 
(a)  Owners and operators of any building within the purview of this article shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in section 17-33 and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and no such owner or operator shall be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant of such building is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof. 
(b)  Occupants of any building within the purview of this article shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in section 17-34 and all the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and such occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the owner or operator of such building is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof. 
(c)  Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this article, the respective obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator of any building within the purview of this article on the one hand, and the occupant of such building on the other, shall not be altered or affected by any agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between them and other parties. 
(Code 1973, § 6-26; Code 1988, § 17-110)  
Sec. 17-33. - Duties of owner and operator enumerated. 
The following duties and responsibilities are hereby imposed upon every owner and operator of any building covered by the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. The items prohibited hereby shall include, but not be limited to: Brush, weeds, broken glass, stump roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, refuse, debris, dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth, loose and overhanging objects and ground surface hazards. 
(2)  Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
(3)  Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally sound, free from defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all times the functions for which they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable, smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases. 
(4)  Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defects. 
(5)  The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood. 
(6)  Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns, hedges and bushes shall be kept trimmed. 
(7)  All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted by reason of other ordinances or laws shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs which have excessively weathered or faded or those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or cracked shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a state of good repair. 
(8)  All display windows or storefronts constructed of plate glass shall be kept clean and free of cracks, and no storage shall be permitted therein unless shielded from public view. 
(9)  All storefronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the event repairs to a storefront become necessary, such repairs shall be made with the same or similar materials used in the construction of the storefront in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area. Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be kept painted, where required, and in good repair. 
(10)  Except for "For Rent" and "For Sale" signs, any temporary sign or other paper advertising material glued or otherwise attached to a window, or otherwise exposed to public view shall be removed at the expiration of the event or sale for which it is erected or within 60 days after erection, whichever shall occur first. 
(11)  Any awnings or marquees and their accompanying structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event such awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, such cloth or plastic where exposed to public view shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing or other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain. 
(12)  The exterior of every structure or accessory structure shall be kept in good repair and kept painted where necessary for purposes of preservation and appearance. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessively peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance. 
(13)  Restrooms shall be surfaced with waterproof floors and shall be kept dry, clean and sanitary at all times. Sufficient restrooms shall be installed and maintained for each sex commensurate with the use of the premises. Every restroom shall be provided with a permanently installed artificial lighting fixture and a wall switch therefor which is free from danger of short circuiting. 
(14)  All premises shall be properly connected to and provided with electric power. All such connections and electrical equipment shall be installed and maintained in conformity with the provisions of the electrical code of the city and other applicable ordinances. 
(15)  Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted conspicuously, and no fuse shall be installed in a fuse box in excess of the stated maximum except that owners and operators shall not be responsible for violation in fuse installations without their knowledge where the correct maximum is stated and the fuse box is located within any part of the premises which is in the exclusive possession of occupants other than the owner, in which case such occupant shall be responsible for such violations. 
(Code 1973, § 6-27; Code 1988, § 17-111)  
Sec. 17-34. - Duties of occupant enumerated. 
The following duties and responsibilities are hereby imposed upon every occupant of any building covered by the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition on the premises which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this article, the occupant shall report the same to the director of public health immediately. 
(2)  All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for the accumulation of garbage or refuse. 
(4)  Every occupant shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation in and on the premises subject to his control. 
(5)  No occupant shall install electrical fuses in a fuse box in excess of the posted limit. 
(Code 1973, § 6-28; Code 1988, § 17-112)  
Secs. 17-35—17-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS 
 
Sec. 17-41. - Created. 
There is hereby created by the city council a board to be known as the housing board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-41)  
Sec. 17-42. - Composition; appointment and terms of members; filling of vacancies. 
The housing board of adjustments and appeals shall consist of not less than three members appointed by the city council. Members of the board shall be appointed for three-year terms. A vacancy on the board shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-42; Ord. No. 1990-129, § 7, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 17-43. - Members not compensated. 
The members of the housing board of adjustments and appeals shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-43)  
Sec. 17-44. - Removal of members. 
Any member of the housing board of adjustments and appeals shall be subject to removal or replacement by the city council at any time. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-44)  
Sec. 17-45. - Election of officers. 
The housing board of adjustments and appeals shall elect a chair, vice-chair and secretary at the annual meeting of the board. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-45)  
Sec. 17-46. - Meetings generally. 
The housing board of adjustments and appeals shall hold regular meetings each month at which meetings all appeals on file shall be considered and acted upon by the board. Regular or special meetings may be called by the chairman at any time. Reasonable notice of the place, time and date of such meetings shall be given all members of the board and all interested parties in each case to be heard by the board. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-46)  
Sec. 17-47. - Minutes as public record; general duties of secretary. 
All minutes of housing board of adjustments and appeals meetings shall be a public record and the secretary of the board shall keep all records and perform such additional duties as the board deems proper. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-47)  
Sec. 17-48. - Rules of procedure. 
The housing board of adjustments and appeals shall establish its own rules of procedure for accomplishment of its duties and functions, provided that such rules shall not be in conflict with the provisions of the Virginia Maintenance Code or of this article or laws of the state. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-48) 
Cross reference— General procedural rules for boards appointed by council, § 2-28(b).  
Sec. 17-49. - Grant of extension of time for performance of action required by code. 
When it is specified that the performance of any action shall be completed within a stated time after notice requiring such action, if the housing board of adjustments and appeals finds that compliance therewith would cause undue hardship on an owner, the board may grant a reasonable extension of such time. All such extensions shall be subject to review as deemed necessary by the board or upon application of the director of permits and inspections. When reviewing applications based on undue financial hardship, the board may consider the applicant's income from all sources, general financial worth, age, physical and mental condition, costs associated with reaching a condition of compliance, and any and all other evidence that may be properly related to the ability of the applicant to comply with the Virginia Maintenance Code. No such extension shall be granted if an inspection of the property reveals a condition that makes the property dangerous to the general public or the occupants thereof or a nuisance. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-49; Ord. No. 1991-21, § 1, 3-12-1991)  
Sec. 17-50. - Appeals to board generally. 
(a)  The housing board of adjustments and appeals shall consider and determine appeals whenever it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of the Virginia Maintenance Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted. 
(b)  Any person receiving written notice from the director of permits and inspections, or his representative, of deficiencies in his property under the Virginia Maintenance Code, which do not affect the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection, alteration, repair, maintenance or use of a building or structure, may, within 21 days following the date of such notice, enter an appeal in writing to the board. Such appeal shall state the name of the applicant and owner, the location of the property, the date of the notice of violations and the number of such notice. The appellant must state the variance or modification requested, the reason therefor and the hardship or conditions upon which the appeal is made. No appeal filed later than 21 days after the date of such notice shall be acted upon by the board, unless the director of permits and inspections consents thereto. 
(c)  No appeal shall be considered under this section where an appeal case has been previously decided involving the same premises. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-50; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 5(17-18(c)), 12-13-1988)  
Sec. 17-51. - Decisions of board. 
(a)  All decisions of the housing board of adjustments and appeals to vary the application of any provision of this Code and/or the Virginia Maintenance Code or to modify an order of the director shall specify in what manner such variance or modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the reasons therefor. 
(b)  Every decision of the board shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. A copy of all decisions shall be promptly filed in the office of the director and shall be open to public inspection. The secretary shall notify the appellant in writing of the final action of the board and provide notification of a right of appeal. 
(Code 1973, § 17-18; Code 1988, § 17-51)  
Secs. 17-52—17-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RENTAL INSPECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-50, § 2, adopted June 28, 2005, repealed former Div. 3, §§ 17-71—17-76, which pertained to certificate of compliance for rental dwellings. Section 1 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Div. 3, §§ 17-81—17-94. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 17-81. - Legislative intent. 
(a)  This division is intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the occupants of residential rental dwelling property units throughout the city and to assure the maintenance of the city's rental housing stock. 
(b)  The creation and designation of rental inspection districts in this division results from a finding by the city council that the residential dwelling units within a designated rental inspection district are either: 
(1)  Blighted or in the process of deteriorating; or 
(2)  In need of inspection by the city to prevent deterioration, taking into account the number, age and condition of the residential dwelling units and that the inspection of residential rental dwelling units inside each proposed rental inspection district is necessary to maintain safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants and other residents living in the rental inspection district. 
(Code 1988, § 17-81; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building maintenance official means an officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code dealing with existing structures or a duly authorized representative. 
Building official means an officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the Uniform Statewide Building Code for new construction and permit issuance or a duly authorized representative. 
Department means the department of permits and inspections for the city. 
Director means the director of permits and inspections for the City of Portsmouth or his designee. 
Dwelling unit means a building or structure or part thereof that is used for a home or residence by one or more persons who maintain a household. 
Owner means the person shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records. 
Rental inspection district means an area designated as such by city council in accordance with the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1. 
Residential rental dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that is leased or rented to one or more tenants. However, a dwelling unit occupied in part by the owner thereof shall not be construed to be a residential dwelling unit unless a tenant occupies a part of the dwelling unit which has its own cooking and sleeping areas, and a bathroom, unless otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance by the local governing body. 
(Code 1988, § 17-82; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-83. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation and a misdemeanor for any owner, agent, property manager or person in charge of a residential rental dwelling unit located within a rental inspection district as established by this division to rent or lease such dwelling unit prior to an inspection and issuance of a certificate of compliance as required by the provisions of this division, unless such occupancy is approved by a temporary waiver pending the issuance of a certificate of compliance. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this division, violations of this division shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 17-27. 
(Code 1988, § 17-83; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005; Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 2-12-2008)  
Sec. 17-84. - Notification of locality by owner of dwelling units. 
(a)  Every owner of a rental dwelling unit located within a rental inspection district shall notify the department, in writing, within 60 days after the creation or expansion of a rental inspection district if the owner's dwelling unit is used for residential rental purposes. 
(b)  Willful failure of an owner of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to a rental inspection to comply with the above written notification requirement will result in a civil penalty of up to $50.00. However, there shall be no penalty for the failure of an owner of a residential rental dwelling unit to comply with the written notification provision, unless and until the department provides personal or written notice to the property owner. 
(c)  For purposes of this subsection, notice sent by regular first class mail to the last known address of the owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed to comply with this requirement. 
(Code 1988, § 17-84; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-85. - Initial inspection of dwelling units when rental inspection district is established. 
Upon the establishment of a rental inspection district, the department may, in conjunction with the written notifications as provided in section 17-84, proceed to inspect dwelling units in the designated rental inspection district to determine if a dwelling unit is being used as residential rental property and to determine compliance with the provisions of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such property. 
(Code 1988, § 17-85; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-86. - Provisions for initial and periodic inspections of multifamily dwelling units. 
If a multifamily rental dwelling unit has more than ten rental dwelling units, in the initial and periodic inspections, the department shall inspect only a sampling of the dwelling units, of not less than two and not more than ten percent of the dwelling units, of a multifamily development. However, in no event, shall the department charge a fee authorized by this section for the inspection of more than ten dwelling units. If the department determines upon inspection of the sampling of dwelling units that there are violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such multifamily development, the department may inspect as many dwelling units as necessary to enforce the building code. In the latter case, the fee shall be based upon a charge per dwelling unit inspected, as otherwise provided in section 7-143. 
(Code 1988, § 17-86; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-87. - Follow-up inspections. 
Upon the initial or periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to this division, the department may require the owner of the dwelling unit to submit to such follow-up inspections of the dwelling unit as the department deems necessary, until such time as the dwelling unit is brought into compliance with the provisions of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants. 
(Code 1988, § 17-87; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-88. - Periodic inspections. 
Except as provided above in section 17-87, following the initial inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to this division, the department may inspect any residential rental dwelling unit in a rental inspection district that is not otherwise exempted no more than once each calendar year. The term "periodic inspection" shall not be deemed to include a follow-up inspection as provided in section 17-87. 
(Code 1988, § 17-88; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-89. - Exemptions from rental inspection ordinance. 
(a)  Upon the initial or periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit as described in sections 17-85 and 17-88, and provided that there are no violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such residential rental dwelling unit, the department shall provide to the owner of such residential rental dwelling unit, an exemption from the rental inspection ordinance for a period of four years. In the event that a violation of the building code affecting the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions is found to exist, an exemption will not be granted. The owner shall be provided with a written notice listing all violations and the period of time required to bring the property into compliance. 
(b)  Upon being brought into compliance, a residential rental dwelling unit shall be subject to periodic inspections until such time as a periodic inspection reveals no violations of the building code. 
(c)  Upon the sale of a residential rental dwelling unit, the department may perform a periodic inspection subsequent to such sale. 
(d)  If a residential rental dwelling unit has been issued a certificate of occupancy prior to July 1, 2005, the department shall grant an exemption for a minimum period of four years from the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1988, § 17-89; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-90. - Revocation of rental inspection exemption. 
(a)  If the condition of the residential rental dwelling unit violates the building code during the exemption period, the department may revoke the exemption previously granted under this section. 
(b)  No exemption granted by this section shall be considered permanent. After the expiration of the exemption period, the owner shall submit a written request to the department for a periodic inspection and shall schedule such inspection within 45 days of the exemption's expiration. 
(Code 1988, § 17-90; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-91. - Inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit outside of a designated rental inspection district. 
The inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit outside of a designated rental inspection district shall be based upon a determination by the department that: 
(1)  There is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of that individual dwelling; and 
(2)  The individual dwelling unit is either blighted, in the process of deteriorating or there is evidence of violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants living in the dwelling unit. 
(Code 1988, § 17-91; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-92. - Fees. 
Fees for all rental inspections shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 17-92; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-93. - Rental inspection districts established; maps. 
There are hereby established three rental inspection districts within the City of Portsmouth. The boundaries of each of the districts shall be as shown on a series of three maps entitled "Rental Inspection Districts Maps, Portsmouth, Virginia," dated July 1, 2005, and any amendments thereto. The rental inspection district maps shall be considered parts of this division as if set out herein and may be amended in accordance with section 17-94. 
(Code 1988, § 17-93; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 17-94. - Amendment of rental inspection ordinance or maps. 
This division and the rental inspection districts maps may be amended only after advertisement and public hearing in accordance with the Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1 and any amendment thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 17-94; Ord. No. 2005-50, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Secs. 17-95—17-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VACANT BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 17-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director means the director of permits and inspections. 
Vacant or unoccupied building means any building or structure which is not occupied, used or inhabited on a regular and continuing basis by some person with a valid claim of right to possession or a fee simple title. The intrusion of trespassers or squatters into such buildings on any basis shall not render such building occupied or nonvacant within the meaning of this article. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-41, 6-43; Code 1988, § 17-131; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 1(6-43), 12-13-1988) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 17-132. - Violations of article. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this article or the Virginia Maintenance Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each violation of a separate and distinct provision shall be a separate offense and each such offense shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500.00; additionally, if the violation concerns a residential unit and if the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the Code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of conviction. 
(Code 1973, § 6-46; Code 1988, § 17-132; Ord. No. 1992-53, § 3, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1993-49, § 1, 6-22-1993)  
Sec. 17-133. - Closure required; care of structure and premises. 
(a)  The owner of any building shall, whenever the same is or becomes vacant or unoccupied, remove therefrom all paper or other combustible waste material accumulated therein, and shall securely close and lock and thereafter keep closed and locked all doors, windows and other openings into such building so long as it shall remain vacant or unoccupied. The owner shall also maintain the building and premises in a clean, sanitary and safe condition so as not to constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  Foundations, walls, chimneys, flues, roofs, awnings, marquees, accessory structures, porches, balconies, stairs, landings, fire escapes, and railings shall be kept by the owner of the premises structurally sound and free from defects and damage and maintained in accord with the construction and repair standards of the building code. 
(c)  The exterior of every structure or accessory structure shall be kept in good repair and kept painted where necessary for the purposes of preservation and appearance. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessively peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance. Boards or other approved materials or methods used to cover windows, doors or other openings in the structure or accessory structures shall be custom cut in such a fashion as to fit snugly into the window frame or door frame or other opening. Such boards or material shall be painted to match the trim color of the structure. 
(d)  The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood. 
(e)  The premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns, hedges, bushes and trees shall be kept trimmed. 
(f)  The above duties and responsibilities are hereby imposed upon every owner of any building covered by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 6-42; Code 1988, § 17-133)  
Sec. 17-134. - Registration and permits required. 
(a)  Whenever any building in the city is or hereafter becomes vacant or unoccupied and the building or any of its doors, windows or other openings cannot be securely closed by the conventional means used in the design of the building, as required by section 17-133, the owner of such building shall, within 15 days thereafter, secure such building against unauthorized entry by boarding up or by some other approved method; shall register such building with the director; and shall obtain therefor a permit. When such registration is accomplished and the fees as set forth in section 17-136 are paid, the director shall issue a permit allowing the building to be maintained in a boarded-up condition for a period of one month from that date. Any building that becomes vacant or unoccupied and cannot be secured by the conventional means used in the design of the building, shall be deemed a nuisance and a threat to public safety and welfare. If, after written notice to the building's owner, with reasonable opportunity to comply, the building is not secured by boarding up or other approved method, the city manager or his designee may cause the building to be so secured. The actual cost of securing the building, together with an administrative fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code, shall be charged to and collected from the building's owner. 
(b)  If the building is to remain vacant for more than the month for which the permit was issued, the owner shall renew such permit on or before its expiration date by certifying to the director or his designee that the building is secure against unauthorized entry and that the information provided in the initial registration remains unchanged. The permit must be obtained or renewed for each month or portion thereof during which the building is vacant or unoccupied and unable to be secured by conventional means. A permit shall be issued by the director or his designee upon receipt by the director or his designee of the required letter of certification. A new registration shall be required whenever the information provided in the initial registration changes. The new registration shall be filed with the director or his designee within ten days after such change. 
(c)  The owner of any building which has been vacant for a continuing period of 12 months or more shall register such building annually with the director or his designee by certifying to the director or his designee that the building is secure against unauthorized entry. The permit must be obtained or renewed annually while the building remains vacant or unoccupied. A permit shall be issued by the director or his designee upon receipt by the director or his designee of a letter of certification. A new registration shall be required whenever the information provided in the initial registration changes. The new registration shall be filed with the director or his designee within ten days after such change. Any person who fails to register a building as required by this subsection shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00. Notice shall be mailed to the owner, at the address to which property tax notices are sent, at least 30 days prior to the assessment of the civil penalty. 
(Code 1973, § 6-43; Code 1988, § 17-134; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 1(6-43), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1993-49, § 2, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 2004-32, § 1, 6-15-2004) 
State Law reference— Registration of vacant buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1127.  
Sec. 17-135. - Registration and permit forms; letters of certification; nonassignable. 
(a)  Registration shall be made on forms supplied by the director or his designee for such purpose and shall include the names and addresses of all persons having any interest in the premises, the name and address of the person who shall be responsible for compliance with this article, the facts and conditions of such vacancy, the date the building became vacant and the length of time the building is expected to remain vacant or unoccupied. 
(b)  Permits shall be on forms supplied by the director or his designee for such purpose and shall include the name of the person to whom issued, the full address of the building covered, a statement that the required fees have been paid, and the expiration date of the permit. No permit or registration shall be assignable. 
(c)  Letters of certification shall be on forms supplied by the director or his designee for such purpose and shall include a statement certifying that the building is secure against unauthorized entry and that the information provided on the initial registration forms remain unchanged. 
(Code 1973, § 6-44; Code 1988, § 17-135) 
State Law reference— Registration of vacant buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1127.  
Sec. 17-136. - Fees. 
The fee schedule for the following, as set out in appendix A to this Code, shall apply to all those buildings required to be registered by section 17-134. The initial fee shall be due within the period of registration required under section 17-134. Thereafter, if subsequent inspections are required because the building does not conform to requirements of this article, the owner shall be assessed additional inspection fees for each and every required inspection. The additional fee shall be due within ten days of receipt of a notice of violation. 
(1)  Single-family or two-family dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family apartment dwellings. 
Plus for each additional apartment above five. 
(3)  All other classes of buildings whether institutional, commercial, industrial, for the first gross 1,000 square feet. 
Plus, an amount for each additional gross 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof. 
(4)  All classes of buildings whether residential, institutional, commercial or industrial which had been vacant for a period of 12 months or more: Annual registration fee. 
(Code 1973, § 6-45; Code 1988, § 17-136; Ord. No. 1993-49, § 3, 6-22-1993) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 17-137. - Inspections. 
Upon registration of any building under this article, or upon any such building coming to his attention, the director shall cause inspection to be made of the premises to determine the condition of such building and premises and to detect all fire, safety or health hazards. 
(Code 1973, § 6-47; Code 1988, § 17-137)  
Chapter 18 - JUNK, SECONDHAND GOODS AND PAWNBROKERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— License tax on junk and secondhand paper canvassers and dealers, §§ 20-21, 20-22. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate pawnshops and secondhand dealers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1114; marking goods as secondhand, etc., required, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-218; dealers in junk and secondhand articles, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-825 et seq.; pawnbrokers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4000 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Pawnbroker. As used in this chapter, the word "pawnbroker" means any person who in any manner lends or advances money or other things for profit on the pledge and possession of tangible personal property, or other valuable things, other than securities or written or printed evidences of indebtedness or title, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back to the seller at a stipulated price. 
(b)  Junk dealer. As used in this chapter, the term "junk dealer" is defined as any person who purchases, sells, barters or exchanges any kind of secondhand articles, including but not limited to junk, rags, rag cullings, bottles, scrap, metal drosses, steel, iron, old lead or lead pipe, old bathroom fixtures, old rubber or other like commodities, except paper, and except furniture, clothes, shoes and stoves or the like intended to be resold for use as such. 
(c)  Secondhand dealer. As used in this chapter, the term "secondhand dealer" means any person who buys, sells, barters or exchanges used or secondhand articles, including but not limited to such items as firearms, jewelry, clothing, office machines, household appliances, radios, television sets, electronic equipment, sporting equipment, photographic equipment, heating or plumbing fixtures or supplies, electrical fixtures or wiring, gas fixtures or appliances, water faucets, pipes, locks, bathtubs or any other secondhand merchandise intended to be resold for use as such. 
(Code 1988, § 18-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4000.  
Sec. 18-2. - Pawnbroker's records; report. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each loan or transaction in the course of his business, including transactions in which secondhand goods, wares or merchandise are purchased for resale. The account shall be recorded at the time of the loan or transaction and shall include: 
(1)  A description, serial number, and a statement of ownership of the goods, article or thing pawned or pledged or received on account of money loaned thereon, or purchased for resale; 
(2)  The time, date and place of the transaction; 
(3)  The amount of money loaned thereon at the time of pledging the same or paid as the purchase price; 
(4)  The rate of interest to be paid on such loan; 
(5)  The fees charged by the pawnbroker, itemizing each fee charged; 
(6)  The full name, residence address, telephone number, and driver's license number or other form of identification of the person pawning or pledging or selling the goods, article or thing, together with a particular description, including the height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair and eye color, and any other identifying marks, of such person; 
(7)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; 
(8)  As to loans, the terms and conditions of the loan, including the period for which any such loan may be made; and 
(9)  All other facts and circumstances respecting such loan or purchase. 
(b)  A pawnbroker may maintain at his place of business an electronic record of each transaction involving goods, article or things pawned or pledged or purchased. If maintained electronically, a pawnbroker shall retain the electronic records for at least one year after the date of the transaction and make such electronic records available to any duly authorized law enforcement officer upon request. 
(c)  Every pawnbroker shall prepare a daily report of all goods, articles or things pawned or pledged with him or sold to him that day and shall file such report by noon of the following day with the chief of police. The report shall include the pledgor's or seller's name, residence, and driver's license number or other form of identification, and a description of the goods, articles or other things pledged or sold and, unless maintained in electronic format, shall be in writing and clearly legible to any person inspecting it. A pawnbroker may compile and maintain the daily report in an electronic format and, if so maintained, shall file the required daily reports electronically with the appropriate law enforcement officer through use of a disk, electronic transmission, or any other electronic means of reporting approved by the law enforcement officer. 
(d)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, §§ 8-1, 18-52; Code 1988, § 18-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers' records and reports, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4009.  
Sec. 18-2.1. - Examination and search and seizure of property of pawnbrokers. 
Every pawnbroker and every employee of the pawnbroker shall admit to the pawnbroker's place of business during regular business hours the chief of police or his designee. The pawnbroker or employee shall permit the officer to examine all records required by this chapter and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen and search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing, or known or believed by him to have been stolen. However, the officer shall not take possession of any article without providing to the pawnbroker a receipt. 
(Code 1988, § 18-2.1; Ord. No. 1990-74, § 1, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4011.  
Sec. 18-3. - Junk dealer's records. 
(a)  Every merchant or foundryman who deals in junk, old metals and similar articles and every junk dealer shall keep at his place of business and shall carry and keep with him a book in which shall be fairly written in English, at the time of each transaction in the course of his business, an accurate account of such transaction, except as to the purchase of rags, bones, old iron and paper, setting forth a description of the goods, articles or other things purchased, the time of receiving same, the name and residence of the person selling or delivering the same together with a description of such person, including complexion, color of eyes and hair, height and general appearance, together with the license number and identification tag of any motor vehicle in which the goods or things were delivered or a description of the vehicle. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-2; Code 1988, § 18-3) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Dealers in secondhand building supplies, records, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-120.  
Sec. 18-4. - Junk dealer's reports. 
(a)  Every junk dealer and merchant or foundryman who deals in junk, old metals and similar articles shall prepare a report, at the end of each day, of all goods, articles or things bought or received during the day and file such report not later than 12:00 noon of the following day with the chief of police. Such report may be compiled and maintained in an electronic format. If so maintained the report may be filed electronically with the chief of police in a manner approved by the chief of police. Such report shall include the name, residence, race, sex and date of birth of the person selling or delivering the same together with the license number of any motor vehicle being used or driven by such person at the time of the transaction. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-3; Code 1988, § 18-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Dealers in secondhand building supplies, reports delivered to chief of police, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-121.  
Sec. 18-5. - Retention of articles purchased or received by junk dealers. 
(a)  No automobiles, automobile parts, batteries, tires, wheels, brass, copper, lead, pipe or tubing made of copper, lead or brass, copper wire, lead insulated wire, brass or copper fixtures, radios or television sets, in whole or in part, bought or received by any junk dealer or merchant or foundryman who deals in junk, old metals and similar articles shall be disfigured or its identity destroyed or affected in any manner whatsoever for a period of five days following the date received or purchased, nor shall such property be in any manner concealed so that it cannot be readily found and inspected by the police, nor shall such property be sold or disposed of in any manner during this period of five days without permission of the chief of police. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-4; Code 1988, § 18-5) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 18-6—18-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND GOODS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4100 et seq.; sales of secondhand heating or plumbing fixtures or supplies, electric fixtures or wiring, gas fixtures or appliances, water fixtures or supplies or other secondhand fixtures of whatever kind or description pertaining to a building, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-117 et seq.; purchase, exchange, etc., of certain metals, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-125 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-26. - Purchasing from minor prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, junk dealer, secondhand dealer or any other person to purchase, barter or exchange or in any manner obtain from minors under the age of 18 years, any kind of secondhand articles, junk, rags, metal or other like commodities. 
(b)  No pawnbroker, junk dealer, secondhand dealer or any other person shall purchase, barter or exchange or in any manner obtain from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-16; Code 1988, § 18-26) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Limitation on purchase of precious metals, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4103.  
Sec. 18-27. - Purchaser to obtain bill of sale; identification of seller. 
(a)  Any person, except a licensed merchant or dealer, buying any secondhand articles at a private or public sale within the city shall obtain from the seller a properly dated written receipt or bill of sale, signed by such seller who shall therein specifically state the seller's address or place of residence. If the seller is not personally known to the buyer, the seller shall produce at least one document of positive identification which includes a picture of the seller. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-17; Code 1988, § 18-27) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 18-28—18-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CLOTHING, FURNITURE, APPLIANCES AND SIMILAR ARTICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Used bedding, upholstered furniture, etc., Code of Virginia, § 32.1-212 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Dealer's record of purchases. 
(a)  All dealers in secondhand clothing, furniture, appliances and other similar secondhand articles shall keep daily records of every article bought by them, such records to contain a full description of such articles, and to show all distinguishing marks, numbers, brands, letters, or monograms of any kind on such articles, together with the names and addresses of the parties from whom such articles were received. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-24; Code 1988, § 18-51) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 18-52. - Dealer's report of purchases. 
(a)  All dealers in secondhand clothing, furniture, appliances and other similar secondhand articles shall furnish daily to the chief of police, upon blanks to be prescribed by the chief, full and complete lists of all articles taken in or bought by such dealers within the 24 hours next preceding the date of such report. Such lists shall contain a full description of all such articles, together with all marks, numbers, brands, letters or monograms on such articles, and the names and addresses of the parties from whom such articles were received. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-25; Code 1988, § 18-52) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 18-53. - Health director's consent required for sale of secondhand mattresses, pillows or bedclothing. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 2 misdemeanor for any person to sell, or to expose for sale, any secondhand mattresses, pillows, bolsters or bedclothing of any description, without first obtaining consent of the director of public health, which consent shall be exhibited on the article so offered for sale and evidenced by such device as the director of public health. 
(Code 1973, § 16-1; Code 1988, § 18-53) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Used bedding, upholstered furniture, etc., Code of Virginia, § 32.1-212 et seq.  
Secs. 18-54—18-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING MATERIAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Sales of secondhand heating or plumbing fixtures or supplies, electric fixtures or wiring, gas fixtures or appliances, water fixtures or supplies or other secondhand fixtures of whatever kind or description pertaining to a building, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-117 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-76. - Definition. 
As used in this division, the term "secondhand building material" includes lumber, bricks, doors, windowpanes, hardware, plumbing, heating, electric light and gas fixtures or any other material ordinarily used in the construction of buildings. 
(Code 1973, § 18-34; Code 1988, § 18-76) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definition of building fixtures, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-117.  
Sec. 18-77. - Record of purchases. 
(a)  All persons who buy secondhand building material other than from a licensed dealer shall keep a daily record of all material so purchased, which record shall contain the name and address of the person from whom the material was purchased, and a description of the property purchased with any distinguishing marks, numbers or trade names which may be thereon. Such records shall be kept for a period of 12 months after each purchase. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-35; Code 1988, § 18-77) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Books on sale or purchase of certain building materials, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-120.  
Sec. 18-78. - Information concerning purchases to be furnished police. 
(a)  Any person who buys any secondhand building material from a person who is not a licensed dealer, other than where he purchases a building as a whole and wrecks the same, within 24 hours after such purchase, furnish the chief of police a description of the materials purchased, and the name and address of the person from whom purchased. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-36; Code 1988, § 18-78) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Reports delivered to chief of police, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-121.  
Secs. 18-79—18-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS AND ACCESSORIES 
 
Sec. 18-101. - Definition. 
As used in this division, the word "dealer" means a person engaged in the business of buying or otherwise acquiring secondhand tires or secondhand motor vehicle parts or accessories. 
(Code 1988, § 18-101)  
Sec. 18-102. - Inspection of records and certificates required by division. 
The records and certificates required by this division shall at all times be open and subject to inspection by the chief of police and any member of the police department of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 18-48; Code 1988, § 18-102)  
Sec. 18-103. - Dealer's record of purchases. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business a permanently bound book in which shall be legibly written in ink, in English, at the time of each transaction in the course of his business, an accurate account of each purchase or acquisition of any secondhand tire or secondhand motor vehicle part or accessory. 
(b)  The account required to be kept by this section shall set forth an accurate description of the secondhand tire, motor vehicle part or accessory, including any distinguishing marks and numbers thereon, purchased or acquired, the date thereof and the name, residence and description of the person selling or delivering the same. The description of such person shall consist of his color, sex, approximate height, age and any distinguishing feature. 
(c)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, §§ 18-44, 18-45; Code 1988, § 18-103) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 18-104. - Dealer to obtain certificate from seller. 
(a)  Before any dealer buys or acquires any secondhand tire or motor vehicle part or accessory, he shall require the person selling or delivering the same to certify, in writing signed by such person on a form prescribed by the chief of police, an accurate description of the tire, motor vehicle part or accessory and when, from whom and how the same were acquired by him. The certificate shall be preserved by the dealer at his place of business. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-47; Code 1988, § 18-104) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 18-105. - Purchases by dealer prohibited between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for a dealer to purchase or acquire any secondhand tire or secondhand motor vehicle part or accessory between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1973, § 18-46; Code 1988, § 18-105) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 18-106—18-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESIDENTIAL SALES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-126. - Definition. 
The term "residential sale," as used in this article, means the sale of personal property in, at or upon any residentially zoned property. The term "residential sale" shall include any sale which is held out to be or which is commonly known as a garage, yard, attic, basement, porch, patio or room sale, or any other type of general sale involving the offering for sale of multiple items of personal property conducted from or on any premises located in a zoning district which does not permit retail or commercial sales, where goods or articles of any type are held out for sale to the public. The term "residential sale" does not encompass the mere incidental sale of one or two items of personal property when such sale is not a part of a general sale of a number of items of personal property. 
(Code 1973, § 18-61; Code 1988, § 18-126) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-127. - Violations of article. 
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each violation of a separate and distinct provision of this article shall be a separate offense, and each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 18-65; Code 1988, § 18-127) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 18-128. - Exemptions from article. 
Periodic sales held exclusively at churches or other places of worship, public or private schools, or other similar places of public assembly under the auspices of a nonprofit organization operated exclusively for religious, charitable, community or educational purposes are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 18-64; Code 1988, § 18-128)  
Sec. 18-129. - General prohibition against sales in residential areas. 
The conduct of general retail sales or commercial sales or any sales of multiple items of personal property in residential areas of the city is, except as otherwise expressly authorized by law, prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 18-62; Code 1988, § 18-129)  
Sec. 18-130. - Signs advertising sale. 
No signs shall be posted anywhere in the city advertising a residential sale, except that the property owner may install on the residential lot on which the sale is to be held one sign not larger than four square feet. Such sign shall be posted not more than 48 hours prior to the date of the sale and shall be removed at the end of the last day upon which the sale is held. 
(Code 1973, § 18-64; Code 1988, § 18-130)  
Sec. 18-131. - Hours and days of sale. 
Any sale conducted pursuant to a permit issued under this article shall be limited in time to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on three consecutive days. No such sale shall be conducted on Sunday. If the sale is not held because of inclement weather, and an amended application so stating is submitted to the commissioner of revenue, another permit may be issued for a sale date within 30 days of the original permitted date. 
(Code 1973, § 18-64; Code 1988, § 18-131)  
Sec. 18-132. - Sale items not to be placed in public right-of-way or so as to interfere with traffic. 
No personal property sold or offered for sale at a residential sale shall be placed, kept or displayed on or in any public right-of-way or in any manner as to interfere with or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 18-64; Code 1988, § 18-132) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 22.  
Sec. 18-133. - Parking of vehicles; temporary controls to alleviate hazards or congestion. 
All parking of vehicles by persons conducting or attending a residential sale shall be in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. Further, the police department may enforce temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards or congestion created by the residential sale. 
(Code 1973, § 18-64; Code 1988, § 18-133) 
Cross reference— Parking regulations, § 22-561 et seq.  
Sec. 18-134. - Sale of goods received on consignment prohibited. 
No goods received from any commercial business or enterprise on a consignment basis shall be sold or offered for sale at a residential sale. 
(Code 1973, § 18-64; Code 1988, § 18-134)  
Sec. 18-135. - Suspension or cancellation for public good. 
The chief of police may, when circumstances indicate the existence of or creation of a nuisance or danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public through the conduct of a residential sale, suspend or cancel the sale for a given period of time or for the duration of the time allocated in the permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 18-64; Code 1988, § 18-135)  
Secs. 18-136—18-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 18-156. - Required. 
No person shall conduct a residential sale without first obtaining a permit so to do from the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1973, § 18-63; Code 1988, § 18-156)  
Sec. 18-157. - Application. 
Application for a permit required by this division shall be made to the commissioner of the revenue in such form as the commissioner shall require at least five days prior to the desired beginning date of the residential sale. 
(Code 1973, § 18-63; Code 1988, § 18-157)  
Sec. 18-158. - Fee. 
Every application for a permit required by the provisions of this division shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 18-63; Code 1988, § 18-158) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 18-159. - Investigation prior to issuance. 
Before issuing a permit under the provisions of this division, the commissioner of the revenue may conduct such investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is compliance with this Code and to determine the impact the proposed sale would have on the neighborhood in question relative to the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Code 1973, § 18-63; Code 1988, § 18-159)  
Sec. 18-160. - Limitation on issuance to members of same family. 
No more than two permits per year shall be issued under this division to the same family or any member of a family who actually resides within the same residence. 
(Code 1973, § 18-64; Code 1988, § 18-160)  
Sec. 18-161. - Display. 
Each permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be displayed in a visible and conspicuous place during the time of the sale. 
(Code 1973, § 18-63; Code 1988, § 18-161)  
Chapter 19 - LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Damaging library property, § 24-317. 
State Law reference— Authority to establish local and regional libraries, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-33 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Library card fee; non-resident library patrons. 
An annual fee, as set out in Appendix A and any subsequent amendments thereto, shall be charged prior to the issuance of a library card to any individual who is a resident of a locality imposing such a fee on the citizens of Portsmouth. The fee shall not be charged to non-resident employees of the City of Portsmouth, non-resident city property owners, non-resident city business owners, and non-resident Tidewater Community College students attending classes in the City of Portsmouth. The fee shall be payable on July 1st of each year or at such time thereafter as an individual subject to the fee shall seek to use a library card. 
( Ord. No. 2009-70 , § 1, 7-28-2009)  
Secs. 19-2—19-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local library boards generally, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-35 et seq. 
 
Sec. 19-21. - Established. 
There is hereby created a board to be known as the public library advisory board. 
(Code 1973, § 19-1; Code 1988, § 19-21)  
Sec. 19-22. - Composition; election and terms of members. 
The public library advisory board shall consist of nine members, who shall be citizens of the city and shall be appointed by the city council. Members of the public library advisory board shall be appointed for terms of three years. Members of the public library advisory board shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1973, § 19-2; Code 1988, § 19-22) 
State Law reference— Membership and term of office of four years, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-35.  
Sec. 19-23. - Members' oath. 
Each member of the public library advisory board shall take the oath of office prescribed by law for city officials. 
(Code 1973, § 19-4; Code 1988, § 19-23)  
Sec. 19-24. - Filling of vacancies. 
All vacancies on the public library advisory board shall be filled by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1973, § 19-5; Code 1988, § 19-24)  
Sec. 19-25. - Compensation of members. 
The members of the public library advisory board shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 19-3; Code 1988, § 19-25)  
Sec. 19-26. - Organizational meeting; election of officers. 
The members of the public library advisory board shall, immediately after their appointment and qualification, meet and organize. The members of the public library advisory board shall elect a chair, a vice-chair and such other officers thereof, if any, as they may deem necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 19-6; Code 1988, § 19-26)  
Sec. 19-27. - Ex officio secretary designated. 
The library director of the Portsmouth Public Library shall be ex officio secretary of the public library advisory board. 
(Code 1973, § 19-7; Code 1988, § 19-27)  
Sec. 19-28. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of the public library advisory board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1973, § 19-8; Code 1988, § 19-28)  
Sec. 19-29. - Adoption of rules. 
The public library advisory board shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their guidance as may be deemed necessary and expedient. 
(Code 1973, § 19-9; Code 1988, § 19-29)  
Sec. 19-30. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The public library advisory board shall have the duties and responsibilities prescribed by the Library of Virginia. 
(Code 1973, § 19-10; Code 1988, § 19-30)  
Secs. 19-31—19-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PORTSMOUTH LAW LIBRARY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Law libraries, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-60 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 19-51. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "law library" means the Portsmouth Law Library. 
(Code 1988, § 19-51) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 19-52. - Administrative supervision. 
Subject to the supervision and control of the city manager, the city attorney shall be charged with administration of the affairs of the law library. 
(Code 1973, § 19-24; Code 1988, § 19-52)  
Sec. 19-53. - Appointment of employees. 
The librarian, assistants and employees of the law library shall be appointed by the city manager after consultation with the law library board or the librarian in the manner prescribed by the city charter for the appointment of officers and employees of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-25; Code 1988, § 19-53) 
Cross reference— Appointment of city employees generally, § 2-101.  
Secs. 19-54—19-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LAW LIBRARY BOARD 
 
Sec. 19-76. - Established; composition. 
There is hereby created a board to be known as the law library board, which shall consist of five members. The city attorney shall be an ex officio member of such board, and the remaining four members shall be appointed by the city council. Two of the appointed members of such board shall be practicing attorneys, one shall be a judge of one of the courts located within the city, and one shall be a qualified person as provided for in section 2-28(a) who is not a licensed attorney and not an official or employee of any court located within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 19-26; Code 1988, § 19-76; Ord. No. 1990-129, § 8, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 19-77. - Terms of members. 
The term of the ex officio member of the law library board shall begin on November 1, 1966, and shall correspond to his official tenure. The terms of the appointed members of such board shall begin on November 1, 1966. Of the original board, one of the appointed members shall be appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three years, and one for a term of four years. At the expiration of the respective terms of such appointed members, their successors shall be appointed for terms of four years. The appointed members shall hold office during their respective terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1973, § 19-27; Code 1988, § 19-77)  
Sec. 19-78. - Members' oath. 
Each member of the law library board shall take the oath of office prescribed by law for city officials. If any such member shall, for 30 days after receiving notice of such appointment, fail to take such oath, he shall be considered as having declined such office, and the same shall be deemed vacant. 
(Code 1973, § 19-29; Code 1988, § 19-78)  
Sec. 19-79. - Filling of vacancies. 
All vacancies on the law library board shall be filled by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1973, § 19-30; Code 1988, § 19-79)  
Sec. 19-80. - Compensation of members. 
All of the members of the law library board shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 19-28; Code 1988, § 19-80)  
Sec. 19-81. - Organizational meeting; election, term of officers. 
The members of the law library board shall, immediately after their appointment and qualification, meet and organize. The members of the law library board shall elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and such other officers thereof, if any, as they may deem necessary. All of such officers shall hold office for a term of one year. 
(Code 1973, § 19-31; Code 1988, § 19-81)  
Sec. 19-82. - Board may appoint law librarian secretary. 
The law library board may appoint the librarian of the law library to the office of secretary of the board. 
(Code 1973, § 19-32; Code 1988, § 19-82)  
Sec. 19-83. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of the law library board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1973, § 19-33; Code 1988, § 19-83)  
Sec. 19-84. - Board to control, manage law library; adoption of rules. 
The law library board shall have the control and management of the city law library and shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for their guidance and for the control and management of the law library as may be deemed necessary and expedient. 
(Code 1973, § 19-34; Code 1988, § 19-84)  
Sec. 19-85. - Board's power to accept, expend gifts, funds; reduction of appropriations. 
The law library board shall have the power to accept, administer and expend for operating expenses funds received as gifts, including gifts in trust. If the law library board receives and expends for operating expenses any funds not included in its budget as approved by the city council, the council may direct that the amount appropriated from city funds be reduced by the amount so expended from outside such budget. 
(Code 1973, § 19-35; Code 1988, § 19-85)  
Sec. 19-86. - Board to furnish information to city manager. 
The law library board shall furnish the city manager, whenever requested by him, a detailed statement of the amount of money deemed necessary by the board for the operation of the law library for any specified time and also such other information as may be desired with respect to the operation and management of such library. 
(Code 1973, § 19-36; Code 1988, § 19-86)  
Secs. 19-87—19-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LAW LIBRARY ASSESSMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Assessment for law library authorized, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70. 
 
Sec. 19-111. - Imposed; amount. 
There is hereby imposed for the law library fund an assessment as part of the costs incident to each civil action filed in the circuit court, located within the boundaries of the city, the sum as set forth in appendix A to this Code, and for each civil action filed in the districts courts, located within the boundaries of the city, the sum as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 19-44; Code 1988, § 19-111; Ord. No. 2000-14, § 1, 4-25-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority for assessment, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 19-112. - Exemptions. 
The assessment of costs provided for in this division shall be in addition to all other costs prescribed by law, but shall not apply to any action in which the state or any political subdivision thereof or the federal government is a party and in which the costs are assessed against the state, political subdivision thereof or federal government. 
(Code 1973, § 19-48; Code 1988, § 19-112) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 19-113. - Collection, remittance. 
The assessment imposed by this division shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed and remitted by him to the city treasurer within ten days after the end of each month. 
(Code 1973, § 19-45; Code 1988, § 19-113) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 19-114. - Use of funds. 
The monies collected under this division shall be for the acquisition of law books, law periodicals and computer legal research services and equipment for the establishment, use and maintenance of a law library which shall be open for the use of the public. In addition to the acquisition of law books, law periodicals and computer legal research services and equipment, disbursements from the law library fund may include compensation to be paid the librarians and other necessary staff for the maintenance of such library and acquisition of suitable quarters for such library. 
(Code 1973, § 19-46; Code 1988, § 19-114) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70.  
Sec. 19-115. - Accounting procedures. 
The chief financial officer shall set up a special account on his books for the law library fund and the funds so deposited shall be disbursed on vouchers signed by such persons as may be authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 19-47; Code 1988, § 19-115; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Secs. 19-116—19-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MUSEUMS 
 
Sec. 19-150. - Museum admission fees. 
The daily fees as set out in appendix A to this Code shall be charged for admission to city museums for the following: 
(1)  Children's Museum of Virginia: 
a.  Regular admission. 
Children less than two years of age 
Children 2 to 17 years of age 
Adults 
Military with ID and seniors (62 years of age and older), AAA members 
b.  Group: Portsmouth Public Schools students. 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  Group: Per person, self-guided tour. 
e.  Additional fees: 
With either Focus Program or Planetarium Program. 
With both Focus Program and Planetarium Program. 
(2)  Other museums per person: 
a.  Courthouse Galleries. 
b.  Naval Shipyard Museum/Lightship Museum. 
Children less than two years of age 
Children 2 to 17 years of age 
Adults 
Military with ID, seniors (62 years of age and older), AAA members 
(3)  Keypass discount program. Upon payment of a fee as set out in Appendix A to this Code, a person shall be entitled to admittance to all city museums except for the Planetarium during normal working hours for 90 days from the date of issuance. 
Children less than two years of age 
Children 2 to 17 years of age 
Adults 
Military with ID, seniors (62 years of age and older), AAA members 
(4)  Members of the Portsmouth Museums and/or the Friends of the Naval Shipyard Museum shall, upon providing proof of active membership, be entitled to admission without charge to any city museum. An individual membership shall entitle the individual member to admission without charge. A family membership shall entitle members of the immediate family to admission without charge. 
(5)  The city manager or his designee is authorized to establish such waivers of admission fees as deemed appropriate, provided that the conditions or grounds for such waivers are specified in writing. 
(6)  The fees established by this section and set out in appendix A to this Code shall not be applicable to any exhibitions which, by contractual agreement preclude fees from being charged for admission. 
(7)  The director of museums is authorized to set promotional or discount rates for certain exhibits or events not to exceed the established admission fees. 
These rates may be offered in conjunction with promotions or even involving other organizations or entities. 
(Code 1988, § 19-150; Ord. No. 1998-51, § 3, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2002-40, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2011-23, § 1, 5-4-2011; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 1, 5-14-2013)  
Chapter 20 - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city as to licenses and license taxes, § 2.02. 
Cross reference— Permit for commercial recreation centers, § 3-101 et seq.; dog licenses, § 4-61 et seq.; permit for residential (yard) sales, § 18-156 et seq.; vehicle licenses, § 22-71 et seq.; permit for private detectives and private detective agencies, § 27-111 et seq.; permit for dealers in precious metals and gems, § 28-51 et seq.; permit for sidewalk vendors in downtown district, § 32-201 et seq.; permit for operation of public swimming pool, § 34-5; taxation, ch. 35; payment of personal property and machinery and tools taxes prerequisite to issuance of license, § 35-4; certificate of public convenience and necessity for taxicabs, § 37-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Chapter overrides conflicting ordinances. 
Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or article II of this chapter, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within this locality. 
(Code 1988, § 20-1; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 2, 12-12-1995)  
Sec. 20-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. As used in this chapter, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this article shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
(3)  Two or more entities if such entities satisfy the requirements in subsections (1) or (2) of this section as if they were corporations and the ownership interests therein were stock. 
Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
Assessor or assessing official means the commissioner of revenue of this jurisdiction. 
Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
Broker means an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: 
(1)  Advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or 
(2)  Filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
Commodity means staples such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
Contractor shall have the meaning prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714(B), whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
Dealer means any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this article. 
Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 
License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
Personal services means rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this article, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this chapter unless exempted from local license tax by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq. 
Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure of alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the state department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701. The department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
Purchases means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
Real estate services means rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate. 
Escrow agents, real estate. 
Fiduciaries, real estate. 
Lessors of real property. 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
Real estate selling agents. 
Rental agents for real estate. 
Retailer or retail merchant means any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
Security shall have the same meaning as in the Securities Act (Code of Virginia, § 13.1-501 et seq.), or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
Buying installment receivables. 
Chattel mortgage financing. 
Consumer financing. 
Credit card services. 
Credit unions. 
Factors. 
Financing accounts receivable. 
Industrial loan companies. 
Installment financing. 
Inventory financing. 
Loan or mortgage brokers. 
Loan or mortgage companies. 
Safety deposit box companies. 
Security and commodity brokers and services. 
Stockbroker. 
Working capital financing. 
Services means things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise. 
Wholesaler or wholesale merchant means any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial and industrial users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Code 1988, § 20-2; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 2, 12-12-1995; Ord. No. 1996-61, § 1, 11-12-1996) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700.1.  
Sec. 20-3. - License requirement; compliance with zoning ordinance prerequisite to issuance. 
(a)  Every person engaging in this jurisdiction in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business") as defined in this section, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if: (i) such person maintains a definite place of business in this jurisdiction, (ii) such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does maintain an abode in this jurisdiction, which abode for the purposes of this section shall be deemed a definite place of business, or (iii) there is no definite place of business but such person operates amusement machines, is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus as specified in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3717, 58.1-3718 or 58.1-3728, respectively, or is a contractor subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715, or is a public service corporation subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  Each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this jurisdiction; 
(2)  All of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and 
(3)  The taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(b)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business, if he was not subject to licensing in this jurisdiction on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the assessing official. 
(c)  The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before March 1. 
(d)  The assessing official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(e)  A penalty of ten percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. In addition to penalties for failure to file an application or failure to pay the license in a timely manner, a penalty for failure to file a return shall be no greater than ten percent of the tax assessable on such return or $10.00, whichever is greater. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within 30 days, the city treasurer may impose a ten percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. Acted responsibly means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business, and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. Events beyond the taxpayer's control include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(f)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this chapter from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from: (i) the date of the payment that created the refund, (ii) or the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Code 1988, § 20-3; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 2, 12-12-1995; Ord. No. 1996-61, § 2, 11-12-1996) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(A)(1), (2).  
Sec. 20-4. - Penalty; procedure for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or to conduct any business or engage in any occupation or profession or to do any other thing for which a license tax is required under this chapter without first obtaining a license required under this chapter, or after having obtained the necessary license, to continue to do so for a longer period than one month after the expiration thereof. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor, and each day of default or violation shall constitute a separate offense. A conviction of such offense shall not relieve any person from the payment of any license tax imposed by this chapter. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided for in this section, or in addition thereto, the commissioner of revenue shall have the right to seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any continuing violation. 
(d)  The commissioner of revenue or his designees and the police department may initiate court action for any violation of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 20-4; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 2, 12-12-1995)  
Sec. 20-5. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this article is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within this jurisdiction. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of personal services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an apportionment agreement, except as to circumstances set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3709, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this jurisdiction solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)  Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of the state concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. 
(Code 1988, § 20-5; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 2, 12-12-1995; Ord. No. 1996-61, § 3, 11-12-1996) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(A)(3).  
Sec. 20-5.1. - Enforcement; limitations and extensions. 
(a)  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this article, both the assessing official and the taxpayer have consented in writing to this assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3903, the assessing official shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six preceding years. 
(c)  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940, two years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subsection, two years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to section 20-5.2(b) and (d) of this article, or two years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984 or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Code 1988, § 20-5.1; Ord. No. 1996-61, § 3, 11-12-1996) 
State Law reference— Limitations and extensions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703(A)(4).  
Sec. 20-5.2. - Enforcement; appeals and rulings. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this article as the result of an audit may apply within 90 days from the date of the assessment to the assessing official for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the jurisdiction (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
(b)  Provided an application is made within 90 days of an assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the assessor, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 20-3(f), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires: 
(1)  To depart quickly from the locality; 
(2)  To remove his property therefrom; 
(3)  To conceal himself or his property therein; or 
(4)  To do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(c)  Any person assessed with a license tax under this article as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days of the determination by the assessing official on an application pursuant to subsection (a) of this section to the tax commissioner for a correction of such assessment. The tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within 90 days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1821, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1822. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(d)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under subsection (c) of this section, the assessing official shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 20-3(f), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the assessor. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if: (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or (ii) the assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Code 1988, § 20-5.2; Ord. No. 1996-61, § 3, 11-12-1996) 
State Law reference— Appeals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(A)(5)—(8).  
Sec. 20-5.3. - Recordkeeping and audits. 
Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within this jurisdiction. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(Code 1988, § 20-5.3; Ord. No. 1996-61, § 3, 11-12-1996) 
State Law reference— Record keeping and audits, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(A)(9).  
Sec. 20-5.4. - Gross receipts; exclusions and deductions. 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)  Exclusions. The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or town for the state retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer. 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(c)  Deductions. The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity provided that such property was purchased within two years of the sale to such entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(2)  Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign county in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
(Code 1988, § 20-5.4; Ord. No. 1996-61, § 3, 11-12-1996) 
State Law reference— Gross receipts, exclusions and deductions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3732.  
Sec. 20-6. - License fee and tax. 
(a)  The following rates shall apply to every person or business subject to licensure under this article: 
(1)  For the 1997 through 1999 license years, every business or person having annual gross receipts of no more than $50,000.00 shall pay a license fee of $50.00. 
(2)  For the 1997 through 1999 license years, every business or person having annual gross receipts of between $50,0001.00 and $100,000.00 shall pay a license fee as follows: 
License Year 	Fee 
 
1997 .....$100.00 
1998 .....75.00 
1999 .....75.00 
(3)  Commencing with the license year 2000, every business or person having annual gross receipts of $100,000.00 or less shall pay a license fee of $50.00. 
(b)  In addition to the license fee specified in subsection (1) of this section, and except as may be otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3712, 58.1-3712.1 and 58.1-3713, every such person or business with annual gross receipts of more than $100,000.00 shall be assessed and required to pay annually a license tax on all the gross receipts of such persons includable as provided in this article at a rate set forth in article II. 
(Code 1988, § 20-6; Ord. No. 1996-61, § 3, 11-12-1996)  
Sec. 20-6.1. - Proration of flat taxes. 
In the event any person required to pay a license tax under the provisions of this chapter where the license tax is a flat amount, calculated without regard to gross receipts, shall begin the business, occupation or calling after March 1 of the license year, the license tax shall be prorated on a monthly basis, with one-twelfth of the annual license tax to be assessed for each month or portion thereof for the remainder of the license year. Provided, however, that no such license tax shall be the subject of such proration where it is $20.00 or less annually. 
(Code 1988, § 20-6.1; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 2, 12-12-1995; Ord. No. 1996-61, § 3, 11-12-1996)  
ARTICLE II. - TAX SCHEDULE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation generally, ch. 35. 
State Law reference— General authority of city as to license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 
 
Sec. 20-7. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Every person engaged in manufacturing, bottling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be liable for license taxes as follows: 
(1)  For each distiller's license, if more than 5,000 gallons of alcohol or spirits, or both, are manufactured during the license year, including bottling, the license tax shall be $1,000.00. 
(2)  For each winery license, the license tax shall be $1,000.00. 
(3)  For each brewery, the license tax shall be $1,000.00. 
(4)  For each bottler's license, the license tax shall be $500.00. 
(5)  For each wholesale beer license, the license tax shall be $250.00. 
(6)  For each wholesale wine distributor's license, the license tax shall be $50.00. 
(7)  For each wholesale druggist license, the license tax shall be $10.00. 
(8)  For each retail on-premises wine and beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club, the license tax shall be $150.00. 
(9)  For each retail off-premises wine and beer license, the license tax shall be $150.00. 
(10)  For each retail on-premises beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club, the license tax shall be $100.00. 
(11)  For each retail off-premises beer license, the license tax shall be $100.00. 
(12)  For each retail druggist license, the license tax shall be $100.00. 
(13)  For each banquet license, the license tax shall be $5.00. 
(14)  For each fruit distiller's license, the license tax shall be $1,500.00. 
(b)  Every person engaged in dispensing mixed beverages shall be liable for license taxes as follows: 
(1)  Persons operating restaurants, including restaurants located on premises of and operated by hotels or motels: 
a.  For each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for up to 100 persons, $200.00. 
b.  For each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 100 but not more than 150 persons, $350.00. 
c.  For each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons, $500.00. 
(2)  A private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club, $350.00. 
(c)  The license taxes imposed by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any other license taxes imposed by this chapter or by any other law. 
(d)  The licenses required by this section shall be as respectively defined by the act of the General Assembly of Virginia, as heretofore and hereafter amended, known as "The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act," and the terms "alcoholic beverage," "alcohol," "spirits," "mixed beverages," "beer," and "wine" whenever used in this section shall have the meanings respectively prescribed to them by such act. 
(e)  No license shall be issued under this section to any person unless such person shall hold or shall secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, which state license shall be exhibited to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(f)  Any license within the scope of this section may be amended to show a change in the place of business within the city. Any such license may be transferred from one person to another, provided the person to whom transferred holds at the same time a similar license from the alcoholic beverage control board. 
(Code 1973, § 20-57; Code 1988, § 20-7; Ord. No. 1992-46, § 1, 6-9-1992; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-1 et seq.; authority for above taxes, Code of Virginia, §§ 4.1-205, 4.1-233, 4.1-238.  
Sec. 20-8. - Amusement operators. 
(a)  Every amusement operator shall pay a license tax of $200.00 for the operator of ten or more coin-operated amusement machines or $100.00 for the operation of less than ten coin-operated machines. 
(b)  The term "amusement operator" means any person selling, leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated amusement machine in the city; however, the term shall not include a person owning less than three such machines and operating such machines on property owned or leased by such person. 
(c)  The term "amusement machine" shall mean any coin-operated machine. This section shall not, however, be applicable to operators of weighing machines, automatic baggage or parcel-checking machines or receptacles, nor to operators of vending machines which are so constructed as to do nothing but to vend goods, wares and merchandise or postage stamps or provide service only nor to operators of viewing machines or photomat machines nor operators of devices or machines affording rides to children or for the delivery of newspapers. 
(d)  Notwithstanding situs requirements to the contrary in either the state law or this Code, situs for purposes of this section shall be the location of the coin-operated machines. 
(e)  In addition to the license tax imposed by this section on any amusement operator, such operator shall pay a business license tax based upon the gross receipts received by such operator from coin machines operated within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 20-58; Code 1988, § 20-8; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3720, 58.1-3721.  
Sec. 20-9. - Amusement parks. 
(a)  Any person operating any permanent park for public amusement in the city which shall be open to the public, for the privilege of operating within such park a bowling alley, hobby horse, merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, old mill, roller coaster, pony or train rides, and other similar amusements, penny or nickel machines for exhibiting pictures, automatic photo machines, bathhouses, boathouses and parking lots shall pay the following license tax: $1,000.00, and in addition thereto $0.30 per $100.00 of the gross receipts, exclusive of any federal and city admission tax thereon, from all such activities, except the gross receipts from the operation of such boathouses, bathhouses and parking lots. 
(b)  When an amusement park has two or less of the above accumulated amusements, such license tax shall be as follows: $150.00, and in addition thereto, $0.30 per $100.00 of the gross receipts therefrom, exclusive of any federal and city admission tax thereon. 
(c)  Whenever such amusement within the park is operated by a person other than the operator of such park, such person shall pay for such amusement the following license tax: $50.00, and in addition thereto, $0.30 per one $100.00 of the gross receipts therefrom exclusive of any federal and city tax thereon. 
(d)  Any person other than the operator of such amusement park, who shall operate any amusement within the park, for which tickets are not sold, such as recording the voice, guessing one's weight or age, testing one's strength, and the like, shall pay a license tax of $50.00. 
(e)  The license tax provided in this section shall not be proratable and the license for the operation of any such park shall not be construed to authorize the operation within such park of any hotel, dance hall, motion picture theater, theater, restaurant, store, booth or stall that is operated on the principle of giving prizes when one may for a fee throw darts, toss rings, fish for numbers, etc., as a method to determine the type of prize to be received by the player. Nor shall the license tax provided in this section be construed to authorize the sale of beer, wine or tobacco, or any other business or occupation for which a specific license is required by this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 20-59; Code 1988, § 20-9; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax on coin-operated amusement machines, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3720.  
Sec. 20-10. - Building and loan associations and remedial loan banks or companies. 
(a)  Each building and loan association lending money on real estate security, or on stock in an amount not to exceed the sum actually paid in at the time of the loan, shall pay a license tax of $50.00. 
(b)  All building and loan associations, other than those provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall pay a license tax of $180.00. 
(c)  Remedial loan banks operating under the Uniform Small Loan Law shall pay a license tax of $360.00. 
(Code 1973, § 20-61; Code 1988, § 20-10; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Tax on savings and loan associations and credit unions, § 20-29. 
State Law reference— Tax on savings institutions and credit unions authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3730.  
Sec. 20-11. - Business services. 
(a)  Every person engaged in business services shall pay a business license tax of $50.00 or $0.36 on each $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Business service shall be defined as any service rendered for compensation to any business, trade, occupation or governmental agency, unless the service is specifically provided for in another section of this article. Those engaged in rendering business services are, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Barging and lightering. 
(2)  Billboard owners. 
(3)  Billposter. 
(4)  Boats used for towing. 
(5)  Blueprint-bookkeeper. 
(6)  Commission merchants. 
(7)  Shipping offices. 
(8)  Laundry supplies. 
(9)  Other business services. 
(Code 1973, § 20-56; Code 1988, § 20-11; Ord. No. 1991-36, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to impose local license taxes and fees; limitation of authority, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.  
Sec. 20-12. - Cable TV. 
Every person conducting, operating and engaging in the business, trade or occupation of cable TV shall pay an annual license tax in the amount of $250.00. 
(Code 1973, § 20-73; Code 1988, § 20-12; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995)  
Sec. 20-13. - Carnivals, circuses and trained animal shows. 
(a)  Every person who exhibits performances in a carnival, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3728, in the city, shall pay a license tax of $180.00 per day that such carnival exhibits in the city. 
(b)  Every person who exhibits performances of a circus or circus and menagerie or wild west show in the city shall pay a license tax of $180.00 per day that such circus exhibits in the city. 
(c)  Every person who exhibits performances of trained animal shows in the city shall pay a license tax of $75.00 per day that such show exhibits in the city. 
(d)  Each person who exhibits performances described in this section shall, before beginning operation in the city, post a surety bond in the amount of $500.00, which bond shall assure faithful compliance by the licensee with all of the laws of the city pertaining to revenue and regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 20-63; Code 1988, § 20-13; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority for tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3728.  
Sec. 20-14. - Contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale. 
(a)  Every person engaged in contracting and persons constructing for their own account for sale shall pay a license tax of $50.00 or $0.16 on each $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is higher. A contractor for purposes of this classification is any person who accepts or offers to accept: 
(1)  An order or contract for doing any work on or in any building or structure, requiring the use of paint, stone, brick, mortar, wood, cement, structural iron or steel, sheet iron, galvanized iron, metallic piping, tin, lead, or other metal or any other building material. 
(2)  An order or contract to do any paving, curbing or other work on sidewalks, streets, alleys or highways, on public or private property, using asphalt, brick, stone, cement, concrete, wood or any combination thereof. 
(3)  An order or contract to excavate earth, rock or other material for foundation or any other purpose, or for cutting, trimming or maintaining rights-of-way. 
(4)  An order or contract to construct any sewer of stone, brick, terracotta or other material. 
(5)  An order or contract for doing any work on or in any building or premises involving the erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing or maintaining of electrical wiring; or the erecting, installing, repairing or maintaining of lines for the transmission or distribution of electric light and power or other utility services. 
(6)  An order or contract to remodel, repair, wreck or demolish a building. 
(7)  An order or contract to bore or dig a well. 
(8)  An order or contract to install, maintain or repair air conditioning apparatus or equipment. 
(b)  Contracting generally includes, but is not limited to, persons engaged in the following occupations, businesses or trades: 
(1)  Air conditioning. 
(2)  Brick contracting and other masonry. 
(3)  Building. 
(4)  Cementing. 
(5)  Dredging. 
(6)  Electrical contracting. 
(7)  Elevator installation. 
(8)  Erecting signs which are assessed as realty. 
(9)  Floor scraping or finishing. 
(10)  Foundations. 
(11)  House moving. 
(12)  Paint and paper decorating. 
(13)  Plastering. 
(14)  Plumbing. 
(15)  Heating. 
(16)  Steam fitting. 
(17)  Refrigeration. 
(18)  Road, street, bridge, sidewalk or curb and gutter construction. 
(19)  Roofing and tinning. 
(20)  Sewer drilling and well digging. 
(21)  Sign painting. 
(22)  Structural metal work. 
(23)  Tile, glass, flooring and floor covering installation. 
(24)  Wrecking, moving or excavating. 
(25)  Other contractors and contracting companies. 
(c)  Any person who shall erect or construct buildings for the purpose of selling or renting the same, and shall not employ therefor a contractor or person who shall act as superintendent who has paid the license tax and given the bond required by law, shall pay a license tax as provided for general contractors, upon his gross receipts or equivalent value of construction, for all such buildings so constructed except the first $10,000.00 of gross receipts or equivalent value in any one license tax year. No license required under this subsection shall be transferred or prorated. 
(Code 1973, §§ 20-27, 20-51; Code 1988, § 20-14; Ord. No. 1991-36, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Contractor's registration and bond, § 7-2; bond for moving contractors, § 7-3. 
State Law reference— Authority for tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706.  
Sec. 20-15. - Direct sellers. 
(a)  Every direct seller who maintains a place of abode within the city and whose total sales exceed $4,000.00 per year, shall pay a license tax of $0.20 per $100.00 of retail sales per year and/or $0.05 of wholesale sales per year, whichever is applicable. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "direct seller" means any person who: 
(1)  Engages in the trade or business of selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products primarily in private residences and maintains no public location for the conduct of such business; 
(2)  Receives remuneration for such activities, with substantially all of such remuneration being directly related to sales or other sales-oriented services, rather than to the number of hours worked; and 
(3)  Performs such activities pursuant to a written contract between such person and the person for whom the activities are performed and such contract provides that such person will not be treated as an employee with respect to such activities for federal tax purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 20-52.4; Code 1988, § 20-15; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority for tax and provisions similar to subsection (b), Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719.1.  
Sec. 20-16. - Financial, real estate and professional services. 
(a)  Every person engaged-in financial, real estate or professional services shall pay a license tax of $50.00 or $0.58 on each $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is greater. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "financial services" shall be defined as any person rendering a service for compensation in the form of a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange unless such service is specifically provided for in another section of this article. Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Buying installment receivables. 
(2)  Chattel mortgage financing. 
(3)  Consumer financing. 
(4)  Credit card services. 
(5)  Credit unions. 
(6)  Factors. 
(7)  Financing accounts receivable. 
(8)  Industrial loan companies. 
(9)  Installment financing. 
(10)  Inventory financing. 
(11)  Loan or mortgage brokers. 
(12)  Loan or mortgage companies. 
(13)  Safety deposit box companies. 
(14)  Security and commodity brokers and services. 
(15)  Stockbrokers. 
(16)  Working capital financing. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, "real estate service" shall be defined as any person rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker, unless the service is specifically provided for in another section of this article. Those rendering real estate services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Appraisers of real estate. 
(2)  Escrow agents, real estate. 
(3)  Fiduciaries, real estate. 
(4)  Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
(5)  Real estate selling agents. 
(6)  Rental agents for real estate. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, "professional services" shall be defined as any person engaged in providing a professional service if engaged in rendering any service specifically enumerated below or engaged in any occupation or vocation where professional knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study, is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding or teaching, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on such learning. Those engaged in rendering a professional service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Architects. 
(2)  Attorneys-at-law. 
(3)  Certified public accountants. 
(4)  Dentists. 
(5)  Engineers. 
(6)  Land surveyors. 
(7)  Pharmacists. 
(8)  Practitioners of the healing arts. 
(9)  Surgeons. 
(10)  Veterinarians. 
(11)  Other professional services. 
(Code 1973, § 20-53; Code 1988, § 20-16; Ord. No. 1988-40, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1991-36, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706.  
Sec. 20-17. - Freight forwarders. 
Every person engaged in the business of freight forwarding shall pay a business license tax of $50.00 or $0.02 on each $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever amount is hereby. 
(Code 1988, § 20-17; Ord. No. 1993-37, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706.  
Sec. 20-18. - Fortunetellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, phrenology and handwriting analysis. 
Every person who, for compensation, shall pretend to tell fortunes or assume to act as a clairvoyant or to practice palmistry, phrenology or handwriting analysis, shall pay a license tax of $1,000.00 per annum. Such license shall not be proratable or transferable. 
(Code 1973, § 20-65; Code 1988, § 20-18; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3726.  
Sec. 20-19. - Heat, light and power companies. 
Any person who shall engage in the business of furnishing heat, light and power, whether by means of electricity or gas, in the city, shall pay a license tax equal to one-half of one percent of the gross annual receipts accruing to such person from sales to the ultimate consumer in the city; provided, however, that there shall be deducted any sum paid by such person to the city as a merchant's license tax or other license taxes, except motor vehicle license taxes. 
(Code 1973, § 20-64; Code 1988, § 20-19; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Utility services tax, § 35-306 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731.  
Sec. 20-20. - Itinerant vendors. 
Every person who shall engage in, do or transact any temporary transient business in the city for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, shall hire, lease, use or occupy any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public room, or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, lodginghouses or houses of private entertainment, or any street, alley or other public place for a period of less than one year for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise shall be deemed to be an itinerant vendor and shall pay a license tax of $500.00 per month or fraction thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 20-52.3; Code 1988, § 20-20; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar definition of "itinerant vendor," Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717; authority for tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717.  
Sec. 20-21. - Junk and secondhand goods canvassers. 
(a)  Every person acting as a canvasser for the purpose of buying junk, secondhand paper or other matter for any junk or secondhand paper dealer, or for sale to such a dealer, shall pay an annual license tax of $50.00. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this section unless and until the applicant shall exhibit to the commissioner of the revenue written evidence of his appointment as a canvasser by a duly licensed junk or secondhand paper dealer. 
(Code 1973, § 20-66; Code 1988, § 20-21; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Junk and secondhand goods and pawnbrokers generally, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706.  
Sec. 20-22. - Junk and secondhand paper dealers. 
(a)  Every person engaging in the business of dealing in junk materials or secondhand paper shall pay an annual license tax of $50.00 or $0.30 for each additional $100.00 of his gross receipts in the business, whichever is greater. 
(b)  No license shall be issued under this section unless and until there is exhibited to the commissioner of the revenue a license to engage in such business issued by the proper court. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any employee of such dealer acting as a canvasser from the payment of the canvasser's license tax. 
(Code 1973, § 20-67; Code 1988, § 20-22; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Junk and secondhand goods and pawnbrokers generally, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706.  
Sec. 20-23. - Peddlers and door-to-door salesmen generally. 
(a)  Every person peddling goods, wares, merchandise or products of any description or who sells any items door-to-door, shall pay a license tax of $500.00 per year. 
(b)  A peddler is defined as any person who carries from place to place any goods, wares, food or merchandise purchased for resale and offers to sell, or actually sells and delivers, the same at retail. The definition of "peddler" set out in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717 is adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  No peddler shall be permitted, while doing business as a peddler to keep his vehicle in one location on the streets for a longer period of time than ten minutes, and shall not make sales in front of or near a place of business where business similar to that conducted by the peddler is transacted. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for each such offense. 
(Code 1973, § 20-52.1; Code 1988, § 20-23; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719.  
Sec. 20-24. - Peddlers of perishable products. 
(a)  Every person peddling perishable products shall pay a business license tax of $50.00 per year. 
(b)  A peddler of perishable products is defined as any person who carries from place to place ice, wood, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, fish, oysters, vegetables, fruits, or other farm products not grown or produced by him and purchased by him for sale, and offers to sell or actually sells and delivers same at retail. 
(c)  No peddler of perishable products shall be permitted, while doing business as a peddler of perishable products to keep his vehicle in one location on the streets for a longer period of time than ten minutes, and shall not make sales in front of or near a place of business where business similar to that conducted by the peddler of perishable products is transacted. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for each such offense. 
(Code 1973, § 20-52.2; Code 1988, § 20-24; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11; peddlers of perishable family supplies grown or produced by them exempt from license taxation, § 26-27. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719.  
Sec. 20-25. - Personal services. 
(a)  Every person engaged in rendering personal services shall pay a license tax of $50.00 or $0.36 on each $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Personal service shall be defined as any service rendered for compensation either upon or for persons, animals or personal effects, unless the service is specifically provided for in another section of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 20-55; Code 1988, § 20-25; Ord. No. 1988-40, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1991-36, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1993-62, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-1993; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706.  
Sec. 20-26. - Rental of residential property. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of renting any residential property, including houses, apartments and dwelling units, shall pay an annual license tax of $12.00 for each such unit. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the phrase "engaged in business" shall mean a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit and implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. The business of renting houses, apartments or dwelling units shall be construed to mean the renting of buildings or portions thereof, each designed for residential occupancy as a single dwelling unit by one family, but not hotels, motels, mobile home parks, lodginghouses or boardinghouses for which a license is otherwise required by this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 20-68; Code 1988, § 20-26; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Housing and community development, ch. 17.  
Sec. 20-27. - Repair services. 
(a)  Every person engaged in repair services shall pay a business license tax of $50.00 or $0.36 on each $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Repair services shall be defined as the repairing, renovating, cleaning or servicing of some article or item of personal property for compensation as a repair service, unless the service is specifically provided for in another section of this article. Those engaged in rendering repair service are, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Boiler cleaner. 
(2)  Piano tuner. 
(3)  General repair services. 
(4)  Other repair services. 
(Code 1973, § 20-54; Code 1988, § 20-27; Ord. No. 1991-36, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706.  
Sec. 20-28. - Retail sales and short-term rentals. 
(a)  Any person engaged in retail sales shall pay a business license tax of $50.00 or $0.20 on each additional $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is higher. Retail sales shall be defined to include, but not be limited to, the sale of goods, wares and merchandise for any purpose other than resale, but not including sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. Furthermore, retail sales shall not include sales by peddlers, door-to-door salesmen or itinerant vendors. 
(b)  Any person engaged in the short-term rental business shall pay a business license tax of $50.00 or $0.20 on each additional $100.00 of gross receipts. A person is engaged in the short-term rental business if not less than 80 percent of the gross rental receipts of such business in any year are from transactions involving rental periods of 92 consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessor. "Affiliated," for purposes of this Code, shall mean any common ownership interest in excess of five percent of any officers or partners in common with the lessor and lessee. For purposes of this test, any rental to a person affiliated with the lessor shall be treated as rental receipts but shall not qualify for purposes of the 80 percent requirement, and any rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental. For the purpose of the Code, the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation. For the purpose of this Code, "daily rental property" means all tangible personal property held for rental and owned by a person engaged in the short-term rental business, except trailers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 and other tangible personal property required to be licensed or registered with the department of motor vehicles, department of game and inland fisheries or the department of aviation. 
(Code 1973, § 20-52; Code 1988, § 20-28; Ord. No. 1989-71, § 1, 7-11-1989; Ord. No. 1991-36, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1992-56, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995)  
Sec. 20-29. - Savings and loan associations and credit unions. 
Every savings and loan association, or state-chartered credit union, which operates a home office in the city shall pay an annual license tax of $50.00. 
(Code 1973, § 20-74; Code 1988, § 20-30; Ord. No. 1991-67, § 1, 6-25-1991; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
Cross reference— Tax on building and loan associations, § 20-10. 
State Law reference— Authority for tax on savings institutions and credit unions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3730.  
Sec. 20-30. - Telegraph companies. 
Telegraph companies doing business in the city and engaged in transmitting or receiving messages to and from points in the state excepting, however, telegrams sent to or received by the governments of the United States or of the state, or their officers or agents, shall be divided into two classes, namely: 
(1)  Telegraph companies doing business in the city and having 50 or more offices in the state shall be placed in the first class, and shall pay a license tax of $180.00 in addition to any other tax on the assessed value of their property. 
(2)  Telegraph companies doing business in the city and having less than 50 offices in the state shall be placed in the second class and shall pay a license tax of $50.00 in addition to any other tax on the assessed value of their property. 
(Code 1973, § 20-71; Code 1988, § 20-31; Ord. No. 1992-72, § 1, 8-25-1992; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731.  
Sec. 20-31. - Telephone service. 
Each person or telephone company providing telephone service shall pay an annual license tax, equal to one-half of one percent of the gross receipts accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer in the city. However, charges for long distance telephone calls shall not be included in gross receipts for purposes of license taxation. 
(Code 1973, § 20-70; Code 1988, § 20-32; Ord. No. 1992-72, § 2, 8-25-1992; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995; Ord. No. 2010-83, § 1, 10-12-2010) 
Cross reference— Utility services tax, § 35-306 et seq.; tax for E-911 telephone service, § 35-341 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731.  
Sec. 20-32. - Wholesale merchants. 
(a)  Every person conducting, operating or engaging in any of the following businesses, trades or occupations as a wholesale merchant shall pay an annual license tax of $50.00 for the first $5,000.00 and $0.15 for each additional $100.00 of these purchases in the business, trade or occupation, for the preceding calendar year: 
(1)  Automotive. 
(2)  Chemicals. 
(3)  Clothing, furnishings. 
(4)  Coal, coke. 
(5)  Commission merchants (who take title, others classified as brokers). 
(6)  Drugs. 
(7)  Dry goods. 
(8)  Electrical, plumbing goods. 
(9)  Farm products or supplies. 
(10)  Furniture and house furnishings. 
(11)  Gold and silver buyers. 
(12)  Groceries and foods. 
(13)  Hardware. 
(14)  Jewelry. 
(15)  Lumber, paint and construction materials. 
(16)  Machinery, equipment and supplies. 
(17)  Metals and metal work. 
(18)  Other goods, wares, merchandise. 
(19)  Paper and paper products. 
(20)  Petroleum and petroleum products. 
(21)  Seafood packers. 
(22)  Soft drinks. 
(23)  Sporting goods. 
(24)  Tobacco and tobacco products (except leaf tobacco). 
(25)  Waste materials. 
(26)  Other wholesale merchants. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "wholesale merchant" means any merchant who sells to others for resale only or who sells to institutional, commercial or industrial users. 
(Code 1973, § 20-72; Code 1988, § 20-33; Ord. No. 1995-116, § 3, 12-12-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3716.  
Chapter 21 - MOBILE HOMES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 7; housing and community development, ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Virginia Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Law, Code of Virginia, §§ 36-85.2—36-85.36. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "mobile home," "mobile home park" and "mobile home subdivision" shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the zoning ordinance of the city as set out in chapter 40 of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 22-1; Code 1988, § 21-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; zoning ordinance, ch. 40.  
Sec. 21-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 21-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 21-3. - Parking mobile home on street or other public place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home or camper-type trailer while used for human habitation on any street, alley or other public place in the city, or to park any mobile home or camper-type trailer when not so used on the streets of the city for a period longer than 12 hours. 
(Code 1973, § 22-2; Code 1988, § 21-3) 
Cross reference— Parking generally, § 22-561 et seq.  
Sec. 21-4. - Parking mobile home outside properly zoned mobile home district. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep or maintain for more than three consecutive days any mobile home used for human habitation upon any lot or parcel of land within the city unless such lot or parcel of land is within a properly zoned mobile home district as required under the zoning ordinance of the city as set out in chapter 40 of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 22-3; Code 1988, § 21-4) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, ch. 40.  
Secs. 21-5—21-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOBILE HOME PARKS AND MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, ch. 33. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-26. - Inspection of subdivision site prior to sale. 
The director of public health shall inspect the premises of each mobile home subdivision site prior to the date of its sale and ensure that the provisions of sections 21-28 through 21-31, any other ordinances of the city and the laws of the state and regulations of the state board of health relating to such are complied with. 
(Code 1973, § 22-27; Code 1988, § 21-26)  
Sec. 21-27. - Dimensional requirements for parks and individual sites located therein. 
Dimensional requirements applicable to mobile home parks and each individual mobile home site therein shall be as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the city as set out in chapter 40 of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 22-22; Code 1988, § 21-27)  
Sec. 21-28. - Drainage and grading of site. 
Every mobile home park and mobile home subdivision shall be located on a well-drained area and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or casual waters. 
(Code 1973, § 22-23; Code 1988, § 21-28)  
Sec. 21-29. - Water supply. 
An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied for each mobile home site within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 22-24; Code 1988, § 21-29) 
Cross reference— Water, sewers and sewage disposal generally, ch. 38.  
Sec. 21-30. - Sewer connection. 
Each mobile home site in a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be furnished with approved sewer connections to service sanitary facilities of each mobile home. 
(Code 1973, § 22-25; Code 1988, § 21-30) 
Cross reference— Water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 38.  
Sec. 21-31. - Garbage and refuse disposal. 
There shall be provided in every mobile home park and mobile home subdivision adequate facilities or receptacles for the disposal of garbage, refuse, ashes and rubbish and all such facilities or receptacles shall be at all times maintained in a clean, sanitary and operable condition. 
(Code 1973, § 22-26; Code 1988, § 21-31) 
Cross reference— Garbage and refuse, ch. 16.  
Secs. 21-32—21-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS 
 
Sec. 21-51. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate within the city any mobile home park without first having secured a permit therefor from the director of public health. 
(Code 1973, § 22-17; Code 1988, § 21-51)  
Sec. 21-52. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall make application therefor in writing to the director of public health, stating his name and address, the location of the proposed mobile home park, and proposed method of obtaining water and of making sewage and garbage disposal and such other information as the director may deem necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 22-18; Code 1988, § 21-52)  
Sec. 21-53. - Investigation of premises; grant or refusal. 
Upon the filing of an application pursuant to this division, the director of public health shall inspect the premises whereon or wherein such mobile home park is to be located, and if the same be found to comply with the provisions of this article, other ordinances of the city, state and laws and regulations of the state board of health, the director of public health shall grant such a permit; otherwise, he shall refuse it. 
(Code 1973, § 22-19; Code 1988, § 21-53)  
Sec. 21-54. - Transfer. 
Any permit granted under this division may be transferred from one person to another upon written application of the holder thereof and with the consent of the director of public health. 
(Code 1973, § 22-20; Code 1988, § 21-54)  
Sec. 21-55. - Revocation. 
Any permit granted under this division may be revoked by the director of public health at any time for failure to comply with the provisions of this article, any ordinances of the city or state laws or regulations of the state board of health regarding public health applicable to the mobile home park. 
(Code 1973, § 22-21; Code 1988, § 21-55)  
Secs. 21-56—21-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT FOR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 21-76. - Required. 
Every developer who shall endeavor to establish a mobile home subdivision shall secure a permit therefor from the director of public health prior to final subdivision plat approval. 
(Code 1973, § 22-27; Code 1988, § 21-76)  
Sec. 21-77. - Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this division shall make application therefor to the director of public health. 
(Code 1973, § 22-27; Code 1988, § 21-77)  
Sec. 21-78. - Investigation. 
Upon receiving an application for a permit required by the provisions of this division, the director of public health shall investigate the applicant to determine compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 22-27; Code 1988, § 21-78)  
Sec. 21-79. - Issuance. 
If the applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this division shall have complied with all applicable provisions of this chapter, specifically including sections 21-28, 21-29 and 21-30, and any other applicable provisions of this Code, city ordinances, laws or regulations of the state board of health relating to such, the director of public health shall grant such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 22-27; Code 1988, § 21-79)  
Chapter 22 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Permitting dog to ride in open vehicle, § 4-35; bicycles, ch. 5; protection of food during transportation, § 15-5; dealers in secondhand motor vehicle parts and accessories, § 18-101 et seq.; residential (yard) sales not to interfere with traffic, § 18-132; open storage of inoperable vehicles, § 23-46 et seq.; unnecessary noise from vehicles, § 24-255; damaging, tampering with, etc., vehicles, § 24-321; operation of commercial vehicles in parks, § 25-96; traffic regulation in parks, § 25-112 et seq.; railroads, ch. 29; streets, sidewalks and local improvements, ch. 32; subdivisions, ch. 33.1; vehicles for hire, ch. 37; zoning, ch. 40.1. 
State Law reference— Municipal powers as to use of streets, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2013, 15.2-2029; motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq.; drivers' licenses, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300 et seq.; municipal parking permits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1230; local regulation of traffic, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 as in effect on July 1, 2006, and any subsequent amendments thereto, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Motorized push scooter. For purposes of this chapter, a motorized push scooter is defined as a conveyance with a flat platform upon which the rider stands, with a post or handlebars or other steering mechanism at the front of the conveyance, with two inline wheels, or three or four wheels and is powered by either an electric or internal combustion motor. Such conveyances may have an optional seat that can be attached for operation in a sitting position. A motorized push scooter shall not include any wheelchair or wheelchair conveyance used to provide mobility for persons who, by reason of physical disability, are otherwise unable to move about as pedestrians. 
(Code 1973, § 23-1; Code 1988, § 22-1; Ord. No. 1988-62, § 2, 6-28-1988; Ord. No. 1989-61, § 1, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 1989-83, 9-26-1989; Ord. No. 1990-69, § 1, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1992-58, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1993-50, § 1, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 1994-72, § 1, 6-28-1994; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 1, 11-22-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100.  
Sec. 22-2. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of the Code of Virginia, §§ 1-220, 46.2-1300 and 46.2-1313, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the commonwealth contained in the Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-100 et seq., 18.2-266 et seq. and 16.1-278 et seq.; except those provisions in conflict with those otherwise contained in this chapter; and except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony; and except those provisions and requirements which by their very nature can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference, and made applicable within the city. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the city; and the provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of the Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-100 et seq., 18.2-266 et seq., or 16.1-278 et seq., which are adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement adopted in this section differ from the penalty imposed for the same or a similar offense under the general law of the commonwealth; which said penalty provisions of state law shall govern over any conflicting provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 1-220, the incorporation of above-referenced sections of the Code of Virginia shall include all future amendments to the referenced provisions of the state statutes as may from time to time be adopted by the Virginia General Assembly. 
(c)  Pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313, the incorporation of the above-referenced sections of the Code of Virginia shall include provisions of state law adopted and approved but not yet in effect, provided, however, that said provisions shall not become effective until the effective date of the state law. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt state law by reference, Code of Virginia, §§ 1-220, 46.2-1313.  
Sec. 22-3. - General penalty for violations of chapter. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more [than] $250.00. 
(b)  Every person convicted of any state statute or city ordinance shall be assessed the sum as set out in appendix A to this Code as part of the costs in each traffic case in the district and circuit courts. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the case is heard, remitted to the city treasurer, and held by the city treasurer subject to appropriation to the sheriff for the funding of courthouse security personnel. 
(Code 1973, § 23-1.1; Code 1988, § 22-2; Ord. No. 1992-58, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 1, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2010-18, § 1, 3-23-2010) 
State Law reference— Penalty applicable to violation of state traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1113; city prohibited from imposing penalty for traffic violation which is greater than penalty imposed by state law for similar offense, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300.  
Sec. 22-4. - Driver improvement program. 
(a)  There is hereby established the city driver improvement program to be directed and conducted by the general district court for the purpose of giving instruction concerning laws and ordinances for the regulation of vehicular traffic, safe operation of vehicles and other related subjects. The court may, in its discretion, conduct the program in conjunction with the Southeastern Virginia Alcohol Safety Action Program. Instruction shall be conducted at such times and dates as may be approved by the court. Instructors shall include personnel from the Southeastern Virginia Alcohol Safety Action Program or such other groups or individuals as may be approved by the court. 
(b)  In lieu of or in addition to the penalties prescribed, any person found guilty of violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be required by any court in the city to attend the city driver improvement program, which shall consist of ten hours of instruction to be provided by sworn police officers or certified defensive driver instructors, or any traffic school that has been established in the county or city where the person is a resident or in any jurisdiction contiguous to the county or city of residence of the convicted violator for a period specified in the order requiring attendance if the governing body of that contiguous jurisdiction consents thereto. Failure to comply with the order of the court shall be punishable as contempt. 
(Code 1973, § 23-1.1; Code 1988, § 22-7; Ord. No. 1993-15, § 1, 2-9-1993; Ord. No. 1993-50, § 1, 6-22-1993) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1314.  
Sec. 22-5. - General authority of city manager relative to traffic. 
(a)  The city manager shall have general supervision and control of management and direction of all vehicular and pedestrian traffic and of the parking and routing of vehicles in the interest of the public safety, comfort and convenience not inconsistent with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq. 
(b)  The city manager may cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained designating residence and business districts, school, hospital and safety zones, highway and railway crossings, stop intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, arterial streets, arterial stops, turns at intersections, traffic lanes, and such other signs as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the power to regulate traffic by means of traffic officers or traffic lights or other signaling devices on any portion of the highway where traffic is heavy or continuous, or where in his judgment conditions may require and may regulate the use of the highways by processions and assemblages. 
(d)  The city manager may adopt any such regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or other city ordinance or resolution as he shall deem advisable and necessary, and repeal, amend or modify any such regulations; provided, however, that such regulations, laws or rules shall not be deemed to be violated, if at the time of the alleged violation any sign or designation required under the terms of this chapter is missing, effaced, mutilated or defaced so that an ordinarily observant person under the same circumstances would not be apprised of or aware of the existence of such rule. 
(e)  The regulations of or effected by the city manager pursuant to this section shall be subject to the supervision, direction and control of the city council. 
(f)  The existence of any such sign or designation at any place within the city shall be prima facie evidence that such signs or markers were erected and placed by or at the direction of the city manager and in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(g)  No person shall fail or refuse to comply with the direction indicated on any sign or marker erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 23-5; Code 1988, § 22-8) 
State Law reference— Local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220; designation of stop and yield right-of-way intersections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301.  
Sec. 22-6. - Applicability of chapter to persons operating bicycles, mopeds, etc. 
Every person operating a bicycle, moped, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle or animal or driving any animal upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall have all of the rights and all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle, unless the context of the provision clearly indicates otherwise. 
(Code 1973, § 23-3; Code 1988, § 22-10; Ord. No. 1994-72, § 1, 6-28-1994; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 1, 11-22-2005) 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, ch. 4; bicycles, ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Applicability of state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800.  
Sec. 22-7. - Direction of traffic by deputized persons. 
The chief of police may deputize persons over the age of 18 years without the power of arrest for the limited purposes of directing traffic in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1309 during periods of heavy traffic or congestion; provided, that such persons first receive training as the chief of police determines necessary to fully acquaint such persons with the techniques of traffic control. Any person who is deputized as hereinabove provided shall at all times while engaged in traffic control wear a distinctive police uniform, safety vest or a white reflectorized belt which crosses both the chest and back above the waist. 
(Code 1973, § 23-24; Code 1988, § 22-13; Ord. No. 1989-83, 9-26-1989)  
Sec. 22-8. - Direction of traffic by fire officers. 
Officers of the fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire, and while so acting, shall have all the authority of peace officers. 
(Code 1973, § 23-6; Code 1988, § 22-14)  
Sec. 22-9. - Retailers of certain motorcycles to furnish statements to vendees. 
(a)  Every retailer of motorcycles having a seven-horsepower or less rating shall provide written statements to every vendee regarding registration and licensing of such vehicles and the requirement of a motor vehicle driver's license. 
(b)  Persons violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-162; Code 1988, § 22-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 22-10. - Registration of mopeds. 
All mopeds operated on the streets of the city shall be registered in the same manner as required for bicycles under the provisions of article II of chapter 5 of this Code, and mopeds and their owners and operators shall be subject to all provisions of such article mutatis mutandis. A violation of any such provision shall be subject to the penalties as prescribed in section 5-2 of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 22-18) 
State Law reference— Authority of city as to licensing of mopeds, Code of Virginia, § 152-1720.  
Sec. 22-11. - Motorized push scooters; voluntary registration; fee; destruction, etc., of serial number prohibited. 
(a)  The serial numbers of motorized push scooters may be registered with the chief of police or his designee. There shall be a one-time registration fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code charged to each owner. 
(b)  No person shall willfully remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter the serial number of any motorized push scooter or knowingly possess a motorized push scooter, the serial number of which has been removed, destroyed or mutilated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-104, § 2, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 22-12. - Parades, public assemblies and expressive activities; permits. 
(a)  Purpose. Pursuant to the authority granted to the city by the Code of Virginia and the city charter, this section is adopted in order to ensure the free and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles on the public rights-of-way, to ensure free and safe access to public areas, and otherwise to regulate and control the time, place and manner of activities that would otherwise threaten the public health, safety, and welfare, while also encouraging the exercise of rights under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution (First Amendment) in the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set out herein, unless the context in which they occur clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  City-sponsored event means a planned event which the city sponsors or is otherwise affiliated with for the primary purpose of providing recreational benefits for citizens and not for the purpose of providing a forum for expressive activities. City-sponsored events include the Memorial Day Parade, Bunny Hop Race, Portsmouth Farmer's Market, Seawall Art Show, Safe Trick or Treat, Fish Bowl Parade, Olde Towne Ghost Walk, Buffalo Rider Parade of Horses, and any other event which is designated as a city-sponsored event by the city manager. 
(2)  Event means a parade, public assembly or expressive activity. 
(3)  Expressive activity means any activity protected under the First Amendment other than a parade or public assembly, addressed below, including, but not limited to, leafleting. 
(4)  Parade means any march, demonstration, procession or motorcade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, upon any traditional public forum within the city that interferes with or is likely to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic within said forum. 
(5)  Public assembly means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering of any kind that occupies any traditional public forum within the city and interferes with or is likely to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or with the customary public usage of said forum. 
(6)  Spontaneous event means an unplanned coming together of persons, animals or vehicles in a parade or public assembly in a traditional public forum which was not contemplated beforehand by any participant therein, and which is caused by or in response to unforeseen circumstances or events. 
(7)  Traditional public forum means, pursuant to the public forum doctrine under the First Amendment, as created and revised by the courts, those government-owned spaces open to the public generally, such as many streets, sidewalks and parks, that have by long tradition and government fiat been devoted to parades, public assemblies and expressive activities generally. 
(c)  Permit required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or participate in a parade, public assembly or expressive activity in any traditional public forum of the city without a written permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following when occurring in a traditional public forum: 
a.  Spontaneous events; 
b.  Recreational activities, including jogging or walking, that do not require closing public streets or other public rights-of-way; 
c.  Footraces and bicycle races are not subject to this section 22-12 but are subject to section 22-12.1. 
d.  Funeral processions of vehicles with appropriate lights and/or escorts; 
e.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
f.  The United States Army, Navy, Air Force and Coast Guard, the military forces of the state, and the employees of the city when acting within the scope of their employment; or 
g.  A governmental agency or agencies acting within the scope of its functions. 
h.  A parade, public assembly or expressive activity conducted in some traditional public forum other than a street and involving less than thirty (30) people. 
(3)  Permits may be granted if they are requested by individuals or organizations who desire to have a permit, even though the permit is not required under this section. 
(d)  Application. 
(1)  A written application for a permit shall be filed as follows: 
a.  When a parade, public assembly or expressive activity will require the blocking or temporary closure of all or any part of one or more major streets of the city, or one or more streets in the downtown area, and the detouring of motor vehicle traffic, and will require the presence of significantly more police officers than are normally assigned to the area for traffic control, traffic diversion and/or the maintenance of order, a written application for the permit shall be filed with the city manager or city manager designee at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the occurrence, and shall include the information described under subsection (d)(1)(C) below. The reasons for this time requirement are that additional time is needed by city officials to coordinate with all involved departments; to determine previously scheduled uses of the areas or streets; to determine the need and arrange for traffic control signages and devices; to notify residents and businesses; to arrange for the rescheduling and/or recall of police officers; and to alter existing parking regulations. Applicants should allow additional time for correction of any deficiencies and first time events. 
b.  For all parades, public assemblies or expressive activities other than those described in subsection (d)(1)(A) above, a written application for the permit shall be filed with the city manager or city manager designee at least ten business (10) days, excluding legal holidays, prior to the occurrence, and shall include the information described in subsection (d)(1)(C) below. Applicants should allow additional time for correction of any deficiencies and first time events. 
c.  Written applications shall include all of the following information: 
(i)  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit; 
(ii)  The name and address of the organization or group the applicant is representing: 
(iii)  The name, address and telephone number of a person who will act as the leader or chairman of the group at the site, and who will be responsible for the conduct of the group; 
(iv)  The type of event planned, including a description of the activities planned during the event; 
(v)  The date and time (start and ending) of the event; 
(vi)  If the event is a public assembly or expressive activity, the specific location or locations of it; 
(vii)  If the event is a parade, the specific assembly and dispersal locations, the specific route, and the plans, if any, for assembly and dispersal; 
(viii)  The approximate number of people, animals and vehicles that will constitute the event, and a description of any animals or vehicles involved; 
(ix)  A statement as to whether the event will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets or sidewalks or other public rights-of-way proposed to be traversed or used; 
(x)  A description of any recording equipment, sound-amplification equipment, banners, signs, or other attention-getting devices to be used in connection with the event; and 
(xi)  A statement, if applicable, that the applicant claims an exemption from the service fee and insurance requirements of subsection (e) below, and such other information as the city manager or city manager designee may deem reasonably necessary in order to properly provide for traffic control, street and property maintenance, administrative arrangements, police and fire protection, and for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Fees and insurance. 
(1)  All applicants shall pay a nonrefundable fee to cover the administrative costs of processing the permit request upon submission of their application. 
(2)  If the application is pursuant to subsection (d)(1)(A) above, and the application is not exempt from these fees pursuant to subsection (e)(4) below, the applicant, prior to the issuance of a permit, shall: 
a.  Pay the charges for all services to be provided the applicant in accordance with a schedule of service costs established by regulations of the city manager; and 
b.  Procure and maintain in full force and effect during the term of the permit a policy of insurance covering general liability and property damage in an amount commensurate with the risk as determined by the city manager or city manager designee, which policy shall include the city, its boards, officers, agents and employees as additional insureds. 
(3)  No application shall be considered complete until all required fees are paid. 
(4)  Applicants may request an exemption from the service fees and insurance requirements of this section for noncommercial parades, public assemblies and expressive activities subject to the protection of the First Amendment. Within five (5) days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, after receiving a permit request claiming an exemption from the service fees and insurance requirements pursuant to this subsection, the city manager or city manager designee shall notify the applicant if his claim of exemption is denied. The city manager or city manager designee shall grant or deny a claim of exemption under this section with the advice and consent of the city attorney. 
(5)  City-sponsored events are exempt from the requirements of this subsection (e). 
(f)  Issuance or denial of permit. 
(1)  The city manager or city manager designee, upon receipt of an application, shall promptly circulate it to the chief of police, the fire chief, the director of parks, recreation and leisure services if the proposed location is a park, city engineer and the director of public works, or their designees, and to any other city departments with relevant responsibilities. 
(2)  The city manager or city manager designee shall issue the permit within fifteen (15) business days after receipt of the completed application for a parade, public assembly or expressive activity described in subsection (d)(1)(A) above, and within five (5) business days after receipt of an application for a parade, public assembly or expressive activity described in subsection (d)(1)(B) above, if it is determined that the proposed parade, public assembly or expressive activity will not endanger the public health, welfare or safety, based upon its meeting all of the following requirements: 
a.  The time, duration, route and size of the event will not unreasonably interrupt the safe and orderly movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
b.  The time, duration, route and size of the event will not require the diversion of so great a number of police and fire personnel to properly police the line of movement in the areas contiguous thereto so as to impair the normal protection of the remainder of the city: 
c.  The applicant has, where appropriate, designated monitors sufficient to control the orderly conduct of the event in conformity with such permit; 
d.  The conduct of the event will not unduly interfere with the proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to. the remainder of the city, or unreasonably disrupt other public services and protection normally provided to the city; 
e.  The event will not interfere with another event for which a permit has been granted; 
f.  The event proposed will not violate, and will conform with all applicable regulations and laws governing the activities of the proposed event; and 
g.  The applicant has, unless exempted, met all requirements concerning fees and insurance, including any unpaid balance of fees owed by applicant from a prior permitted event and any liability incurred by the city as a direct and proximate result of applicant's failure to obtain and maintain the insurance required hereunder for any prior permitted event. 
(3)  The city manager or city manager designee shall not issue the permit if any information supplied by the applicant is false or intentionally misleading. 
(4)  The city manager or city manager designee shall have the authority to and shall make reasonable efforts to consider an application hereunder which is not filed within the applicable deadlines before the proposed date of the parade, public assembly or expressive activity. The city manager or city manager designee shall waive the deadline if, after due consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the event, the anticipated number of participants and the city services required in connection with the event, and where good cause is otherwise shown, the city manager or city manager designee determines that the waiver of the permit application deadline will not present an undue hazard to public safety. 
(5)  If the city manager or city manager designee denies an application, she shall promptly attempt to call and will promptly mail and/or email to the applicant a notice of her action, stating the reasons for her denial of the permit. 
(6)  If two (2) or more applications are submitted requesting a permit under this section for a parade, public assembly or expressive activity to be used at the same date, time and place, the application first filed shall be granted if it meets the requirements of this section. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall permit the city manager or city manager designee to deny a permit or waive a required fee based upon political, social or religious grounds or reasons or based upon the content of the views expressed. Denial of a permit on such grounds is prohibited. 
(8)  The issuance of a permit under this section shall not excuse the applicant from any other license, inspection or permit requirements that may be otherwise necessary for the proposed event, such as business licenses, right of way occupancy permits, land use permits, special event license, electrical permits, building permits and health permits. 
(g)  Alternative permit. The city manager or city manager designee shall have the authority to modify the route, time and place of a parade, public assembly or expressive activity to facilitate crowd control in the interest of relieving congestion and promoting public safety, provided that the applicant's rights under the First Amendment are not denied thereby. The city manager or city manager designee may temporarily close any street in the city affected by a parade when in her judgment the public safety so requires. 
(h)  Notice to various officials. Immediately upon the issuance of a permit under this section, the city manager or city manager designee shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The chief of police; 
(2)  The fire chief; 
(3)  The city engineer; 
(4)  The director of public works; and 
(5)  The director of parks, recreation and leisure services if the location is a park. 
(i)  Compliance with directions and standards. Every person to whom a permit is issued under this section shall comply with all permit terms and conditions and with all applicable regulations and laws. The parade, public assembly or expressive activity applicant or other person heading or leading the event shall carry the permit upon his person during the conduct of the event, and show the permit when requested to do so. 
(j)  Revocation of permit. The city manager or city manager designee shall have the authority to revoke any permit issued pursuant to this section if any information supplied by the applicant is discovered to be false or intentionally misleading, or if any term, condition, restriction or limitation of the permit has been substantially violated, or if there is any continued violation of the terms, conditions, restrictions or limitations of the permit after the applicant or anyone acting in concert with him is notified of a violation of the permit by an appropriate law enforcement official. 
(k)  Public conduct during events. 
(1)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade, public assembly or expressive activity or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in such an event. 
(2)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a parade except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(3)  Parking on parade route or the area of a public assembly or expressive activity. The city manager or city manager designee shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along the public streets or public rights-of-way constituting a part of the route of a parade or an area in which a public assembly or expressive activity will occur. The city manager or her designee, shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section. 
(l)  Parades in street; relocation of parades from the street to the sidewalk. 
(1)  Parades consisting of thirty (30) or fewer people and no vehicles shall be confined to the sidewalks and shall not enter the street except for the purpose of crossing from one sidewalk to another. 
(2)  Parades for which a permit to parade in the street has been issued shall be converted to sidewalk parades on the order of the police officer in charge at the scene if, at the time designated for the start of the parade in the permit, the officer in charge determines: 
a.  There are no vehicles prepared to participate in the parade; and 
b.  There are thirty (30) or fewer people prepared to participate in the parade. 
(3)  Every person to whom a parade permit is issued and all participants therein shall obey the instructions converting a street parade to a sidewalk parade if the police officer in charge at the scene directs as though those were the terms and conditions of the original written permit. 
(m)  Nonpublic forums. Parades, public assemblies and expressive activities are prohibited in nonpublic forums because they are not compatible with the purpose, facts and circumstances of such properties. However, by special written permit the city manager or city manager designee may allow such an event in a nonpublic forum when under all the facts and circumstances it is determined that the specific event and the specific nonpublic forum are not incompatible. Decisions concerning requests for access to nonpublic forums by special written permit shall be made only with the advice and consent of the city attorney to ensure any denials or restrictions are viewpoint neutral and otherwise consistent with the public forum doctrine under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, as created and revised by the courts. 
(n)  Severability. If any portion of this section is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this section, and such invalid provisions or portions thereof shall be severable. 
(o)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15; Code 1988, § 22-19; Ord. No. 1992-35, § 1, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 1-8-2013; Ord. No. 2017-14 , § 1, 3-14-2017; Ord. No. 2018-64 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-24-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-64 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted July 24, 2018, renamed § 22-12 from "permits for parades and other special events" to "parades, public assemblies and expressive activities; permits."  
Sec. 22-12.1. - Footraces or bicycle races require permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a footrace or bicycle race upon any of the streets of the city or other public places of the city, without obtaining a permit therefor from the city manager. The application for the permit shall be submitted sixty (60) days in advance of the event with the city manager or city manager designee and shall contain information as to the date and time of the race and the public streets and places upon which the race is to be conducted and such other information as shall be required by the city manager or city manager designee. The applicant shall deposit the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for processing the application and in addition thereto a sum sufficient to cover the costs of city personnel, equipment and material which is utilized in connection with conducting the race; provided, however, that said sums shall not be charged to a permit applicant applying to sponsor an event on city-owned property upon which the city collects an entry or admission fee. 
(b)  The city manager shall grant the permit, unless the city manager is of the opinion that such footrace or bicycle race on the streets or other public places in the city will unreasonably interfere with the public use thereof or will tend to disturb or imperil the public safety or the public peace, in which case the permit shall be denied. The city manager may temporarily close any street in the city affected by a footrace or bicycle race when in the city manager's judgment the public safety so requires. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2018-64 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-24-2018)  
Sec. 22-13. - Identification of funeral processions. 
All motor vehicles participating in a funeral procession, when proceeding to any place of burial, shall display use of high beam headlights and hazard lights and such other identification as the city manager may prescribe. 
(Code 1973, § 23-16; Code 1988, § 22-20) 
State Law reference— Identification of cars in funeral procession, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828.  
Sec. 22-14. - Escort services for funeral processions. 
The chief of police is authorized to furnish official escorts for funeral processions. The fee for such escort service shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as requiring such escort service to be furnished by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 23-16.1; Code 1988, § 22-21) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police escort and charge a fee, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828.  
Sec. 22-15. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1973, § 23-17; Code 1988, § 22-22)  
Sec. 22-16. - Washing, polishing or greasing vehicle on highway, sidewalk. 
No person shall, for compensation, wash, polish or grease a vehicle upon a highway or sidewalk, nor shall the owner of a vehicle permit it to be washed, polished or greased, for compensation, upon a highway or sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 23-18; Code 1988, § 22-23)  
Sec. 22-17. - Repair, dismantling or painting motor vehicle on highway or sidewalk. 
No person shall repair, dismantle, paint or repaint any motor vehicle, or any part thereof, on any highway or sidewalk; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed as prohibiting such emergency repairs as may be necessary to render a disabled motor vehicle operative where such disabled motor vehicle is so located as to constitute a traffic hazard. 
(Code 1973, § 23-19; Code 1988, § 22-24)  
Sec. 22-18. - Distribution of handbills, etc., solicitation of contributions, and sale of merchandise or services on highways, public roadways, and medians prohibited. 
(a)  The following acts are prohibited: 
(1)  The distribution of handbills, leaflets, bulletins, literature, advertisements, or similar materials to the occupants of motor vehicles on highways or on public roadways and medians located within the city; 
(2)  The solicitation of any nature from the occupants of motor vehicles on highways or on public roadways and medians located within the city; or 
(3)  The sale of merchandise or services or the attempted sale of merchandise or services to the occupants of motor vehicles on highways or on public roadways and medians located within the city. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of subsection (a) hereof shall be guilty of a traffic infraction. 
( Ord. No. 2010-62, § 1, 7-27-2010)  
Secs. 22-19—22-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL VEHICLE LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city as to vehicle licenses, § 2.02. 
Cross reference— Registration of bicycles, § 5-26 et seq.; registration of pleasure boats, § 6-31 et seq.; licenses generally, ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Authority of city as to vehicle license fee, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 22-71; Ord. No. 1997-18, § 1, 3-25-1997)  
Sec. 22-72. - Levy and purpose of fee. 
(a)  For each year beginning with January 1 thereof and ending with the following December 31 until otherwise changed, there is hereby levied and there shall be collected from every person owning a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, which is normally garaged, stored or parked within the city limits, a license fee on such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer at the rates set forth in this article. In the event it cannot be determined where a vehicle is normally garaged, stored or parked, or if the owner is a student attending an institution of higher education, the situs for the purpose of imposing the license fee shall be the domicile of the owner of the vehicle. 
(b)  The revenues derived from the collection of the license fee shall be for the purpose of providing funds for the operation of the city government, the payment of the city debt, and for other municipal purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 23-465; Code 1988, § 22-72; Ord. No. 1991-75, § 1, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001)  
Sec. 22-73. - Fee additional to other license taxes. 
The license fee imposed by this article shall be in addition to any other city license tax. 
(Code 1973, § 23-466; Code 1988, § 22-73; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001)  
Sec. 22-74. - License fee for vehicles designed and used for transportation of passengers—Schedule. 
(a)  The annual license fee for motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers designed and used for the transportation of passengers upon the streets of the city shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following: 
(1)  For each private passenger car or motor home if the passenger car or motor home weighs 4,000 pounds or less and an additional amount for each passenger car or motor home which weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds; provided, such passenger car or motor home is not used for the transportation of passengers for compensation and is not kept or used for rent or for hire, or is not operated under a lease without a driver. 
(2)  Per 100 pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for a private motor vehicle other than a motorcycle with a normal seating capacity of more than ten adult persons including the driver if such private motor vehicle is not used for the transportation of passengers for compensation and is not kept or used for rent or for hire or is not operated under a lease without a driver. In no case shall the fee be less than the amount set out in appendix A to this Code if the vehicle weighs 4,000 pounds or less or the amount set out in appendix A to this Code if the vehicle weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds. 
(3)  Per 100 pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for a school bus, public or private; provided that in no case shall the fee be less than the amount set out in appendix A to this Code if the vehicle weighs 4,000 pounds or less or the amount set out in appendix A to this Code if the vehicle weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds. 
(4)  For each trailer or semitrailer designed for use as living quarters for human beings. 
(5)  Per 100 pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for each motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer kept or used for rent or for hire or operated under a lease without a driver for the transportation of passengers. An additional fee of as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged if the vehicle weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds. This subsection does not apply to vehicles used as common carriers. 
(6)  For a taxicab or other vehicle kept for rent or hire and operated with a driver for the transportation of passengers and which is operated or should be operated under permits issued by the state corporation commission as required by law and this Code. An additional fee of as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged if the vehicle weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds. This subsection does not apply to vehicles used as common carriers. 
(7)  For a motorcycle, with or without a sidecar. 
(8)  For a bus used exclusively for transportation to and from Sunday School or church, for the purpose of divine worship; provided that if the empty weight of the vehicle exceeds 4,000 pounds. 
(9)  Per 100 pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for other passenger-carrying vehicles. 
(b)  The license fees required by subsections (a)(5) and (a)(6) of this section shall not be required for the operation of any motor vehicle with a normal seating capacity of not more than six adult persons including the driver while used not for profit in transporting persons who, as a common undertaking, bear or agree to bear all or a part of the actual costs of such operation, or while used by a lessee renting or hiring such vehicle for a period of 12 months or longer under a written lease or agreement. Every such motor vehicle shall be treated as a private passenger car for which the annual license fee shall be as prescribed in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 23-473; Code 1988, § 22-74; Ord. No. 1997-32, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001)  
Sec. 22-75. - Same—Weights used in computation. 
In computing the license fees required by section 22-74 to be based upon the weight of the vehicle, the manufacturer's shipping weight or scale weight shall be used. 
(Code 1973, § 23-471; Code 1988, § 22-75; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001)  
Sec. 22-76. - Same—Burden of proof. 
The applicant for the licensing of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer designed and used for the transportation of passengers upon the streets of the city, the fee upon which is set out in section 22-74, shall bear the burden of proof that the vehicle for which licensing is sought is entitled by weight, design and use to be licensed at the rate contended for by the applicant to the commissioner of the revenue or to his authorized agent. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-470, 23-472; Code 1988, § 22-76; Ord. No. 1988-41, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001)  
Sec. 22-77. - Fees for vehicles not displaying current license. 
The annual license fee for motor vehicles not displaying current license plates shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. This fee shall not apply to those individuals exempted from the requirements of displaying such license plates under the provisions of the Code of Virginia or to those motor vehicles in a public dump, in an automobile graveyard, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348, or in the possession of a licensed junk dealer or licensed motor vehicle dealer. This fee shall, in addition, not apply to any vehicle which is stored on private property for a period not in excess of 60 days for the purpose of removing parts for the repair of another vehicle. This fee shall also not apply to any vehicle being held or stored by or at the direction of any governmental authority, to any vehicle owned by a member of the armed forces on active duty, or to any vehicle regularly stored within a structure. 
(Code 1973, § 23-470.1; Code 1988, § 22-77; Ord. No. 1988-59, § 1, 6-14-1988; Ord. No. 1989-83, § 1, 9-26-1989; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005)  
Sec. 22-78. - License fee for vehicles not designed or used for transportation of passengers. 
Except as otherwise provided, the license fee to be paid by the owner of a motor vehicle not designed and used for the transportation of passengers shall be an amount to be determined by the gross weight of the vehicle, or combination of vehicles of which it is a part, when loaded to the maximum capacity for which it is registered and licensed, according to the schedule of taxes herein set forth. For the gross weight for which any such vehicle is registered and licensed, there shall be paid to the city the fee indicated in the following schedule immediately opposite the weight group and under the classification established by the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-711(B) into which such vehicle, or any combination of vehicles of which it is a part, falls when loaded to the maximum capacity for which it is registered and licensed. The fee for a vehicle not designed or used for transportation of passengers, as prescribed herein, shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code if the gross weight is 4,000 pounds or less and as set forth in appendix A to this Code if the gross weight is 4,001 pounds through 6,500 pounds, and as set forth in appendix A to this Code for a motor vehicle with a gross weight of 6,501 pounds through 10,000 pounds. 
(Code 1973, § 23-474; Code 1988, § 22-78; Ord. No. 1989-83, 9-26-1989; Ord. No. 1990-33, § 1, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001)  
Sec. 22-79. - License fees on certain trailers. 
The annual license fee on a one- or two-wheel trailer of a cradle, flatbed or open pickup type which has a body width not greater than the width of the motor vehicle to which it is attached at any time of operation, which is pulled or towed by a passenger car or station wagon, or a pickup or panel truck having an actual gross vehicle weight not exceeding 5,000 pounds, and which is used for carrying property not exceeding 1,500 pounds at any one time, shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. Nothing herein shall be construed as applying to the fee for trailers or semitrailers designed for use as living quarters for human beings, or to those trailers or semitrailers operated under lease or rental agreement, or operated for compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 23-475; Code 1988, § 22-79; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001)  
Sec. 22-80. - Combinations of tractor trucks and semitrailers, etc. 
(a)  In the case of a combination of a truck or tractor truck and a trailer or semitrailer, each vehicle constituting a part of such combination shall be registered as a separate vehicle, but, for the purpose of determining that gross weight group into which any such vehicle falls pursuant to section 22-78, the combination of vehicles of which such vehicle constitutes a part shall be considered a unit, and the aggregate gross weight of the entire combination shall determine such gross weight group. The license fee for a trailer or semitrailer constituting a part of such combination shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code; provided, however, if such trailer or semitrailer exceeds a gross weight of 4,000 pounds such fee shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  In determining the license fee to be paid for a truck or tractor truck constituting a part of such combination the fee shall be assessed on the total gross weight and the tax per 1,000 pounds applicable to the gross weight of the combination when loaded to the maximum capacity for which it is registered and licensed. There shall be no deduction from this fee for the fee on the trailer or semitrailer in the combination. 
(Code 1973, § 23-476; Code 1988, § 22-80; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005)  
Sec. 22-81. - State registration card prerequisite to licensing. 
Each applicant for a license under this article shall present to the commissioner of the revenue his state registration card within 30 days of purchase or relocation to the city before a license application can be issued to him. 
(Code 1973, § 23-467; Code 1988, § 22-81)  
Sec. 22-82. - Date assessment and collection of fee to begin. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall begin to assess and the city treasurer will collect the license fees imposed under this article beginning January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1973, § 23-469; Code 1988, § 22-83; Ord. No. 1994-70, § 1, 6-28-1994; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005)  
Sec. 22-83. - Proration of license fee. 
In the event of the registration with the state department of motor vehicles of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on or after February 1 in any license year, an annual license fee shall be paid which shall be equal to one-twelfth of the applicable annual license fee prescribed in this article, computed to the nearest cent, multiplied by the number of months remaining in the license year. 
(Code 1973, § 23-477; Code 1988, § 22-84; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001)  
Sec. 22-84. - Penalty for late payment of fee. 
If any license fee imposed by this article is not paid by June 5th of any license year, or in case of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer purchased or acquired thereafter, within 30 days of the date of purchase or acquisition of same, there shall be added to such license fee a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the license fee or $10.00, whichever is greater, to be assessed and paid along with the license fee as part thereof. No penalty shall exceed the amount of the unpaid license fee, shall accrue at a rate of ten percent per annum on the first day following the due date and each month thereafter until paid in full. 
(Code 1973, § 23-478; Code 1988, § 22-85; Ord. No. 1994-70, § 2, 6-28-1994; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005; Ord. No. 2005-30, § 1, 4-25-2006)  
Sec. 22-85. - Refund of erroneously paid fee. 
(a)  Any person who feels that he has erroneously paid a license fee required by this article for any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer may, within 90 days of the date on which he paid such fee, make application, in writing, to the commissioner of the revenue for a refund of the amount of such fee erroneously paid. An application that is not timely made will not be considered. 
(b)  If the commissioner of revenue is satisfied that the license fee has been erroneously paid, he shall certify to the city treasurer that such payment was erroneous. The city treasurer is authorized to refund the erroneous payment to the applicant. 
(Code 1973, § 23-479.1; Code 1988, § 22-87; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001)  
Sec. 22-86. - Refund for unused portion of license fee. 
(a)  Any person paying a license fee on a vehicle under the requirements of this article shall be entitled to a refund upon furnishing proof, satisfactory to the commissioner of the revenue, of disposal of the vehicle or of the change of the vehicle's garaging to another jurisdiction. 
(b)  The amount to be refunded to such person shall be one-half of the amount paid if disposed of or garaged in another jurisdiction between January 1 and June 30 of the year for which such license fee was paid and one-fourth of such amount if between July 1 and September 30 of such license year. No refund shall be made after September 30 of such year. 
(c)  Upon satisfaction that a person is entitled to receive a refund, the commissioner of the revenue shall certify the correct refund amount to the city treasurer who shall mail such amount to the person entitled to the refund. 
(Code 1988, § 22-87; Ord. No. 1997-34, § 1, 5-13-1997; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005)  
Sec. 22-87. - License fees for vehicles owned by nonresident military personnel. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue is authorized to remove, without payment any license fee imposed by this article, on any person who is on active military duty and is in this city solely by reason of military orders and whose legal residence or domicile is a state other than Virginia, for each motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer of which he is the sole owner and which is normally garaged, stored or parked within the city limits, provided such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is registered and titled in the commonwealth solely in such person's name or a Virginia license has been purchased for such vehicle. In the event it cannot be determined where such vehicle is normally garaged, stored or parked, situs, for the purpose of this section, shall be the city when the vehicle is registered with the state department of motor vehicles, utilizing a mailing address in the city. 
(b)  The burden of proof shall rest with the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to present sufficient evidence in the form of a current leave and earnings statement to the commissioner of the revenue indicating that the sole owner of the vehicle is on active military duty, is in the city solely by reason of military orders and his legal residence or domicile is a state other than Virginia. If such person fails to do so, he shall be subject to the license fees imposed by this article. 
(c)  The payment of a license fee as provided in this section is essential to the functioning of the vehicle licensing laws of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 23-483; Code 1988, § 22-92; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005)  
Sec. 22-88. - License fee for vehicle owned by disabled veteran. 
No license fee shall be charged for one motor vehicle owned and used personally by any veteran who holds a current state motor vehicle registration card establishing that he has received a disabled veteran's exemption from the department of motor vehicles and has been issued a disabled veteran's motor vehicle license plate as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739. 
(Code 1988, § 22-93; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 2, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005)  
Secs. 22-89—22-119. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Special equipment requirements for vehicles used for sale of ice cream on streets, § 15-102. 
 
Sec. 22-120. - Special permits for traction engines and tractors. 
The city manager may issue special permits limited to such time as he may deem proper, authorizing the operation upon a highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with traverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable tracks. A fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged for each permit at the time of issuance. 
(Code 1973, § 23-398; Code 1988, § 22-120) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14. 
State Law reference— Authority to issue special permits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1046.  
Secs. 22-121—22-236. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD; COMBINATIONS OF VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-237. - Maximum width—Generally. 
(a)  No vehicle, including any load thereon, but excluding the mirror required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1082 and any warning device installed on a school bus pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090, shall exceed a total outside width as follows: 
(1)  Passenger bus operated in the city when authorized under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300: 102 inches. 
(2)  School buses: 100 inches. 
(3)  Vehicles hauling boats or other watercraft: 102 inches. 
(4)  Other vehicles: 102 inches. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a travel trailer as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1900 or a motor home may exceed 102 inches if such excess width is attributable to an appurtenance that extends no more than six inches beyond the body of the vehicle. For the purposes of this subsection, "appurtenance" includes an awning and its support hardware and any appendage that is installed by the manufacturer or dealer intended to be an integral part of a motor home or travel trailer, but does not include any item that is temporarily attached to the exterior of the vehicle by the vehicle's owner for the purposes of transporting the item from one location to another. 
(Code 1973, § 23-520; Code 1988, § 22-237; Ord. No. 1994-72, § 1, 6-28-1994) 
State Law reference— Authority to increase width of certain vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1105.  
Secs. 22-238—22-266. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT FOR OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Permit for oversize and overweight vehicles, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1101, 46.2-1131, 46.2-1135; authority to issue excessive size and weight permits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1139. 
 
Sec. 22-266.1. - Permits for excessive size and weight generally; penalty. 
(a)  Required. A permit shall be required for the operation or movement of any vehicle within the city, whether laden or without load, of a size or weight, exceeding the maximums specified in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq. Application for such permit shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city manager or his designee. The application shall show axle spacing and weight displacement and shall contain sketches indicating the size and placement of the load. Unless otherwise provided herein, the permit shall designate the route to be traversed and contain any other restrictions or conditions deemed necessary by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  Fees. The fee for obtaining such a permit shall be paid at the time of the application and shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following: 
(1)  For each single-trip permit. A single-trip permit shall authorize one trip between the point of origin and the point of destination and shall expire 13 days from the date of issuance. Return trips will be covered under the same permit if requested on the application. The single-trip permit shall be the only permit which may be issued where the operation of the oversize or overweight vehicle requires a police escort. A copy of a valid certificate of automobile liability insurance in the amount of $500,000.00 must be furnished at the time of application. 
(2)  Single-trip house move permit. All such movements shall require an engineering study to be done by the department of public works. The permit fee is due and payable whether a permit is issued or not. 
(3)  Annual blanket-term permit. For the first unit. For each additional unit. A blanket-term permit shall authorize travel over all streets and highways in the city except those that prohibit truck traffic or those that have weight restrictions. The permit shall expire 12 months from the last day of the month issued. A copy of a valid certificate of automobile liability insurance in the amount of $500,000.00 must be furnished at the time of application. Blanket-term permits may be issued for manufactured housing not exceeding a maximum length of 100 feet or width of 14 feet. 
a.  A blanket-term permit shall be issued only for vehicles not exceeding a maximum length of 90 feet or a height of 14 feet or a width of 12 feet or a gross weight of 115,000 pounds, except that a blanket-term permit may be issued for repeated travel over a specified route approved by the city manager or his designee where the vehicle does not exceed a maximum length of 100 feet (manufactured housing, 90 feet) or a height of 14 feet six inches or a width of 12 feet or a gross weight of 115,000 pounds. Holders of blanket permits for manufactured housing must notify the office of the city manager or his designee of intent to move. 
b.  A blanket-term permit shall not be issued to cover any trip which requires a police escort. 
c.  For blanket-term mobile crane permits. 
(4)  Oversized vehicles. For each movement of oversized vehicles with a width exceeding 14 feet or a weight exceeding 115,000 pounds. All such movements shall require an engineering study to be performed by the department of public works. The permit fee is due and payable whether a permit is issued or not. 
(5)  Exceptions to fee assessment. Fees will not be assessed for permits issued to any office or agency of the United States government or the state or its political subdivisions, provided the vehicle for which the permit is issued is registered in the name of such government, its agency or political subdivision. 
(c)  Surety required. A surety bond may be required upon individual evaluation of oversized or overweight movements. The amount of the surety to be given will be determined based on the estimated cost of restoring the city's infrastructure should damage occur during the move. Sureties must be posted with the department of public works by either letter of credit, liability bond, cash or cashier's check. 
(d)  Costs of engineering studies. The estimated costs of any engineering studies for inspections determined to be necessary by the department of public works shall be paid upon filing an application for a permit. Any overage will be refunded within 30 days of the completion of the move. If the estimated engineering fee is not sufficient to cover the costs, the applicant shall pay the difference within 30 days of the billing date. No refund of the cost of an engineering study shall be made where, for any reason, the permit applied for is not issued. 
(e)  Permit in vehicle. Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be available for inspection by any law enforcement or by the city manager or his designee. 
(f)  Reduced speed. Each vehicle, when loaded according to the provisions of a permit issued under this section, shall be operated at a reduced speed. The reduced speed limit shall be ten miles per hour slower than the legal speed limit in 55, 45 and 35 miles per hour speed limit zones. 
(g)  Conformity to legal limits. No permit shall be issued for any vehicle or load which reasonably can be reduced to the limitations of the size and weight contained in Code of Virginia, so as not to require a permit under this section. The weight and size must be reduced to the absolute minimum and loaded in such a manner that will most nearly conform to legal limits. 
(h)  Exemption. No permit shall be required under this section for vehicles exceeding maximum size requirements where such vehicles are exempt from size limitations under the Code of Virginia. 
(i)  Violation; penalty. It shall be a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the terms of the permit or of this section. In addition, the permit may be revoked for any such violation, upon conviction thereof, absent a showing that the violation was based upon emergency or extenuating circumstances. A permit shall not be reissued within six months of revocation. 
(Code 1988, § 22-266.1; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 3, 8-27-2002) 
State Law reference— Permit for oversize and overweight vehicles, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1101, 46.2-1131, 46.2-1135; authority to issue excessive size and weight permits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1139.  
Sec. 22-266.2. - Police escort for certain overweight and oversize vehicles. 
Whenever a special permit is issued by city manager or his designee for overweight and oversize vehicles pursuant to this chapter or to the Code of Virginia, and whenever it is determined that a police escort for such vehicles is required, a fee in the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code of plus the actual costs of each police officer and equipment so required shall be charged to the holder of such special permit. A police escort shall be required for movement of 14 feet or greater width loads on all two-lane roads. 
(Code 1988, § 22-266.2; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 3, 8-27-2002)  
Sec. 22-267. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, adopted July 24, 2012, repealed § 22-267, which pertained to vehicles hauling cargo in seagoing containers and derived from Code 1973, § 23-528; Code 1988, § 22-267; and Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 2002.  
Sec. 22-268. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, adopted July 24, 2012, repealed § 22-268, which pertained to concrete mixers and derived from Code 1973, § 23-528; Code 1988, § 22-268; Ord. No. 1994-72, § 1, adopted June 28, 1994; and Ord. No. 2002-56, § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 2002.  
Sec. 22-268.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, adopted July 24, 2012, repealed § 22-268.1, which pertained to vehicles hauling excavated material and derived from Code 1988, § 22-268.1; and Ord. No. 2002-56, § 3, adopted Aug. 27, 2002.  
Sec. 22-269. - Permit to be carried in vehicle; violation of terms and conditions. 
Every permit issued under this division shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any officer. It shall be a traffic infraction for any person to violate any of the terms or conditions of such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 23-529; Code 1988, § 22-270) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1139(D).  
Sec. 22-270. - Weighing vehicles; procedure; shifting loads; unloading excess load; weighing fee; certificate as to accuracy of scales admissible in evidence; penalties. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer, having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful, is authorized to weigh the load and the vehicle. If the place where the vehicle is stopped is ten road miles or less from a permanent weighing station, the officer may, and upon demand of the driver shall, require the vehicle to proceed to such station. If the distance to the nearest permanent weighing station is more than ten road miles such vehicle may be weighed by wheel load weighers. Any driver who fails or unreasonably refuses to drive his vehicle to such permanent weighing station or such scales or wheel load weighers upon the request and direction of the officer to do so shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. The penalty for such violation shall be in addition to any other penalties prescribed for exceeding the maximum weight permitted or for any other violation. 
(b)  In the event of such failure or unreasonable refusal, where the officer has reason to believe the vehicle is overweight, the officer may use whatever reasonable means are available to have the vehicle weighed, including the employment of a tow truck to move the vehicle to the weighing area. He may also use whatever means are necessary to reload the vehicle if the load is intentionally dumped. In such a case, any expenses incurred in having the vehicle weighed may be taxed as costs to be imposed upon the operator who failed or unreasonably refused to drive his vehicle to such weighing area, when he has been convicted of such failure or refusal and an overweight violation. In all cases where such failure or refusal or overweight charges are dismissed, payment shall be made from highway funds. 
(c)  Should the officer find that the weight of any vehicle and its load is greater than that permitted by law or that the weight of the load carried in or on such vehicle is greater than that which the vehicle is licensed to carry under the provisions of this title, he may require the driver to unload, at the nearest place where the property unloaded may be stored or transferred to another vehicle, such portion of the load as may be necessary to decrease the gross weight of the vehicle to the maximum therefor permitted by this title. Any property so unloaded shall be stored or cared for by the owner or operator of the overweight vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator. 
(d)  However, notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1122—46.2-1127, should the officer find that the gross weight of the vehicle and its load is within limits permitted under this title and does not exceed the limit for which the vehicle is registered, but that the axle weight of any axle of the vehicle exceeds that permitted under this title, the driver shall be allowed one hour to shift his load within or on that same vehicle in order to bring the axle weight within proper limits. However, liquidated damages shall be assessed under section 22-274 based on the weight prior to shifting the load, unless the load can be successfully shifted to bring the vehicle's axle weight within limits permitted under this title by: (i) sliding the axle of the semitrailer or the fifth wheel of the tractor truck, (ii) repositioning the load if the motor vehicle is transporting off-the-road mobile construction equipment, or (iii) adjusting the load if the vehicle is operating on noninterstate highways and qualifies for weight extensions pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1129. Such load shifting shall be performed at the site where the vehicle was weighed and found to exceed allowable axle weight limits. No such load shifting shall be allowed if such load is required to be placarded as defined in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1450 and consists of hazardous material as defined in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400. 
(e)  If the driver of an overloaded vehicle is convicted, forfeits bail, or purchases an increased license as a result of such weighing, the court in addition to all other penalties shall assess and collect a weighing fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code from the owner or operator of the vehicle and shall forward such fee to the city treasurer. Upon receipt of the fee, the city treasurer shall allocate the same to the fund appropriated for the administration and maintenance of the police department. 
(f)  In any court or legal proceedings in which any question arises as to the calibration or accuracy of any such scales at permanent weighing stations or wheel load weighers, a certificate, executed and signed under oath by the inspector calibrating or testing such device as to its accuracy as well as to the accuracy of the test weights used in such test, and stating the date of such test, type of test and results of testing, shall be admissible when attested by one such inspector who executed and signed it as evidence of the facts therein stated and the results of such testing. 
(Code 1988, § 22-271; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 3, 8-27-2002)  
Sec. 22-271. - Special processing provisions for overweight violations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all violations of any weight limit as provided in this article or any permit issued in accordance with this article or with the Code of Virginia shall be processed in the following manner: 
(1)  The officer charging the violation shall serve a citation on the operator of the overweight vehicle. The citation shall be directed to the owner, operator, or other person responsible for the overweight violation as determined by the officer. Service of the citation on the vehicle operator shall constitute service of process upon the owner, operator, or other person charged with the weight violation. 
(2)  The officer charging the violation shall cause the citation to be delivered or mailed by first-class mail to the state department of transportation within 24 hours after it is served. 
(3)  The owner, operator, or other person charged with the weight violation shall, within 21 days after the citation is served upon the vehicle operator, either make full payment to the department of transportation of the civil penalty, liquidated damages, weighing fee, and processing fee as stated on the citation, or deliver to the department a written notice of his election to contest the overweight charge in court. 
(4)  Failure of the owner, operator, or other person charged with the weight violation to timely deliver to the department of transportation either payment in full of the uncontested civil penalty, liquidated damages, weighing fee, and processing fee or a notice of contest of the weight violation shall cause the department to issue an administrative order of assessment against such person. A copy of the order shall be sent by first-class mail to the person charged with the weight violation. Any such administrative order shall have the same effect as a judgment for liquidated damages entered by a general district court. 
(5)  Upon timely receipt of a notice of contest of an overweight charge, the department of transportation shall: 
a.  Forward the citation to the general district court named in the citation and 
b.  Send by first-class mail to the person charged with the weight violation, and to the officer who issued the citation, confirmation that the citation has been forwarded to the court for trial. 
(6)  Notices and pleadings may be served by first-class mail sent to the address shown on the citation as the address of the person charged with the weight violation or, if none is shown, to the address of record for the person to whom the vehicle is registered. 
(7)  An alleged weight violation that is contested shall be tried as a civil case. The attorney for the city shall represent the interests of the city. The disposition of the case shall be recorded in an appropriate order, a copy of which shall be sent to the department of transportation in lieu of any record that may be otherwise required by the Code of Virginia. If judgment is for the city, payment shall be made to the court and forwarded to the city treasurer and allocated to the fund appropriated for construction and maintenance of city streets. 
(Code 1988, § 22-271.1; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 3, 8-27-2002) 
State Law reference— Processing overweight vehicle violations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1133.  
Sec. 22-272. - Special overweight seizure provisions; penalty. 
(a)  Any law enforcement officer authorized to serve process or weigh vehicles under the provisions of this article may hold an overweight vehicle without an attachment summons or court order, but only for such time as is reasonably necessary to promptly petition for an attachment summons to attach the vehicle. 
(b)  After finding reasonable cause for the issuance of an attachment summons, the judicial officer conducting the hearing shall inform the operator of the vehicle of his option to either pay the liquidated damages, civil penalty, weighing fee, and processing fee, or contest the charge through the attachment proceeding. If the operator chooses to make payment, he shall do so to the judicial officer who shall transmit the citation, liquidated damages, civil penalty, weighing fee, and processing fee to the city treasurer for use by the city for the construction and maintenance of streets within the city. 
(c)  The city shall not be required to post bond in order to attach a vehicle pursuant to this section. The officer authorized to hold the overweight vehicle pending a hearing on the attachment petition shall also be empowered to execute the attachment summons if issued. Any bond for the retention of the vehicle or for release of the attachment shall be given in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 8.01-553 except that the bond shall be taken by a judicial officer. The judicial officer shall return the bond to the clerk of the appropriate court in place of the officer serving the attachment as otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, § 8.01-554. 
(d)  In the event the civil penalty, liquidated damages, weighing fee, and processing fee are not paid in full, or no bond is given by or for the person charged with the weight violation, the vehicle involved in the weight violation shall be stored in a secure place, as may be designated by the owner or operator of the vehicle. If no place is designated, the officer executing the attachment summons shall designate the place of storage. The owner or operator shall be afforded the right of unloading and removing the cargo from the vehicle. The risk and cost of the storage shall be borne by the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
(e)  Whenever an attachment summons is issued for a weight violation, the court shall forward to the state department of transportation both a copy of the order disposing of the case and the weight violation citation prepared by the officer but not served. 
(f)  Upon notification of the judgment or administrative order entered for such weight violation and notification of the failure of such person to satisfy the judgment or order, in addition to the state department of transportation, any law enforcement officer shall thereafter deny the offending person the right to operate a motor vehicle upon the highways of the commonwealth until the judgment or order has been satisfied. 
(g)  When informed that the right to operate the motor vehicle has been denied, the driver shall drive the motor vehicle to a nearby location off the public highways and not move it or permit it to be moved until such judgment or order has been satisfied. Failure by the driver to comply with this provision shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(h)  All costs incurred by the city and all judgments, if any, against the city due to action taken pursuant to this section shall be paid from the fund into which liquidated damages are paid. 
(i)  Police officers and all other law enforcement officers are vested with the same powers with respect to the enforcement of this article as they have with respect to the enforcement of the criminal laws of the city or of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1988, § 22-271.2; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 3, 8-27-2002) 
State Law reference— Seizure provisions for overweight vehicle violations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1134.  
Sec. 22-273. - Procedures for issuing and serving process in overweight vehicle cases. 
(a)  Any officer authorized to enforce overweight vehicle laws may issue a citation for a violation of such laws. Such officer may also serve an attachment summons issued by a judge or magistrate in connection with a weight violation. 
(b)  Service of any such citation shall be made upon the driver of the motor vehicle involved in the violation. Such service on the driver shall have the same legal force and validity as if served within the commonwealth personally upon the owner, operator, or other person charged with the weight violation, whether such owner, operator, or other person charged is a resident or nonresident. 
(Code 1988, § 22-271.3; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 3, 8-27-2002) 
State Law reference— Processing overweight vehicle violations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1133.  
Sec. 22-274. - Liquidated damages for violation of weight limits; powers of enforcement officers; forfeiture of vehicle and cargo. 
(a)  Any person violating any weight limit as provided in this article or in any overweight vehicle permit issued by the state department of transportation or by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed liquidated damages. The amount of those damages shall be: 
Excess Weight Over the Prescribed or Permitted Axle Weight Limits 	Assessed Amount Per Pound 	Excess Weight Over the Prescribed or Permitted Gross Weight Limit 	Assessed Amount Per Pound 
4,000 pounds or less 	$0.01 per pound 	4,000 pounds or less 	$0.01 per pound 
4,001 to 8,000 pounds 	$0.10 per pound 	4,001 to 8,000 pounds 	$0.05 per pound 
8,001 to 12,000 pounds 	$0.20 per pound 	8,001 to 12,000 pounds 	$0.10 per pound 
12,001 pounds or more 	$0.30 per pound 	12,001 pounds or more 	$0.15 per pound 
 
All gross permit violations shall be assessed $0.20 per pound over the permitted weight limit. 
(b)  If a person has no prior violations under the motor vehicle weight laws, and the excess weight does not exceed 2,500 pounds, the general district court may waive the liquidated damages against such person. Except as provided by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1138, such assessment shall be entered by the court or by the department of transportation as a judgment for the city, the entry of which shall constitute a lien upon the overweight vehicle. Except as provided by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1138, such sums shall be paid to the department or collected by the attorney for the city and forwarded to the city treasurer and allocated to the fund appropriated for the construction and maintenance of city streets. 
(c)  If the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds lawful limits by at least 25 percent but no more than 50 percent, the amount of the liquidated damages shall be two times the amount provided for in the foregoing provisions of this section; if the gross weight of the vehicle exceeds lawful limits by more than 50 percent, the amount of the liquidated damages shall be three times the amount provided for in the foregoing provisions of this section. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to pickup or panel trucks. 
(Code 1988, § 22-271.4; Ord. No. 2002-56, § 3, 8-27-2002) 
State Law reference— Liquidated damages for overweight vehicle violations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1135.  
Secs. 22-275—22-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Operation of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-291. - Bicycles, etc.; riding on righthand side of road; two or more abreast. 
Every person riding a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped or motorized push scooter on any street shall keep as close as practicable to the righthand side of the roadway and shall not ride two or more abreast. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, shall move into a single file formation as quickly as practicable when being overtaken from the rear by a faster moving vehicle, and, on a laned roadway, shall ride in a single lane. A person riding a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped shall not travel between two lanes of traffic moving in the same direction, except where one lane is a separate turn lane or a mandatory turn lane. 
(Code 1988, § 22-291.1; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 2, 11-22-2005) 
State Law reference— Use of right side of road, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-802.  
Sec. 22-292. - Mopeds, motorized push scooters; passengers. 
No moped or motorized push scooter shall be used to carry more persons at one time other than the number of persons for which it was designed or equipped. A violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. 
(Code 1988, § 22-325.1; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 2, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 22-293. - Mopeds, motorized push scooters; use of handlebars; earphones. 
No person shall ride a moped or motorized push scooter upon any street without having at least one hand upon the handlebars. No person shall ride a moped or motorized push scooter upon any street while wearing earphones in one or in both ears. 
(Code 1988, § 22-328.1; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 2, 11-22-2005) 
State Law reference— Hands on handlebar, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-906; use of earphones, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1078.  
Sec. 22-294. - Limitation on use of certain streets by trucks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor truck of gross weight of 10,000 pounds or over (empty or loaded) upon any of the following named streets in the city, except for the purposes of receiving loads or making deliveries on portions of the streets listed below: 
Arlington Place between Airline Boulevard and Frederick Boulevard. 
Belle Street between Romanesque Street and Phillips Avenue. 
Bellhaven Road between Deep Creek Boulevard and Finchley Road. 
Booker Street between Constitution Avenue and Industrial Avenue. 
Brighton Street between Airline Boulevard and Frederick Boulevard. 
Broad Street between Bayview Boulevard and Commerce Street. 
Castelwood Road between Finchley Road and Endicotte Road. 
Cavalier Boulevard between Chesapeake city limits and Rapidan Street. 
Chancellor Street between Douglas Avenue and Wool Avenue. 
Chautauqua Avenue between Detroit Street and Commerce Street. 
City Park Avenue between Portsmouth Boulevard and Airline Boulevard. 
Cleveland Street between Lee Avenue and Mount Vernon Avenue. 
Cutherell Street between Romanesque Street and High Street. 
Dartmouth Street between Airline Boulevard and Frederick Boulevard. 
Derby Road between Finchley Road and Endicotte Road. 
Douglas Avenue between Hartford Street and Commerce Street. 
Douglas Avenue between Portland Street and North Street. 
Douglas Avenue between Watson Street and Chancellor Street. 
Dunkirk Street between Town Point Road and Tyre Neck Road. 
Elmhurst Lane between Airline Boulevard and Portsmouth Boulevard. 
Evergreen Place between Portsmouth Boulevard and Deep Creek Boulevard. 
Fayette Street between Effingham Street and Elm Avenue. 
Finchley Road between Bellhaven Road and Kelly Drive. 
Florida Avenue between Bayview Boulevard and Commerce Street. 
Florida Avenue between Portland Avenue and London Boulevard. 
Freedom Avenue between Rapida Street and Victory Boulevard. 
Gothic Street between Turnpike Road and Watson Street. 
Grayson Street between Orange Street and High Street. 
Greenwood Drive between Rotunda Street and Victory Boulevard. 
Gust Lane between Victory Boulevard and Claremont Drive. 
Hamilton Avenue between Portland Street and North Street. 
Hartford Street between High Street and Mount Vernon Avenue. 
Harvey Street between Arthur Street and the northern terminus of Harvey Street. 
High Street between Effingham Street and Virginia Avenue. 
Hodges Ferry Road between Cherokee Road and Portsmouth Boulevard. 
Howard Street between Turnpike Road and Wool Avenue. 
Jefferson Street between Effingham Street and Elm Street. 
Kelly Drive between Deep Creek Boulevard and Raven Street. 
LaSalle Avenue between Gilmerton Avenue and Duke Street. 
Leslie Drive between Reese Drive and Cedar Lane. 
Lincoln Street between Effingham Street and Eighth Street. 
London Boulevard between Effingham Street and Crawford Street. 
Maple Avenue between Gilmerton Avenue to Duke Street. 
Maryland Avenue between Bayview Boulevard and south of Woodrow Street. 
Mayflower Road between Portsmouth Boulevard and Hodges Ferry Road. 
Mount Vernon Avenue between Bayview Boulevard and London Boulevard. 
North Street between Cambridge Avenue and Mount Vernon Avenue. 
North Street between Green Street and Crawford Street. 
Palmer Street between Effingham Street and Eighth Street. 
Phillips Avenue between Turnpike Road and Watson Street. 
Potomac Avenue between Vermont Avenue and Glasgow Street. 
Prentis Avenue between Gilmerton Avenue and Race Street. 
Raven Street between Kelly Drive and Hanbury Avenue. 
Reese Drive between Portsmouth Boulevard and Western Branch Boulevard. 
Romanesque Street between Ash Street and Belle Street. 
Romanesque Street between Turnpike Road and Cutherell Street. 
Scott Street between Fauquier Avenue and Airline Boulevard. 
Tyre Neck Road between West Norfolk Road and Dunkirk Street. 
Vermont Avenue between Potomac Avenue and Glasgow Street. 
Watson Street between High Street and Hamilton Avenue. 
Wesley Street between Mount Vernon Avenue and Chautauqua Avenue. 
West Norfolk Road between Churchland Boulevard and Cedar Lane. 
Western Branch Boulevard between Rodman Avenue and High Street. 
Wool Avenue between High Street and Howard Street. 
(Code 1973, § 23-13; Code 1988, § 22-329; Ord. No. 1990-87, § 1, 8-14-1990; Ord. No. 1991-102, § 1, 11-26-1991; Ord. No. 1995-30, §§ 1, 2, 3-28-1995; Ord. No. 1997-51, § 1, 8-12-1997; Ord. of 10-13-2009 , § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1304.  
Sec. 22-295. - Through truck routes. 
All motor trucks 36,000 pounds or over (empty or loaded) passing through the city shall be operated only on those streets designated on the approved through truck route map on file with the traffic engineer, which map is hereby incorporated by reference as a part of this section. Such through truck routes shall not be changed except by amendment hereto. 
(Code 1973, § 23-14; Code 1988, § 22-330) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate through truck routes, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1304.  
Secs. 22-296—22-390. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RECKLESS DRIVING; SPEED 
 
Sec. 22-391. - General rule as to reckless driving. 
Irrespective of the maximum speeds herein provided, any person who drives a vehicle, including a motor vehicle, bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped or motorized push scooter upon a highway recklessly or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger life, limb, or property of any person shall be guilty of reckless driving. 
(Code 1973, § 23-66; Code 1988, § 22-391; Ord. No. 1992-58, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 1, 11-22-2005) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-852.  
Sec. 22-392. - Specific instances of reckless driving. 
A person shall be guilty of reckless driving who shall: 
(1)  Drive a vehicle which is not under proper control or which has inadequate or improperly adjusted brakes upon any highway of this city. 
(2)  While driving a vehicle, overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction upon or approaching the crest of a grade or upon or approaching a curve in the highway where the driver's view along the highway is obstructed, except where the overtaking vehicle is being operated on a highway having two or more designated lanes of roadway for each direction of travel or on a designated one-way street or highway. 
(3)  Drive a vehicle when it is so loaded or when there are in the front seat such number of persons as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(4)  Pass or attempt to pass two other vehicles abreast, moving in the same direction, except on highways having separate roadways of three or more lanes for each direction of travel, or on designated one-way streets or highways; however, this subsection shall not apply to a motor vehicle passing two other vehicles, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when one or both of such other vehicles is a bicycle or moped; nor shall this subsection apply to a bicycle or moped passing two other vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Drive any motor vehicle, including any motorcycle, so as to travel abreast of another motor vehicle in a lane designed for one vehicle, or drive any motor vehicle, including any motorcycle, so as to travel abreast of any other vehicle traveling in a lane designed for one vehicle. However, this subsection shall not apply to any validly authorized parade, motorcade or motorcycle escort, nor shall it apply to a motor vehicle traveling in the same lane of traffic as a bicycle or moped. 
(6)  Overtake or pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any steam, diesel or electrical railway crossing with the words "School Bus" in black letters at least eight inches high on the front and rear thereof. Only school buses which are painted yellow and equipped with the required lettering and warning devices shall be identified as school buses. 
(7)  Fail to give adequate and timely signals of intention to turn, partly turn, slow down or stop. 
(8)  Exceed a reasonable speed under the circumstances and traffic conditions existing at the time regardless of any posted speed limit. 
(9)  Drive a motor vehicle upon the highways of this city: 
a.  At a speed of 20 miles per hour or more in excess of the applicable maximum speed limit where the applicable speed limit is 30 miles per hour or less; 
b.  At a speed of 60 miles per hour or more where the applicable maximum speed limit is 35 miles per hour; 
c.  At a speed of 20 miles per hour or more in excess of the applicable maximum speed limit where the applicable maximum speed limit is 40 miles per hour or more; or 
d.  In excess of 80 miles per hour regardless of the posted speed limit. 
(10)  Fail to bring his vehicle to a stop immediately before entering a highway from a side road when there is traffic approaching upon such highway within 500 feet of such point of entrance unless a "Yield Right-Of-Way" sign is posted or, where such sign is posted, fail upon entering such highway to yield the right-of-way to the driver of a vehicle approaching on such highway from either direction. 
(11)  Drive or operate any automobile or other motor vehicle upon any driveway or premises of a church, or school, or of any recreational facilities or of any business property open to the public, or on the premises of an industrial establishment providing parking space for customers, patrons or employees, or upon any street or highway under construction or not yet open to the public, recklessly or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. 
(Code 1973, § 23-66; Code 1988, § 22-392; Ord. No. 1991-75, § 2, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 1992-58, § 1, 6-23-1992) 
State Law reference— Reckless driving in parking lots, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-864.  
Sec. 22-393. - Penalty for reckless driving under section 22-391 or 22-392. 
(a)  Every person convicted of reckless driving under section 22-391 or 22-392 shall for the first violation be punished for a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties for reckless driving prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, if any person is convicted of reckless driving under any section referred to therein, the court may suspend any license issued to such convicted person under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300 et seq. for a period of not less than ten days nor more than six months, and such court shall require the convicted person to surrender his license so suspended to the court where it will be disposed of. If the person so convicted has not obtained the license required by such chapter, or is a nonresident, the court may direct in the judgment of conviction that such person shall not, for a period of not less than ten days or more than six months as may be prescribed in the judgment, drive or operate any motor vehicle in the commonwealth. The court or the clerk of court shall transmit the license to the commissioner of the state department of motor vehicles along with the report of the conviction required to be sent to the department of motor vehicles. 
(c)  When any person is convicted of reckless driving as provided for in section 22-392, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the driver's license of such person may be suspended by the court for a period of not less than 60 days nor more than six months. In case of conviction, the court shall order the surrender of the license to the court where it shall be disposed of in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. When the conviction is a second conviction which would require revocation under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-389, the court shall suspend the driver's license of such person and thereupon transmit the same to the state department of motor vehicles as provided by law. If such person so convicted has not obtained a license required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300 et seq. or is a nonresident, such court shall direct in the judgment of conviction that such person shall not drive or operate any motor vehicle in the commonwealth for a period of not less than 60 days nor more than six months. 
(Code 1973, § 23-66; Code 1988, § 22-395; Ord. No. 1989-83, § 1, 9-26-1989; Ord. No. 1990-69, § 1, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1990-118, § 1, 11-13-1990; Ord. No. 1995-32, § 1, 3-28-1995) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Penalties for reckless driving, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-392, 46.2-393, 46.2-868.  
Sec. 22-394. - Finding accused guilty of improper driving rather than reckless driving. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, upon the trial of any person charged with a violation thereof where the degree of culpability is slight, the court, in its discretion, may find the accused not guilty of reckless driving but guilty of improper driving. Improper driving shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1973, § 23-66; Code 1988, § 22-397; Ord. No. 1990-69, § 1, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-869.  
Sec. 22-395. - Maximum speed limits. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, the maximum speed limits on highways of this city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fifty-five miles per hour on the interstate system of highways or other limited access highways with divided roadways if the vehicle is a passenger motor vehicle, passenger bus, United States post office bus, pickup or panel truck or a motorcycle; and 55 miles per hour on such highways if the vehicle is a truck, road tractor, tractor-truck, or combination of vehicles designed to transport property, or is a motor vehicle being used to tow a vehicle designed for self-propulsion or a house trailer. 
(2)  Fifty-five miles per hour on nonlimited-access highways having four or more lanes if the vehicle is a passenger motor vehicle, passenger bus, United States post office bus, pickup or panel truck or a motorcycle; and 55 miles per hour on such highway if the vehicle is a truck, road tractor, tractor-truck, or combination of vehicles designed to transport property, or is a motor vehicle being used to tow a vehicle designed for self-propulsion or a house trailer, provided that for such highways such speed has been prescribed by the city manager after an engineering and traffic investigation. On any highway where such speed is prescribed, the speed shall be plainly indicated upon the highway by signs and, where the speed limit is indicated by posted signs, there shall be prima facie presumption that such engineering and traffic investigation was made. 
(3)  Fifty-five miles per hour on highways not included in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section if the vehicle is a passenger motor vehicle, passenger bus, United States post office bus, pickup or panel truck or a motorcycle; and 45 miles per hour on such highways if the vehicle is a truck, road tractor, tractor-truck, or combination of vehicles designed to transport property, or is a motor vehicle being used to tow a vehicle designed for self-propulsion or a house trailer. 
(4)  Thirty-five miles per hour on any highway other than an interstate highway if the vehicle is being used as a school bus to carry children and 45 miles per hour on interstate highways; provided, however, that for any such vehicle which neither takes on nor discharges children between its point of origin and point of destination, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(5)  Forty-five miles per hour on any highway if the vehicle or combination of vehicles is operating under a special permit issued by the state highway and transportation board in accordance with Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1112 and 46.2-1139. The state highway and transportation board may, however, prescribe a speed limit of less than 45 miles per hour on any permit issued in accordance with Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1112 and 46.2-1139. 
(6)  Twenty-five miles per hour between portable signs, tilt-over signs or fixed blinking signs placed in or along any highway bearing the word "school." Such word shall indicate that school children are present in the vicinity. Any signs erected under this subsection shall be placed not more than 300 feet from the limits of the school property or crossing in the vicinity of the school which is used by children going to and from the school; provided that such crossings are not more than 500 yards from the limits of the school property and the city council approves the crossing for such signs. It shall be the duty of the principal or chief administrative officer of each school or some responsible person designated by the school board, preferably not a classroom teacher, to place such portable signs in the highway at a point not more than 600 feet from the limits of the school property and remove such signs when their presence is no longer required by this subsection. Such portable signs, tilt-over signs or fixed blinking signs shall be placed in a position plainly visible to vehicular traffic approaching from either direction but shall not be placed so as to obstruct the roadway. Such portable signs, tilt-over signs or blinking signs shall be in a position or be turned on for 30 minutes preceding regular school hours and for 30 minutes thereafter and during such other times as the presence of children on such school property or going to and from school reasonably requires a special warning to motorists. 
(7)  Twenty-five miles per hour on highways in a business or residential district, except upon interstate or other limited-access highways with divided roadways. 
(8)  Thirty-five miles per hour on highways in the city, except upon interstate or other limited-access highways with divided roadways and except in business or residence districts. 
(9)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)(1), (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section, the speed limits for passenger motor vehicles while towing utility, camping or boat trailers not exceeding an actual gross weight of 2,500 pounds shall be the same as that for passenger motor vehicles. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the city manager may decrease the speed limits set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section and may increase or decrease the speed limits set forth in subsections (a)(6) through (a)(8) of this section; and he may establish differentiated speed limits for daytime and nighttime by decreasing for nighttime driving the speed limits set forth in subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section and by increasing for daytime or decreasing for nighttime the speed limits set forth in subsections (a)(6) through (a)(8) of this section. Such increased or decreased speed limits and such differentiated speed limits for daytime and nighttime driving shall be effective only when prescribed after a traffic engineer and traffic investigation and when indicated upon the highway by signs. 
(Code 1973, § 23-105; Code 1988, § 22-398; Ord. No. 1989-83, 9-26-1989) 
Cross reference— Speed limit in city cemeteries, § 9-51; speed limit in parks, § 25-115. 
State Law reference— Maximum speed, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-870.  
Sec. 22-396. - Minimum speed restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(b)  Whenever the city manager shall determine on the basis of a traffic engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any part of a highway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the city manager may determine and declare a minimum speed limit to be set forth on signs posted on such highway below which no person shall drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law; provided, however, that such minimum speed limit shall not apply to a school bus carrying children. 
(Code 1973, § 23-106; Code 1988, § 22-399) 
State Law reference— Authority to alter speed limits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-878.  
Sec. 22-397. - Slow-moving vehicles on Churchland Bridge prohibited. 
(a)  No slow-moving motor vehicle shall be driven across the Churchland Bridge between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. For the purposes of this section "slow-moving motor vehicle" shall be taken to mean any motor vehicle which is not designed to or which is not able to attain a speed of 30 miles per hour. 
(b)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at any time on the Churchland Bridge at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(Code 1973, § 23-107; Code 1988, § 22-400)  
Sec. 22-398. - Mopeds, motorized push scooters; operation on certain streets and highways; prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  Mopeds shall not be operated on any street, highway, or public vehicular area at a speed in excess of 35 miles per hour. Any person who operates a moped at a speed in excess of 35 miles per hour shall be deemed, for all the purposes of this chapter, to be operating a motorcycle. 
(b)  Operation of mopeds is prohibited on any Interstate Highway System component. 
(c)  Violation of this subsection shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of no more than $50.00. 
(Code 1988, § 22-400.1; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 2, 11-22-2005; Ord. No. 2013-20, §§ 1, 2, 4-23-2013)  
Secs. 22-399—22-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ONE-WAY STREETS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-451. - When provisions effective. 
The provisions of division 2 of this article shall become effective as to any one-way street when signs have been provided therefor as prescribed in section 22-452. 
(Code 1973, § 23-158; Code 1988, § 22-451)  
Sec. 22-452. - Authority of city manager to erect signs. 
The city manager is authorized and directed to provide such signs on the one-way streets enumerated and designated in division 2 of this article as will apprise an ordinarily observant person of such one-way streets. 
(Code 1973, § 23-159; Code 1988, § 22-452)  
Sec. 22-453. - Permits for exceptions. 
When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager, or his duly authorized representative, that the strict enforcement of the provisions of division 2 of this article will cause an unreasonable hardship on some particular person relative to the loading or unloading of trucks or other vehicles on such one-way streets, the city manager, or his duly authorized representative, is authorized to issue a special permit to such person permitting a variance from the provisions of division 2 of this article. Any such special permit shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager, or his duly authorized representative, that the granting of such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience to the person who seek such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 23-160; Code 1988, § 22-453)  
Secs. 22-454—22-470. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-18, § 3, adopted Mar. 23, 2010, repealed Div. 2. Former Div. 2, §§ 22-471—22-509, pertained to enumerations and derived from Code 1973, §§ 23-166—23-194.2; Code 1988, §§ 22-471—22-509; Ord. No. 1993-88, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 1993; Ord. No. 1995-30, § 3, adopted Mar. 28, 1995; and Ord. No. 2005-26, § 1, adopted Apr. 12, 2005. 
 
Secs. 22-471—22-535. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MALL AND MALL TRANSIT STREETS 
 
Sec. 22-536. - Established. 
For the purpose of regulating traffic pursuant to the police power of the city and to ensure the safety of pedestrian traffic, the following streets are hereby designated mall and mall transit streets, subject to the provisions of this article: 
MALL AND LIMITED-ACCESS STREETS 
(1)  Middle Street between High Street and King Street. 
(2)  King Street for a distance of 355 feet east of the centerline of Middle Street Mall and 230 feet west of said centerline. 
MALL TRANSIT STREETS 
(1)  Harbor Street between Harbor Court and Water Street. 
(Code 1973, § 23-493; Code 1988, § 22-536; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 1, 11-26-2002)  
Sec. 22-537. - Vehicles prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  On any mall street or mall transit street no person shall operate or park any vehicle, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, motorcycles and bicycles, on such street, other than the following: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles; 
(2)  Public vehicles and equipment and public utility vehicles and equipment (other than for transit or transportation purposes); 
(3)  Vehicles and equipment engaged in the construction or maintenance of such street; 
(4)  Construction vehicles and equipment, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. only, while being used in the construction, repair or demolition of any buildings or structures adjacent to such street, provided that a permit has been first obtained from the department of building inspection or the department of public works; 
(5)  Mass transit vehicles operated under a franchise granted by the city council, on a mall transit street only; 
(6)  Vehicles delivering to commercial stores merchandise for sale. 
(b)  Permits for any vehicular use of such street other than those permitted herein shall be obtained from the city manager. A permit may be granted for such other vehicular use only at such times and under such conditions as may be reasonably calculated to protect pedestrian traffic and to protect the surface of such street and any structures, fixtures, appurtenances and features thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 23-494; Code 1988, § 22-537)  
Sec. 22-538. - Damage to streets. 
(a)  No person shall operate, park, load or unload on any mall street or mall transit street any vehicle or equipment, including those permitted under section 22-537, in such manner as to mark, stain or damage the surface of such street or any structures, fixtures, appurtenances and features thereon by any means including but not limited to wheel marks, oil drippings and excess weight. 
(b)  Any person operating or causing the operation of any such vehicle or equipment which so marks, stains or otherwise damages such surface or structures, fixtures, appurtenances and features shall be responsible for replacing, repairing or correcting the same to the satisfaction of the city, and upon failure to do so, shall be responsible to the city for the cost of such replacement, repair or correction. 
(Code 1973, § 23-495; Code 1988, § 22-538)  
Sec. 22-539. - Sidewalk areas. 
(a)  In mall and mall transit streets, the owners or occupiers of property abutting thereon shall not be responsible for the installation, maintenance and resurfacing of the portion of the right-of-way which was formerly customary sidewalk area, and the city shall be responsible for such installation, maintenance and resurfacing. The city may, at its discretion, resurface vault areas or require the owners or occupiers of the abutting property to do so. Such owners or occupiers shall continue to be responsible for the installation, maintenance, proper repair, structural soundness, and removal of vaults. The term "vault" shall include basements which extend under the surface of the street right-of-way. 
(b)  In mall streets, such owners or occupiers shall be responsible for removal of snow from and for cleaning of the portion of the right-of-way which was formerly customary sidewalk area or which is ten feet from the property line, whichever is greater. 
(c)  In mall transit streets, such owners or occupiers shall be responsible for removal of snow and for cleaning from the nearest edge of the transit lane to the building line, in no event to exceed a distance of 20 feet from the property line. 
(Code 1973, § 23-496; Code 1988, § 22-539)  
Secs. 22-540—22-560. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Parking by persons conducting or attending residential (yard) sale, § 18-133; parking of mobile homes or camper-type trailers on streets, § 21-3; standing or parking of vehicles in parks, § 25-113; standing vehicle on railroad track, § 29-9. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt local parking regulations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-561. - Stopping or parking on highways generally. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be stopped in such a manner as to impede or render dangerous the use of the highway by others, except in the case of an emergency as the result of an accident or mechanical breakdown, in which case the emergency flashing lights of such vehicle shall be turned on if the vehicle is equipped with such lights and such lights are operating, and a report shall be made to the nearest police officer as soon as practicable, and the vehicle shall be removed from the roadway to the shoulder as soon as possible and removed from the shoulder without necessary delay. If the vehicle is not promptly removed, such removal may be ordered by a police officer at the expense of the owner if the disabled vehicle creates a traffic hazard. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be stopped except close to and parallel to the righthand edge of the curb or roadway, except that a vehicle may be stopped close to and parallel to the lefthand curb or edge of the roadway on one-way streets or may be parked at an angle where permitted by posted city signage. Where back-in or font-in parking is required by posted city signage, no vehicle shall be parked in the opposite direction. No vehicle shall be parked or stopped with any of its wheels on or over the curb. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be stopped at or in the vicinity of a fire, vehicle or airplane accident or other area of emergency in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard or interfere with the necessary procedures of police, firemen, rescue workers or others whose duty it is to deal with such emergencies. Any vehicle found unattended in the vicinity of such fire, accident or area of emergency may be removed by order of a police officer at the risk and expense, not to exceed the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code, of the owner if such vehicle creates a traffic hazard or interferes with the necessary procedures of police, firemen, rescue workers or others whose assigned duty is to deal with such emergencies. 
(d)  Vehicles being used by accredited information services, such as press, radio and television, when being used for the gathering of news, shall be exempt from provisions of this section, except when actually obstructing the police, firemen and rescue workers dealing with emergencies. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned or controlled by the state department of highways and transportation or any unit of local government, while actually engaged in the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of highways. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-206, 23-213, 23-214; Code 1988, § 22-561; Ord. No. 2014-99, § 1, 11-25-2014 ) 
State Law reference— Stopping vehicle on highways, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-888 et seq.  
Sec. 22-562. - General parking prohibitions; interference with parked vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public driveway. 
(3)  On a crosswalk. 
(4)  Within 20 feet of crosswalk at an intersection. 
(5)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal. 
(6)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official signs or markings. 
(7)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing. 
(8)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic. 
(9)  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(10)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a tunnel. 
(11)  Wherever official signs prohibit parking completely or during or after certain hours or days. 
(b)  No person shall park on any public street or right-of-way any vehicle with missing state license plates or expired state license stickers. 
(c)  No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful, or start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, change or move the levers, brake, starting device, gears or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof, or attempt to do so. 
(Code 1973, § 23-204; Code 1988, § 22-562; Ord. No. 2005-116, § 1, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2007-61, § 1, 6-12-2007) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances regulating operation of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300.  
Sec. 22-563. - Parking, standing in front of private driveway, near fire hydrant or fire station, etc. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, upon a highway in front of a private driveway or within 15 feet in either direction of a fire hydrant or the entrance to a fire station, or within 15 feet of the entrance to a building housing rescue squad equipment or ambulances, provided such buildings are plainly designated, or within 20 feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of highways. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00. 
(Code 1973, § 23-205; Code 1988, § 22-565; Ord. No. 1995-18, § 1, 3-14-1995; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239.  
Sec. 22-564. - Parking in public lanes. 
(a)  No parking shall be permitted in public lanes in the city at any time. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $25.00. 
(Code 1973, § 23-208; Code 1988, § 22-567; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 2, 1-24-1995)  
Sec. 22-564.1. - Blocking intersections or marked crosswalks. 
(a)  No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk, in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding, to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $250.00. 
( Ord. No. 2010-18, § 2, 3-23-2010)  
Sec. 22-565. - Parking, standing on roadway outside of business or residence district. 
(a)  No person shall leave any vehicle, attended or unattended, upon the paved, improved or main traveled portion of any highway, outside of a business or residence district, when it is practicable to leave such vehicle standing off the paved, improved or main traveled portion of such highway. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned or controlled by the state department of highways and transportation or the city, while actually engaged in the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of highways. 
(Code 1973, § 23-209; Code 1988, § 22-569) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances regulating operation of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300.  
Sec. 22-566. - Parking for more than 48 hours. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or cause to be left any motor vehicle for more than 48 hours in any public street. If any such person fails to remove the vehicle within 24 hours after being notified so to do by any police officer, then every day which shall elapse thereafter without such removal shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply in any residential parking district created under section 22-567.1, provided the motor vehicle displays a valid residential parking district decal or sticker. 
(Code 1973, § 23-210; Code 1988, § 22-570; Ord. No. 1998-39, 7-28-1998; Ord. No. 2007-35, § 2, 3-27-2007) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances regulating operation of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300.  
Sec. 22-567. - Parking of certain vehicles in residential districts prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to be parked in the streets of the city, in any residential district, any motorbus, van, truck, trailer, or semitrailer, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, except on Saturday and Sunday, and between the hours of 6:00 p.m., on Saturday and 6:00 a.m., the following Monday except for the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers or cargo; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to small delivery trucks and pickup trucks whose overall length does not exceed 18 feet, whose overall width does not exceed seven feet and whose overall height does not exceed 6½ feet. 
(Code 1973, § 23-211; Code 1988, § 22-571)  
Sec. 22-567.1. - Residential parking districts. 
(a)  In order to reduce or prevent congestion in public streets within areas zoned for residential use, to reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of such streets for the parking of vehicles by non-residents, to protect the residents of such districts from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences, to promote efficiency in the maintenance of streets in a clean and safe condition; to preserve the safety of children and other pedestrians, to protect against danger and congestion in travel and transportation, to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community, to preserve the value of property in residential districts; to preserve peace, good order, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, the city manager is hereby authorized to designate by order, rule, or regulation the creation, expansion, or reduction of such residential parking district or districts as he may deem necessary to accomplish the above-stated purposes. 
(b)  Upon a written finding outlining the need for the creation, reduction, or expansion of a residential parking district, the city manager shall, by order, rule, or regulation create, reduce, or expand such district. The order, rule or regulation shall establish the conditions governing parking in the district and may provide for the issuance of parking permits to residents of the district, their guests, and to others lawfully engaging in activities within the district. 
Any permit so issued shall be of such term as the city manager or his designee shall deem appropriate, but in no event shall any term be longer than one year from the date of issuance. Permits may be renewed upon a showing by the applicant of continued eligibility. Permits shall expire automatically upon the cessation of the conditions giving rise to eligibility. 
(c)  Prior to the enforcement of any order, rule, or regulation establishing a residential parking district, the city manager shall cause appropriate signs giving notice of the restricted parking to be posted on the streets within the district. The signs placed in the district shall be of such character as to inform readily any ordinarily observant person of the existence of the rules and regulations imposing the foregoing restrictions. 
(d)  Any person who represents that he is entitled to a residential parking permit when not so entitled, who fails to surrender a permit to which he is no longer entitled, or who parks a vehicle displaying such a permit at any time when the holder of the permit is not entitled to hold it shall be guilty of a violation of this section. Violators of any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 22-578. 
(e)  Wherever metered parking is in effect in any portion of a district that becomes subject to the restrictions of this section, the parking spaces controlled by meters may be exempted from the provisions of this section so long as the control by meters continues. 
(f)  Any residential parking district created prior to the adoption of this provision shall remain in full force and effect as if adopted hereunder. Such district may be expanded or reduced in size by the city manager in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-35, § 1, 3-27-2007)  
Sec. 22-567.2. - Parking of unconnected semitrailers. 
(a)  The term "semitrailer" shall be deemed to mean every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests on or is carried by another vehicle. This section shall apply only to semitrailers that are at least 23 feet in length, whether loaded or unloaded. 
(b)  No person shall park a semitrailer that is not connected to a truck or tractor, on any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way at any time. 
(c)  (1)  Any police officer of the city who observes a semitrailer parked in violation of the preceding subsection shall make reasonable efforts to contact the owner and seek to have the owner remove the trailer before taking any official action. If these efforts are not successful, the police officer may then cause it to be ticketed, towed, and impounded. 
(2)  However, if the trailer creates a traffic hazard, there shall be no requirement of effort to contact the owner, and the trailer may be ticketed, towed, and impounded forthwith. 
(d)  The fine for a violation of this section shall be $250.00. 
(e)  A semitrailer that has been impounded under this section shall not be released until the owner thereof, or a person acting on behalf of the owner, pays in full the towing charge, all accrued impound fees, and the fine. 
(Ord. No. 2009-04, 1-13-2009)  
Sec. 22-568. - Parking in front of entrance of places where audiences assemble. 
Except when parked in accordance with regularly erected signs or markers or in a parking meter space, it shall be unlawful for any person to park in front of the entrance of any church, theatre, public building, or other place where audiences are assembled, during the hours of service, entertainment or performances, or when occupied by the public. The city manager may permit parking in front of churches during marriage ceremonies and funerals, except immediately in front of the entrance thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 23-212; Code 1988, § 22-572)  
Sec. 22-569. - Consent required to park on private property. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any private lot or lot area without the express or implied consent of the owner, operator or lessee thereof. Whenever signs or markings have been erected on any lot or lot area, contiguous or adjacent to a street, thoroughfare or alley permitting parking or standing of vehicles thereon only with the permission of the owner, operator or lessee, or prohibiting the parking or standing of vehicles thereon, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across any curb or lot line or over any driveway from a street or alley into such lot or area for the purpose of standing or parking such vehicle, or for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in such lot or lot area. 
(Code 1973, § 23-215; Code 1988, § 22-573)  
Sec. 22-570. - Removal, storage of vehicles unlawfully parked on private property. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for any owner, operator or lessee of any parking lot or parking area or space therein or part thereof, or of any other lot or building, to have any motor or other vehicle, occupying such lot, area, space or building or part thereof without the permission of such owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent of the one having the control of such premises removed by towing, or otherwise, to a licensed garage for storage until called for by the owner or his agent. 
(b)  Any towing under the provisions of this section shall not be commenced unless notice is, first or simultaneously with the towing operations, given by the tow truck operator to the police department or to the state police. Failure to report such tow as required by this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. Additionally, such failure to report shall limit the amount which may be charged for the storage and safekeeping of the towed vehicle to an amount no greater than that charged for one day of storage and safekeeping. 
(c)  In the event of such removal and storage, the owner of the vehicle involved shall be chargeable with and such vehicle may be held for a reasonable charge for its removal and storage. However, if the owner or representative or agent of the owner of the trespassing vehicle is present and removes the trespassing vehicle from the premises before it is actually towed, the trespassing vehicle shall not be towed, but the owner or representative or agent of the owner of the trespassing vehicle shall be liable for a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code, in lieu of towing. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to police, fire or public health vehicles or when a vehicle shall, because of a wreck or other emergency, be parked or left temporarily upon the property of another. 
(e)  All businesses engaged in towing vehicles without the consent of their owners shall prominently display a comprehensive list of all fees for towing, recovery and storage services, or the basis of such charges. Charges in excess of those posted shall not be collectible from any motor vehicle owner whose vehicle is towed, recovered or stored without his consent. 
(Code 1973, § 23-216; Code 1988, § 22-574; Ord. No. 1991-75, § 2, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 1994-57, § 1, 6-14-1994) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1231.  
Sec. 22-571. - Liability for damage to vehicles parked in free parking lot. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "free parking accommodations" means parking accommodations for which no specific charge is made and the patronage of the business by customers and the performance of the regular services for the business by employees shall not constitute the payment of any consideration for the use of the parking accommodations. 
(b)  No action shall lie or proceeding be brought against any person conducting any business and maintaining a parking lot, at which free parking accommodations are provided for customers or employees of such business, when a motor vehicle is parked in such parking lot, for the total or partial loss of such motor vehicle by reason of theft or damage by any person other than an employee or for the total or partial loss of property left in such motor vehicle by reason of theft or damage by any person other than an employee; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any person of liability resulting from his own wrongdoing. 
(Code 1973, § 23-217; Code 1988, § 22-575) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinance prohibiting parking on private property, removal, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1215.  
Sec. 22-572. - Use of loading zones. 
Where a loading and unloading zone has been set apart by the city manager in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply with respect to the use of such areas: 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. All delivery vehicles, other than regular delivery trucks, using such loading zones shall be identified by the owner's or company's name in letters three inches high on both sides of the vehicle. 
(2)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in a space marked as a curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or bundles when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or is about to enter such loading space. 
(Code 1973, § 23-218; Code 1988, § 22-576)  
Sec. 22-573. - Use of bus stops. 
Where a bus stop has been set apart by the city manager in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in such bus stop, when such stop has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1973, § 23-219; Code 1988, § 22-577)  
Sec. 22-574. - Stopping vehicle for advertising purposes. 
Stopping a vehicle at any time upon any street or highway for the purpose of advertising any vehicle of any kind, or displaying thereupon advertisements of any article, or advertisement for sale of the vehicle itself, is prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 23-222; Code 1988, § 22-580)  
Sec. 22-575. - Backing to curb. 
Except where permitted or required by posted city signage, no vehicle shall be backed up to a curb, except during the time actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise therefrom and then not to obstruct traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 23-223; Code 1988, § 22-581; Ord. No. 2012-26, § 1, 5-22-2012, eff. 8-1-2012; Ord. No. 2014-99, § 1, 11-25-2014 )  
Sec. 22-576. - Parking in spaces reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a driver of a motor vehicle to park in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities, at privately owned shopping centers, business offices, or parking lots or on the streets or public grounds of the city, unless such driver or passenger is a person with a disability that limits or impairs his ability to walk and the motor vehicle displays disabled parking license plates, an organizational removable windshield placard, a permanent removable windshield placard, a temporary removable windshield placard issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-731, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739(B). The license plate issued by the commissioner to a motor vehicle shall be attached to such motor vehicle. Any such windshield placard must be displayed in the front windshield of the motor vehicle when such vehicle is parked in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities. Spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall be identified in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each police officer or other uniformed city employee or appointee whose normal duties include enforcing parking regulations to give to any person operating a motor vehicle parked in violation of this section a summons or parking ticket or to attach to the vehicle found so parked, a parking ticket which states that such vehicle has been illegally parked in violation of this section and instructing the operator to report to the city treasurer or the police records office of the police department within 14 days, to pay the sum of $200.00 due to his vehicle being illegally parked in violation of this section. Upon failure of the violator to pay the penalty for the violation noted herein, a summons or warrant for the prosecution of the violation shall be issued according to law, without necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of the private parking area. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(c)  In any prosecution under subsection (a) of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the summons, ticket or warrant was parked in violation of subsection (a) of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. 
(d)  Disabled parking license plates, permanent removable windshield placards, temporary removable windshield placards, and DV disabled parking license plates issued by other states and countries for the purpose of identifying vehicles permitted to use parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk shall be accorded all rights and privileges accorded vehicles displaying such devices in the commonwealth. 
(Code 1973, § 23-229; Code 1988, § 22-582; Ord. No. 1990-69, § 1, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1992-58, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1994-72, § 1, 6-28-1994; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 3, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2007-61, § 2, 6-12-2007) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinances prohibiting parking in spaces for the disabled, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1240 et seq.  
Sec. 22-577. - Appointees to enforce parking regulations. 
The city manager, or his designee, the chief of police, is hereby authorized to appoint uniformed personnel serving under an agreement with the city, in addition to regular and auxiliary police officers, to enforce the provisions of sections 22-562(a), 22-563 through 22-569, 22-572, 22-573, 22-574 through 22-578, 22-605 through 22-608, 22-611, 22-613 through 22-616, 22-634, 22-636 through 22-639, 22-642 through 22-644, and 22-664 of the City Code governing parking regulations, without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of a private parking area. Such personnel shall wear a uniform as prescribed by the city manager, or his designee, the chief of police. Such personnel, who are not sworn law enforcement officers, shall not have general police powers, and shall not have arrest powers, and, they shall only be authorized to issue parking violation summons to persons found in violation of the sections set out herein. 
(Code 1988, § 22-582.1; Ord. No. 1997-20, § 1, 4-8-1997)  
Sec. 22-578. - Procedure and penalties for parking violations. 
(a)  Except where otherwise provided, it shall be the duty of each police officer of the city, or other uniformed city employee or appointee whose normal duties include parking enforcement, to give to the person operating a motor vehicle illegally parked, a notice, or to attach to the vehicle found so parked, a notice to the owner that the vehicle has been illegally parked and instructing him/her to report to the city treasurer or the police records office of the police department to pay the penalty of $25.00 or state objection to and intent to contest the notice of violation. Provided, however, the penalty for an overtime parking violation, not including a violation of sections 22-566 or 22-567, in the Downtown Business District, as defined in section 22-582, shall be $15.00, and the penalty for parking without a current Olde Towne parking permit in the Olde Towne Historic District between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall be $50.00. If the owner of the vehicle fails to make such payment within 14 days of the time the notice was attached to the vehicle, or state objection to and intent to contest the notice of violation, he/she shall again be notified and an additional penalty of $10.00 shall be charged for the additional notice. All monies due shall be paid to the city treasurer or the police records office of the police department who shall be accountable therefor. Failure of the owner of the vehicle to pay the penalty for such violation and the $10.00 for the additional notice within 28 days from the date of violation, shall constitute a violation of this section. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00. 
(b)  The contesting by any person of any parking citation shall be certified in writing, on an appropriate form to the appropriate district court, by the chief of police. 
(c)  The chief of police, or his designee, shall cause complaints, summons or warrants to be issued for delinquent parking citations. However, before any summons shall issue for the prosecution of a violation of an ordinance regulating parking, the violator shall have been first notified by mail at his last known address or at the address shown for such violator on the records of the state department of motor vehicles, that he may pay the penalty, provided by law for such violation, within 14 days of receipt of such notice, and the authorized person issuing the complaint, summons or warrant shall be notified that the violator has failed to pay such penalty within such time. Notice to the violator, required by the provisions of this section, shall be contained in an envelope bearing the words "Law Enforcement Notice" stamped or printed on the face thereof in type at least one-half inch in height. 
(Code 1973, § 23-224; Code 1988, § 22-583; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 4, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 1995-18, § 2, 3-14-1995; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-106, § 2, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 2007-61, § 2, 6-12-2007; Ord. No. 2012-26, § 1, 5-22-2012, eff. 8-1-2012) 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsection (c) above, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-941, 46.2-1225.  
Sec. 22-579. - Interference by officers with enforcement of parking penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any police officer, city official or any other person to remove from the report or destroy the record of the illegal parking of any vehicle, or to do any other act which shall prevent any penalty from being imposed. 
(Code 1973, § 23-225; Code 1988, § 22-584)  
Sec. 22-580. - Responsibility of vehicle owner for parking violations. 
The owner of any illegally parked motor vehicle shall, prima facie, be guilty of such violation. 
(Code 1973, § 23-226; Code 1988, § 22-585)  
Sec. 22-581. - Removal of vehicles with three outstanding parking violation notices. 
Whenever there is found any motor vehicle parked upon the public streets or highways or public grounds against which there are three or more outstanding unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices or tickets, such a vehicle may, by towing or otherwise be removed or conveyed to the city compound designated by the city manager for the temporary storage of such vehicle. Such removal or conveyance shall be under the direction of a member of the police department. It shall be the duty of the police department to inform, as soon as practicable, in writing, the owner of the removed vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices or tickets, for which or on account of which, such a vehicle was removed. The owner of such removed vehicle or other duly authorized person, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle by payment of outstanding parking violation notices or tickets for which the vehicle was removed and by payment of all towing costs and storage fees as prescribed in section 22-805(a) of this Code and for the reasonable costs incidental or incurred in the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable, the vehicle that was so removed may be sold at public auction in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 22-806(a). 
(Code 1973, § 23-228; Code 1988, § 22-585; Ord. No. 1995-109, § 1, 11-14-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216.  
Sec. 22-582. - Downtown Business District defined. 
For purposes of this article, the Downtown Business District is defined as the area bounded by Queen Street on the north, King Street on the south, Chestnut Street on the west, and Water Street on the east. The area so bounded shall be deemed to encompass both sides of each said street. 
(Ord. No. 2006-106, § 1, 12-12-2006)  
Secs. 22-583—22-600. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS GENERALLY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city as to parking meters, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
 
Sec. 22-601. - Designation of zones. 
The following described parts of streets in the city are hereby designated as parking meter zones: 
County Street, south side, from Crawford Street to Court Street. 
County Street, north side, from Crawford Street to garage entrance. 
Court Street, east side, from High Street to King Street. 
Court Street, both sides, from King Street to County Street. 
Crawford Street, both sides, from High Street to London Street. 
Crawford Street, both sides, from King Street to Columbia Street. 
Harbor Street, west side, from Water Street to Harbor Court. 
King Street, north side, between Middle Street Mall and Washington Street. 
London Street, south side, from Crawford Street to Court Street. 
London Street, both sides, from Crawford Street to Water Street. 
Queen Street, south side, from Court Street to Crawford Street. 
Washington Street, both sides, from High Street to County Street. 
(Code 1973, § 23-257; Code 1988, § 22-601; Ord. No. 1990-119, § 1, 11-13-1990; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 1, 11-26-2002)  
Sec. 22-602. - Powers, duties of city manager generally. 
(a)  In the zones designated in section 22-601, the city manager shall cause to be installed parking meters and shall cause parking meter spaces to be designated in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby directed to provide for the installation, regulation, control, operation and use of the parking meters provided for in this division, and to maintain such meters in good working condition. The city manager is hereby invested with power and authority to enter into a contract for the purchase and installation of parking meters. 
(Code 1973, § 23-258; Code 1988, § 22-602)  
Sec. 22-603. - Meter fees; installation, operation, etc., of meters. 
(a)  The fee for parking at a meter in a parking meter zone shall be as established in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established as provided in this division, shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking places. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter shall be installed and set to display, upon the deposit of a coin of the United States therein, as required by the legend on the meter, a signal indicating legal parking for that period of time which has been or may be established for that area or zone of the street upon which such parking meter is installed, and shall continue to operate from the time of the deposit of such coins therein until the expiration of the time fixed as a parking limit for the part of the street upon which such parking meter is placed. Each such meter shall also be arranged that, upon the expiration of the legal parking time, it will indicate by a mechanical operation and the dropping of proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired. 
(Code 1973, § 23-259; Code 1988, § 22-603; Ord. No. 2011-22, § 1, 5-4-2011) 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2011-22 states that this ordinance shall take effect July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 22-604. - Parking spaces. 
The city manager shall have lines or markings painted or placed on the curb and upon the streets, either or both, adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space for which such meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked alongside of or next to any parking space shall park within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park such vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings, and it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any place in such zone except within the spaces indicated for such parking. 
(Code 1973, § 23-260; Code 1988, § 22-604)  
Sec. 22-605. - Manner of parking generally. 
When parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so that the vehicle is centered within the indicated parking space. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in any such parking space shall be parked within the indicated space with the foremost part of such vehicle directed at and nearest to such meter. 
(Code 1973, § 23-261; Code 1988, § 22-605)  
Sec. 22-606. - Occupation of space upon deposit of coin; parking overtime. 
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space alongside of or next to which a parking meter is located, in accordance with the provisions of this division, the driver of the vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited, a coin of the United States in such parking meter, as required by the legend on the meter, and such parking space may then be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during such period as may be indicated by such legend, which is herein prescribed as the period of parking time allowed in such zone. If such vehicle shall remain parked in such parking space beyond the parking time limit fixed by such parking space, the parking meter shall display a sign or signal showing illegal parking, and in such event, the vehicle parked in such parking space shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and the parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time in such parking space shall be a violation of this division, and punished as hereinafter set out. 
(Code 1973, § 23-262; Code 1988, § 22-606)  
Sec. 22-607. - Owner not to allow parking overtime. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as described in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 23-263; Code 1988, § 22-607)  
Sec. 22-608. - Occupation of space when signal indicates overtime parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space. 
(Code 1973, § 23-264; Code 1988, § 22-608)  
Sec. 22-609. - Deposit of coin for purpose of extending time. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, in a parking meter any coin for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the time allowed on the meter. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the defendant shall be punished as provided in section 22-616. 
(Code 1973, § 23-265; Code 1988, § 22-609)  
Sec. 22-610. - Defacing, injuring, tampering with. 
It shall be a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open, or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 23-266; Code 1988, § 22-610) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; authority of city manager to offer reward in cases involving damage to city property, § 2-167; damaging city property generally, § 24-318.  
Sec. 22-611. - Procedure in case of violation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each police officer of the city, or other uniformed city employee or appointee whose normal duties including parking enforcement, to report: 
(1)  The number of each parking meter that indicated that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(2)  The state license number and/or any other identifying information of such vehicle. 
(3)  The length of time during which such vehicle is parked, in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(4)  Any other facts, knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(b)  Each police officer, or other uniformed city employee or appointee whose normal duties include parking enforcement, shall attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner thereof; that the vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this division and instructing the owner to report to the city treasurer or the police records office of the police department in regard to such violation, and to pay the penalty or state objection to and intent to contest the notice of violation. Each owner may, within 14 days of the time when such notice was attached to the vehicle, pay a penalty in the sum of $25.00 for violation of any of the provisions of this division. Provided, however, the penalty for an expired meter violation in the Downtown Business District, as defined in section 22-582, shall be $15.00. If the owner of the vehicle fails to make the payment within 14 days of the time when such notice was attached to the vehicle or state objection to and intent to contest the notice of violation, then an additional notice shall be given the owner, and an additional penalty of $10.00 shall be charged for the additional notice. All monies due shall be paid to the city treasurer or the police records office of the police department, who shall be accountable therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-267; Code 1988, § 22-611; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 5, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2000-23, § 1, 6-27-2000; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-106, § 2, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 2007-61, § 2, 6-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-612. - Purpose of levy. 
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters, as provided in this division, are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets and to cover the cost of the supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking spaces and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones hereby created. 
(Code 1973, § 23-268; Code 1988, § 22-612)  
Sec. 22-613. - Hours, days provisions apply. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to parking only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and on days other than Saturdays and Sundays; legal holidays declared and observed by the city council, the commonwealth, or the government of the United States; and to parking on special-event days and/or for limited periods of time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. as designated by the city manager in parking meter zones or portions thereof as identified by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 23-269; Code 1988, § 22-613; Ord. No. 1989-110, § 1, 12-12-1989; Ord. No. 1991-104, § 1, 11-26-1991; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 6, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 1, 11-26-2002)  
Sec. 22-614. - Construction of division. 
Nothing in this division shall alter or affect any existing ordinance, rule or regulation, or any ordinance, rule or regulation hereafter adopted, relating to traffic or parking on any other street, alley, lane or highway, within the city, other than those included within the parking meter zones herein established. 
(Code 1973, § 23-270; Code 1988, § 22-614)  
Sec. 22-615. - Prima facie guilt of owner of vehicle. 
The owner of any vehicle parked in violation of this division shall be prima facie guilty of such violation. 
(Code 1973, § 23-271; Code 1988, § 22-615)  
Sec. 22-616. - General penalty for violation. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate or permit, suffer or allow anyone to violate any of the provisions of this division, shall be punished on conviction, by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1973, § 23-272; Code 1988, § 22-616; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 7, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Secs. 22-617—22-630. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - METERED PARKING LOTS 
 
Sec. 22-631. - Designation. 
The following described parcels of land, or portions thereof, owned or leased by the city are hereby designated as metered off-street parking lots and garages: 
(1)  Civic Center Parking Lot. The parcel of land in the square bounded by King Street extended, Water Street, Columbia Street and the Southern Branch of the Elizabeth River shall be known and designated as the "Civic Center Parking Lot." 
(2)  Courthouse Museum Parking Lot. The parcel of land located on the west side of the 400 block of Court Street and adjacent to the 1846 Courthouse Museum shall be known and designated as the "Courthouse Museum Parking Lot." 
(3)  King Square Parking Lot. The parcel of land located between the 400 blocks of County Street and King Street shall be known and designated as the "King Square Parking Lot." 
(4)  Proctor Square Parking Lot. The parcel of land located between the 700 blocks of County and King Streets shall be known and designated as the "Proctor Square Parking Lot." 
(5)  Water Street Parking Garage. The parking garage located between the 500 blocks of Water and Crawford Streets immediately north of the City of Portsmouth Civic Center complex, shall be known and designated the "Water Street Parking Garage." 
(6)  Central Parking Garage. The parking garage located at the southeast corner of the intersection of Crawford and Columbia Streets shall be known and designated as the "Central Parking Garage." 
(Code 1973, § 23-278; Code 1988, § 22-631; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 1, 11-26-2002)  
Sec. 22-632. - Duties generally of city manager. 
In the off-street parking lots referred to in section 22-631, the city manager or his designee shall provide for the regulation, control, operation and use of the parking spaces and parking meters in such off-street parking lots. 
(Code 1973, § 23-280; Code 1988, § 22-632)  
Sec. 22-633. - Designation of spaces and installation of meters by city manager. 
In the off-street parking lots referred to in section 22-631, the city manager or his designee is hereby directed to have markings painted or placed for each parking space defining the space set apart for the parking of a motor vehicle and to have a parking meter placed or set to serve each such parking space. 
(Code 1973, § 23-281; Code 1988, § 22-633)  
Sec. 22-634. - Parking to be in spaces. 
Each vehicle using a parking space designated in section 22-633 shall be parked or placed within the lines or markings established as provided in such section. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in an off-street parking lot referred to in section 22-631 except within a parking space so designated or to park any vehicle across any line or marking or to park a vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by the lines or markings. 
(Code 1973, § 23-282; Code 1988, § 22-634)  
Sec. 22-635. - How meters placed and installed. 
Parking meters installed pursuant to section 22-633 shall be placed or set in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the space served by such meter is or is not legally in use. The parking meters shall be installed and set to display upon deposit of the requisite coins of the United States or the equivalent in tokens issued pursuant to regulations promulgated by the city manager or his designee a signal indicating legal parking for the designated period, and the parking space shall then be legally occupied by the motor vehicle during such period. 
(Code 1973, § 23-283; Code 1988, § 22-635)  
Sec. 22-636. - Front of vehicle to be parked by meter. 
Any motor vehicle parking in any off-street parking lot as enumerated in section 22-631 shall be parked with the foremost part of the vehicle directly at or next to the parking meter. 
(Code 1973, § 23-284; Code 1988, § 22-636)  
Sec. 22-637. - Operation of meters; overtime parking generally. 
(a)  The fee for parking at a meter in any off-street parking lot and garage of the city shall be as established in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  When any vehicle is parked in any metered space in any off-street parking lot or garage of the city designated in section 22-631, the driver shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited a coin of the United States, or the equivalent in tokens issued pursuant to regulations promulgated by the city manager or his designee, in the meter provided for the space, as required by the legend on the meter, and such parking space shall then be lawfully occupied by the vehicle during the period as may be indicated by the legend, which is herein prescribed as the period of parking time allowed for the use of the space. If the vehicle shall remain parked in such parking space beyond the parking time limit during which the same is lawfully occupied, the parking meter shall display a sign or signal showing illegal parking, and in such event the vehicle parking in the parking space shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period of legal parking time, and the parking of a vehicle overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time in such parking space shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1973, § 23-285; Code 1988, § 22-637; Ord. No. 2011-22, § 1, 5-4-2011) 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2011-22 states that this ordinance will take effect on July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 22-638. - Owner not to allow parking overtime. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking in any parking space in any off-street parking lot of the city referred to in section 22-631. 
(Code 1973, § 23-286; Code 1988, § 22-638)  
Sec. 22-639. - Occupation of space when signal indicates overtime parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in a parking space in any parking lot of the city referred to in section 22-631 while the meter adjacent to and regulating the time of parking in the space is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the time allowed in the space. 
(Code 1973, § 23-287; Code 1988, § 22-639)  
Sec. 22-640. - Deposit of coin for purpose of extending time prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any coin or token issued pursuant to regulations promulgated by the city manager or his designee for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the time allowed on the meter. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the defendant shall be punished as provided in section 22-644. 
(Code 1973, § 23-288; Code 1988, § 22-640)  
Sec. 22-641. - Defacing, injuring, tampering with, etc., meters. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1973, § 23-289; Code 1988, § 22-641) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; authority of city manager to offer rewards in cases involving damage to city property, § 2-167; damaging city property generally, § 24-318.  
Sec. 22-642. - Procedure in case of violation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each police officer, or uniformed city employee or appointee whose normal duties include parking enforcement, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the chief of police, to report: 
(1)  The number of each parking meter that indicated that a vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(2)  The state license number and/or any other identifying information of such vehicle. 
(3)  The length of time during which such vehicle is parked in violation of any of the provisions of this division. 
(4)  Any other facts, knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(b)  Each police officer or other uniformed City employee or appointee whose normal duties include parking enforcement, shall attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner thereof; that the vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this division and instructing the owner to report to the city treasurer or the police records office of the police department in regard to such violation, and to pay the penalty or state objection to and intent to contest the notice of violation. Each owner may, within 14 days of the time when such notice was attached to the vehicle, pay a penalty in the sum of $25.00 for violation of any of the provisions of this division. Provided, however, the penalty for an expired meter violation in the Downtown Business District, as defined in section 22-582, shall be $15.00. If the owner of the vehicle fails to make the payment within 14 days of the time when such notice was attached to the vehicle or state objection to and intent to contest the notice of violation, then an additional notice shall be given the owner, and an additional penalty of $10.00 shall be charged for the additional notice. All monies shall be paid to the city treasurer or the police records office of the police department, who shall be accountable therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-290; Code 1988, § 22-642; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 8, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2000-23, § 1, 6-27-2000; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-106, § 2, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 2007-61, § 2, 6-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-643. - Hours, days provisions apply. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to parking only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and on days other than Saturdays and Sundays and legal holidays declared and observed by the council of the city, the commonwealth, or the government of the United States. 
(Code 1973, § 23-291; Code 1988, § 22-643; Ord. No. 1989-110, § 1, 12-12-1989; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 9, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 1, 11-26-2002)  
Sec. 22-644. - General penalty for violations. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate or permit, suffer or allow anyone to violate any of the provisions of this division shall be punished, on conviction, by a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $100.00. 
(Code 1973, § 23-292; Code 1988, § 22-644; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 10, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Secs. 22-645—22-660. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - UNMETERED PARKING LOTS AND GARAGES 
 
Sec. 22-661. - Designation of lots and garages of the city. 
The following described parcels of land and parking garages, or portions thereof, owned, leased, controlled, operated or used by the city are designated as city unmetered parking lots and garages for the purposes of this division: 
(1)  Civic Center Parking Garage. The underground parking structure, located immediately north of Columbia Street between Crawford and Water Streets, shall be known and designated as the "Civic Center Parking Garage." 
(2)  Court Street Parking Lot. The parcel of land in Olde Towne, located on the west side of Court Street between 358 and 366 Court Street, shall be known and designated as the "Court Street Parking Lot." 
(3)  Elizabeth Square Parking Lot. The parcel of land in Olde Towne, located at the northeast corner of the intersection of Court and Glasgow Streets, shall be known and designated as the "Elizabeth Square Parking Lot." 
(4)  Glasgow Square Parking Lot. The parcel of land in Olde Towne, located on the south side of the 300 block of Glasgow Street, shall be known and designated as the "Glasgow Square Parking Lot." 
(5)  Greenwich Square Parking Lot. The parcel of land in Olde Towne, located on the north and south sides of the 500 block of Glasgow Street, shall be known and designated as the "Greenwich Square Parking Lot." 
(6)  Hampton Place Parking Lot. The parcel of land in Olde Towne, located on the south side of the 500 block of Hamilton Place between 511 and 519 Hampton Place, shall be known and designated as the "Hampton Place Parking Lot." 
(7)  Norfolk Square Parking Lot. The parcel of land in Olde Towne, located behind and to the east and west of 211 North Street, shall be known and designated as the "Norfolk Square Parking Lot." 
(8)  North Street Parking Lot. The parcel of land in Olde Towne, located north of the 400 block of North Street and behind 424-432 North Street, shall be known and designated as the "North Street Parking Lot." 
(9)  Red Lion Square Parking Lot. The parcel of land in Olde Towne, located between the 200 block of Glasgow Street and London Boulevard, having its entrance east of 219 London Boulevard, shall be known and designated as the "Red Lion Square Parking Lot." 
(10)  Waverly Parking Lot. The parcel of land in Olde Towne, located on the south side of Waverly Boulevard behind 411 and 415 Waverly Boulevard with access to Dinwiddie Street, shall be known and designated as the "Waverly Parking Lot." 
(Code 1973, § 23-293; Code 1988, § 22-661; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 1, 11-26-2002)  
Sec. 22-662. - Designation of lots and garages of parking authority. 
The following described parcels of land and parking garages controlled, operated or used by the city parking authority are hereby designated as unmetered city parking authority parking lots and garages for the purposes of this division: 
(1)  Central Parking Garage. The garage structure, located at the southeast corner of the intersection of Crawford and Columbia Streets, shall be known and designated as the "Central Parking Garage." 
(2)  Civic Center Parking Lot. The parcel of land in the square bounded by High Street extended, Water Street, and Columbia Street shall be known and designated as the "Civic Center Parking Lot." 
(3)  Columbia Street Parking Lot. The parcel of land bounded on the north by Columbia Street, on the west by Guardian Way, and on the east by Crawford Street shall be known and designated as the "Columbia Street Parking Lot." 
(4)  Water Street Parking Garage. The parking garage, located between the 500 blocks of Water and Crawford Streets immediately north of the City of Portsmouth Civic Center complex, shall be known and designated as the "Water Street Parking Garage." 
(5)  County Street Parking Garage. The parking garage, located on the north side of the 200-300 blocks of County Street, shall be known and designated as the "County Street Parking Garage." 
(6)  Harbor Court Parking Garage. The parking garage, located on the north side of Harbor Court, shall be known and designated as the "Harbor Court Parking Garage." 
(7)  King Square Parking Lot. The parcel of land, located between the 400 blocks of County Street and King Street, shall be known and designated as the "King Square Parking Lot." 
(8)  Middle Street Parking Garage. The parking garage located on the south side of the 200 block of London Street east of Middle Street shall be known as the "Middle Street Parking Garage." 
(9)  Proctor Square Parking Lot. The parcel of land, located between the 700 blocks of County and King Streets, shall be known as the "Proctor Square Parking Lot." 
(Code 1973, § 23-294; Code 1988, § 22-662; Ord. No. 2002-66, § 1, 11-26-2002)  
Sec. 22-663. - Duties generally of city manager. 
(a)  In the off-street parking lots and garages referred to in section 22-661, the city manager or his designee shall provide for the regulation, control, operation and use of the parking spaces in such off-street parking lots and garages. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall have lines or markings painted or placed on the sides of each parking space defining the space set apart for the parking of a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 23-295; Code 1988, § 22-663)  
Sec. 22-664. - Violation of regulations of parking authority and city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any regulation relating to parking on lots or in garages designated in sections 22-661 and 22-662. Violators shall be proceeded against as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each police officer, or other uniformed city employee or appointee whose duties include parking enforcement, to report, with regards to any violations of subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Where applicable, the number of each reserved space that is subject to a violation of subsection (a) of this section; 
(2)  The state license number and/or any other identifying information of each vehicle occupying a reserved space in violation of subsection (a) of this section; 
(3)  The length of time during which a vehicle is parked in violation of subsection (a) of this section; 
(4)  Any other facts, knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(c)  Each police officer or uniformed city employee or appointee whose normal duties include parking enforcement, shall attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner thereof, that the vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of such regulation and instructing such owner to report to the city treasurer or the police records office of the police department in regard to such violation, and to pay the penalty or state objection to and intent to contest the notice of violation. Each owner may, within 14 days of the time when such notice was attached to the vehicle, pay a penalty in the sum of $25.00 for violation of any of the provisions of such regulation. Provided, however, the penalty for an overtime parking violation in the Downtown Business District, as defined in section 22-582, shall be $15.00. If the owner of the vehicle fails to make the payment within 14 days of the time when the notice was attached to the vehicle or state objection to and intent to contest the notice of violation, then an additional notice shall be given the owner, and an additional penalty of $10.00 shall be charged for the additional notice. Failure of such owner to pay the penalty for the violation and the $10.00 for the additional notice within 14 days from the date of such notice shall render the owner subject to the penalty provided in section 22-666. 
(Code 1973, § 23-296; Code 1988, § 22-664; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 11, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2000-23, § 1, 6-27-2000; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-106, § 2, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 2007-61, § 2, 6-12-2007)  
Sec. 22-665. - Removal, storage of vehicles unlawfully parked on parking lots and garages of parking authority. 
(a)  The city parking authority may cause any motor or other vehicle, occupying, without its permission or in violation of this division or any regulation of the parking authority, any parking lot or garage owned, operated, leased or controlled by the parking authority, to be removed by the police department and to be placed in such storage facility as may be designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Prior to the removal of any vehicle, the parking authority shall notify the police dispatcher of such removal and shall provide the police dispatcher with the license number and state of issuance of the license and, if known, the vehicle identification number and the make, model and model year of the vehicle to be towed. 
(c)  In the event of such removal and storage, the owner of the vehicle involved shall be chargeable with and such vehicle may be held for a reasonable charge for its removal and storage. 
(Code 1973, § 23-297; Code 1988, § 22-665)  
Sec. 22-666. - Penalty. 
Except as otherwise provided, any person who shall violate or permit, suffer or allow anyone to violate any of the provisions of this division shall be punished, on conviction, by a fine of not less than $25.00 or more than $100.00. 
(Code 1973, § 23-298; Code 1988, § 22-666; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 12, 1-24-1995)  
Secs. 22-667—22-685. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES 
 
Sec. 22-686. - Operator to ride only on permanent seat; carrying passengers. 
A person operating a motorcycle, excluding four-wheeled and three-wheeled vehicles, shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached to the motorcycle, and such operator shall not carry any other person, and no other person shall ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the seat for the operator. If such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, it shall also be equipped with a footrest, for the use of such passenger. 
(Code 1973, § 23-80; Code 1988, § 22-686; Ord. No. 1994-72, § 1, 6-28-1994) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-911.  
Sec. 22-687. - Safety devices for protection of operator and passengers. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle shall wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles or have his motorcycle equipped with safety glass or windshield at all times while operating such vehicle, and operators and passengers thereon, if any, shall wear protective helmets. Operators and passengers riding on motorcycles with wheels of eight inches or less in diameter shall not be required to wear protective helmets. Failure to wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles or protective helmets shall not constitute negligence per se in any civil proceeding. 
(b)  No motorcycle operator shall use any face shield, safety glasses or goggles or have his motorcycle equipped with safety glass or a windshield unless of a type approved by the superintendent of state police. 
(Code 1973, § 23-80; Code 1988, § 22-687; Ord. No. 1994-72, § 1, 6-28-1994) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-911.  
Sec. 22-688. - Mopeds, motorized push scooters; safety devices for protection of operator and passengers. 
(a)  Every person operating or riding on a moped or motorized push scooter on a public street or highway shall wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles of a type approved by the superintendent or have his moped equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating such vehicle, and operators and passengers thereon shall wear protective helmets of a type approved by the superintendent of state police. 
(b)  Every person operating a motorized push scooter on a public street or highway shall wear a helmet meeting the standards of the superintendent of state police or of the consumer product safety commission, if the superintendent does not establish such standards. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Code 1988, § 22-688; Ord. No. 1989-61, § 2, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 1, 11-22-2005)  
Secs. 22-689—22-700. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 22-701. - Obedience to signs, police. 
Pedestrians shall obey signs and signals erected on highways or streets for the direction and control of travel and traffic and they shall obey the orders of police officers engaged in directing travel and traffic on the highways and streets. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $50.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1973, § 23-330; Code 1988, § 22-701) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-935.  
Sec. 22-702. - Crossing highways or streets generally. 
(a)  When crossing highways or streets, pedestrians shall not carelessly or maliciously interfere with the orderly passage of vehicles. Pedestrians shall cross wherever possible only at intersections or marked crosswalks. Where any intersection of highways or streets contains no marked crosswalks, pedestrians shall not be guilty of negligence as a matter of law for crossing at any such intersection or between intersections when crossing by the most direct route. 
(b)  Pedestrians may cross an intersection diagonally when all traffic entering the intersection has been halted by lights or signals by a peace or police officer. 
(Code 1973, § 23-331; Code 1988, § 22-702) 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsection (a) and authority for subsection (b), Code of Virginia, § 46.2-923.  
Sec. 22-703. - Right-of-way generally. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle upon a highway or street shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such highway or street within any clearly marked crosswalk whether at mid-block or at the end of any block, or any regular pedestrian crossing included in the prolongation of the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent sidewalk at the end of a block, or at any intersection when the driver is approaching on a highway or street where the legal maximum speed does not exceed 35 miles per hour except at intersections or crosswalks where the movement of traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices where the driver shall yield according to the direction of the traffic officer or device. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall enter or cross an intersection in disregard of approaching traffic. 
(c)  The drivers of vehicles entering, crossing or turning at intersections shall change their course, slow down or come to a complete stop if necessary to permit pedestrians to cross such intersections safely and expeditiously. 
(d)  Pedestrians crossing highways or streets at intersections shall at all times have the right-of-way over vehicles making turns into the highways or streets being crossed by the pedestrians. 
(Code 1973, § 23-332; Code 1988, § 22-703) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-924.  
Sec. 22-704. - Stepping where they cannot be seen. 
Pedestrians shall not step into that portion of a highway or street open to moving vehicular traffic at a point between intersections where their presence would be obscured from the vision of drivers of approaching vehicles by a vehicle or other obstruction at the curb or side, except to board a passenger bus or to enter a safety zone, in which event they shall cross the highway or street only at right angles. 
(Code 1973, § 23-333; Code 1988, § 22-704) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-926.  
Sec. 22-705. - Entering or leaving buses. 
When actually boarding or alighting from passenger buses, pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over vehicles, but shall not, in order to board or alight from passenger buses, step into the highway or street sooner nor remain there longer than is absolutely necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 23-334; Code 1988, § 22-705) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-927.  
Sec. 22-706. - Walking on roadways. 
Pedestrians shall not use the highways or streets, other than the sidewalk thereof, for travel, except when necessary to do so because of the absence of sidewalks, reasonably suitable and passable for their use, in which case, if they walk upon the hard surface, or the main traveled portion of the roadway, they shall keep to the extreme left side or edge thereof, or where the shoulders of the highway are of sufficient width to permit, they may walk on either shoulder thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 23-335; Code 1988, § 22-706) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-928.  
Sec. 22-707. - Soliciting rides, employment or business. 
No person shall stand or stop in any street or roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 23-329; Code 1988, § 22-707) 
State Law reference— Soliciting rides, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-929.  
Sec. 22-708. - Playing on streets, highways, sidewalks; use of roller skates, toys, or other devices on wheels or runners. 
(a)  No person shall play on a highway or street, other that upon the sidewalks thereof, within the city. No person shall use on a highway or street where play is prohibited on roller skates, toys or other devices on wheels or runners, except bicycles, mopeds, motorized push scooters and motorcycles. 
(b)  On highways or streets where play is prohibited, the city manager may designate areas in which persons may be permitted to use roller skates, toys or other devices on wheels and runners, and, if such highways or streets have two traffic lanes, such persons using such devices, except bicycles, mopeds, motorized push scooters and motorcycles, shall keep as near as reasonably possible to the extreme left side or edge of the left hand lane so that they will be facing oncoming traffic at all times. 
(c)  No person riding upon any moped, motorized push scooters, roller skates, toys or other devices on wheels or runners shall at the same time attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(d)  No person operating a moped, motorized push scooter, or other device on wheels or runners shall tow any person on a bicycle, skateboard, skates, or any other vehicle or method of conveyance. 
(e)  No person shall operate a moped or motorized push scooter on a public sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 23-336; Code 1988, § 22-708; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 1, 11-22-2005) 
Cross reference— Provisions similar to subsection (c) above applicable to bicycle riders, § 5-65. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932.  
Sec. 22-708.1. - Mopeds, motorized push scooters; age of operators. 
No person under 16 years of age shall ride a moped or motorized push scooter on any street within the city. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of no more than $50.00. 
(Code 1988, § 22-708.1; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 2, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 22-708.2. - Motorized push scooters to be operated during daylight. 
No person shall operate a motorized "push scooter" as defined in section 22-1 on any highways, city streets or public property between sundown and sunrise. In no event shall a motorized push scooter be operated on any highway, city street or public property later than 7:00 p.m. or earlier than 9:00 a.m. 
(Code 1988, § 22-708.2; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 2, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 22-709. - Duty of driver approaching pedestrian guided by dog or carrying white or metallic cane. 
(a)  Whenever a totally or partially blind pedestrian is crossing or attempting to cross a public street or highway guided by a dog or carrying a cane, which is predominantly metallic or white in color, with or without a red tip, the driver of every vehicle approaching the intersection or place of crossing shall bring his vehicle to a full stop before arriving at such intersection or place of crossing, unless such intersection or place of crossing is controlled by a law enforcement officer or traffic light. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-338; Code 1988, § 22-709; Ord. No. 1990-69, § 1, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-933.  
Sec. 22-710. - Construction of section 22-709; failure to use cane or guide dog not contributory negligence. 
Nothing contained in section 22-709 shall be construed to deprive any totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person, not carrying such a cane or walking stick or not being guided by a dog, of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon pedestrians crossing streets or highways, nor shall the failure of such totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person to carry a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog upon the streets, highways or sidewalks of this city be held to constitute nor be evidence of contributory negligence. 
(Code 1973, § 23-341; Code 1988, § 22-710) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-934.  
Sec. 22-711. - Unlawful carrying of metallic or white cane. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, unless totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated, while on any public street or highway to carry in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is metallic or white in color or white tipped with red. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-339; Code 1988, § 22-711) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.1.  
Secs. 22-712—22-730. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - GARAGES AND REPAIR SHOPS 
 
Sec. 22-731. - Authority of police to inspect vehicles. 
Any police officer who shall be in uniform or shall exhibit a badge or other sign of authority shall have the right to inspect any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in any public garage or repair shop, for the purposes of locating stolen motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers and for investigating the title and registration of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers. For such purpose, the owner of any such garage or repair shop shall permit any such police officer, without let or hindrance to make investigation as herein authorized. 
(Code 1973, § 23-8; Code 1988, § 22-731) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-110.  
Sec. 22-732. - Reports—Vehicle struck by bullet. 
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle that shows evidence of having been struck by a bullet shall report to the nearest police station or to the state police, within 24 hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration number, and the name and address of the owner or operator of the vehicle if known. 
(Code 1973, § 23-9; Code 1988, § 22-732) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-109.  
Sec. 22-733. - Same—Unclaimed vehicles. 
The person in charge of any public garage or repair shop or automotive service or storage or parking place shall report to the nearest police station or to the state police any motor vehicle left unclaimed in his place of business for more than two weeks when he does not of his own knowledge know the name of the owner and the reason for such storage. 
(Code 1973, § 23-11; Code 1988, § 22-733) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1218.  
Sec. 22-734. - Same—Vehicles with certain equipment. 
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop shall, within 24 hours, report to the chief of police or the superintendent of state police any motor vehicle, other than an authorized police or fire department vehicle, brought to his place of business upon which is discovered any bulletproof glass or any smoke screen device of any nature. 
(Code 1973, § 23-10; Code 1988, § 22-734) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-109.  
Sec. 22-735. - Same—Forms. 
The reports required by sections 22-732 through 22-734 shall be made in writing on appropriate forms furnished by the city or the superintendent of state police, as the case may be. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-9—23-11; Code 1988, § 22-735)  
Secs. 22-736—22-751. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - ACCIDENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Tow trucks, § 37-246 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-752. - Duties of drivers and passengers when property damaged. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident in which a person is killed or injured or in which an attended vehicle or other attended property is damaged shall immediately stop as close to the scene of the accident as possible without obstructing traffic, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-888, and report his name, address, driver's license number and the vehicle registration number forthwith to the chief of police and to the person struck and injured if such person appears to be capable of understanding and retaining the information, or to the driver or some other occupant of the vehicle collided with or to the custodian of other damaged property. The driver shall also render reasonable assistance to any person injured in such accident, including taking such injured person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital if it is apparent that medical treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person. Where, because of injuries sustained in the accident, the driver is prevented from complying with the foregoing provisions of this section, the driver shall, as soon as reasonably possible, make the required report to the state police or local law enforcement agency and make a reasonable effort to locate the person struck, or the driver or some other occupant of the vehicle collided with, or the custodian of the damaged property, and report to such person or persons his name, address, driver's license number, and vehicle registration number. 
(b)  If the driver fails to stop and make the report required by subsection (a) of this section, every person 16 years of age or older in the vehicle with the driver at the time of the accident who has knowledge of the accident shall have a duty to ensure that a report is made within 24 hours from the time of the accident to the chief of police. The report shall include his name, address and such other information within his knowledge as the driver must report pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident in which no person is killed or injured but in which an unattended vehicle or other unattended property is damaged shall make a reasonable effort to find the owner or custodian of such property and shall report to the owner or custodian the information which the driver must report pursuant to subsection (a) of this section if such owner or custodian is found. If the owner or custodian of such damaged vehicle or property cannot be found, the driver shall leave a note or other sufficient information including driver identification and contact information in a conspicuous place at the scene of the accident and shall report the accident in writing within 24 hours to the chief of police. Such note or other information and written report shall contain the information that the driver must report pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. The written report shall, in addition, state the date, time and place of the accident and the driver's description of the property damage. Where, because of injuries sustained in the accident, the driver is prevented from complying with the foregoing provisions of this section, the driver shall, as soon as reasonably possible, make the required report to the chief of police and make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or custodian of the unattended vehicle or property and report to him the information required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  If the driver fails to stop and make a reasonable search for the owner or custodian of an unattended vehicle or property or to leave a note for such owner or custodian as required by subsection (c) of this section, every person 16 years of age or older in the vehicle with the driver at the time of the accident who has knowledge of the accident shall have a duty to ensure that a report is made within 24 hours from the time of the accident to the chief of police. The report shall include his name, address and such other facts within his knowledge as are required by subsection (c) of this section to be reported by the driver. 
(e)  The reports required by this section are in addition to other accident reports required by this article or state law and shall be made irrespective of the amount of property damage involved. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall apply irrespective of whether such accident occurs on the public streets or highways or on private property. 
(g)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall, if such accident results in injury to or the death of any person, be guilty of a class 6 felony. If such accident results only in damage to property, the person so convicted shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor; however, if the vehicle or other property struck is unattended and such damage is less than $250.00, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. A motor vehicle operator convicted of a class 4 misdemeanor under this section shall be assigned three demerit points by the state commissioner of the department of motor vehicle. 
(h)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section may be punished, in addition to the penalties provided in this section for such violation, if such accident resulted only in damage to property and such damage exceeded $500.00, by suspension of his license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the highways of this state for a period not to exceed six months by the court. This subsection shall in no case be construed to limit the authority or duty of the commissioner of the state department of motor vehicles with respect to revocation of licenses for violation of this section or of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-894—46.2-897, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-364 et seq. Any license revoked under the provisions of this subsection shall be surrendered to the court to be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-304—23-306; Code 1988, § 22-752; Ord. No. 1989-83, 9-26-1989; Ord. No. 1993-15, § 1, 2-9-1993) 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsections (a)—(f) and duties of drivers and passengers when accident results in personal injury or death, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-894—46.2-899; provisions similar to subsections (g) and (h), Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-900, 46.2-901.  
Sec. 22-753. - Driver to give immediate notice of certain accidents. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury or death of any person, or some person acting for such driver, shall immediately give notice of the accident to the police department. A willful failure to make the report required in this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-308; Code 1988, § 22-753) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-371.  
Sec. 22-754. - Written reports by drivers. 
(a)  Any person involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage or when there is reason to believe a motor vehicle involved in the accident was uninsured at the time of the accident, may make a written report of it to the commissioner of the state department of motor vehicles, on a form prescribed by the state department of motor vehicles. 
(b)  If any accident report filed pursuant to the provisions of this article is alleged to be false or inaccurate, the commissioner of the state department of motor vehicles shall withhold any action under this section or imposition of any penalty and shall investigate and determine the true circumstances of the accident, including a determination of the identity of the parties involved. 
(c)  The driver of a motor vehicle involved in any accident of which report must be made pursuant to this section shall provide information relating to the certification of insurance or bond if there was in effect at the time of the accident with respect to the motor vehicle involved: 
(1)  A standard provisions automobile liability policy in form approved by the state corporation commission and issued by an insurance carrier authorized to do business in this state or, if the motor vehicle was not registered in this state or was a motor vehicle which was registered elsewhere than in this state at the effective date of the policy, or at its most recent renewal, an automobile liability policy acceptable to that commission as substantially the equivalent of a standard provisions automobile liability policy; provided, in either event, that every such automobile liability policy is subject to the limits provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-472. 
(2)  Any other form of liability insurance policy issued by an insurance carrier authorized to do business in this state or by a bond; provided that every such policy or bond mentioned herein is subject to limits set out in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-472. 
(d)  The chief of police shall forward the certification of insurance or bond to the insurance company or surety company, whichever is applicable, for verification as to whether or not the policy or bond certified was applicable to any liability that may arise out of the accident as to the named insured. A copy of the certification of insurance or bond shall be retained and shall be disclosed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-380. 
(Code 1973, § 23-309; Code 1988, § 22-754; Ord. No. 1989-83, 9-26-1989) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-372; authority of city to require driver to file accident report, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381.  
Sec. 22-755. - Report by investigating officer. 
(a)  Every police officer who, in the course of duty, investigates a motor vehicle accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of the minimum amount stated in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-373(A) (as said subsection is amended, restated or moved from time to time) or more, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter and elsewhere, by interviewing participants or witnesses shall, within 24 hours after completing the investigation, forward a written report of the accident to the police department and the state department of motor vehicles. Such report shall include the name of the insurance carrier or of the insurance agent of the automobile liability policy on each vehicle involved in such accident. 
(b)  Any report filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include information as to the speed of each vehicle involved in the accident and the type of vehicles involved in all accidents between passenger vehicles and vehicles or combinations of vehicles used to transport property, and whether any trucks involved in such accidents were covered or uncovered. 
(c)  The state department of motor vehicles shall supply copies of accident reports received under this section to the commonwealth transportation commissioner who shall exercise the authority granted to him under Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-870—46.2-878 to reduce speed limits where accident frequency or severity or other factors may indicate the course of action to be warranted. 
(d)  All accident reports made by investigating officers shall be for the confidential use of the police department and other city or state agencies for accident prevention purposes and shall not be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of any accident. The police department shall disclose from the reports, upon request of any person, the date, time and location of the accident and the names and addresses of the drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved, the injured persons, the witnesses and one investigating officer. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-310, 23-316; Code 1988, § 22-755; Ord. No. 1992-48, § 1, 6-9-1992; Ord. No. 2019-38 , § 1, 6-11-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-373, 46.2-379.  
Sec. 22-756. - Report by person in charge of garage or repair shop. 
(a)  The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle that shows evidence of having been involved in a serious motor vehicle accident or with evidence of bloodstains shall report to the police department within 24 hours after the motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration and the name and address of the owner or operator of the vehicle if known. Reports required by this section shall be made upon forms furnished by the superintendent of state police. 
(b)  All accident reports made by garages pursuant to this article shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department or other city or state agencies having use for the report for accident prevention purposes. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-313, 23-314; Code 1988, § 22-756) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-376, 46.2-377.  
Sec. 22-757. - Report forms. 
The city shall supply to the police department or other officials, garages and other suitable agencies forms for accident reports and other reports required by this article to be made to the police department, appropriate with respect to the persons required to make such reports and the purpose to be served. 
(Code 1973, § 23-312; Code 1988, § 22-757) 
State Law reference— State department of motor vehicles to prepare and supply, upon request, forms to police department, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-374.  
Sec. 22-758. - Extent to which reports may be used as evidence. 
No report submitted pursuant to this article shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the police department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has or claims to have made such a report or upon demand of any court a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the police department, solely to prove compliance or noncompliance with the requirement that the report be made to the police department. 
(Code 1973, § 23-315; Code 1988, § 22-758) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-378.  
Sec. 22-759. - Certain reports open to inspection by parties in interest. 
Any report of an accident made pursuant to sections 22-754, 22-755 or 22-756 shall be for the confidential use of the police department and subject to the provisions of this article. The police department shall make the reports, including the report of the investigating officer, and including any photographs taken by the investigating officers, available for inspection by any person involved or injured in the accident or his attorney or any authorized representative of any insurance carrier reasonably anticipating exposure to civil liability as a consequence of the accident. 
(Code 1973, § 23-317; Code 1988, § 22-759) 
State Law reference— Retention period; reports open to inspection of certain persons, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-380; authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381.  
Sec. 22-760. - Furnishing copy of report to parties in interest. 
The chief of police, upon written request of any person entitled to inspect a report pursuant to section 22-759, shall furnish a copy of such report to such person, for which a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged for each such copy. The chief of police may furnish an extract of the information contained in such report sufficient to identify the accident, the vehicle involved, the driver, owner and insurer of the vehicle and such other information as he shall deem pertinent, upon such form as he shall deem advisable, for which no fee shall be charged. 
(Code 1973, § 23-317; Code 1988, § 22-760; Ord. No. 2002-41, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
State Law reference— Authority to charge fee for reports, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381.  
Sec. 22-761. - Reports required by article are in addition to reports required by state law. 
The reports of accidents required by this article are in addition to and not in lieu of any reports required by the Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-371—46.2-388. 
(Code 1973, § 23-318; Code 1988, § 22-761; Ord. No. 1989-83, 9-26-1989) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to require accident reports, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381.  
Sec. 22-762. - Leaving scene of accident when directed to do so by officer. 
A person shall leave the scene of a traffic accident when directed to do so by a police officer. A violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction. 
(Code 1973, § 23-307; Code 1988, § 22-762) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-902.  
Secs. 22-763—22-785. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - ABANDONED VEHICLES GENERALLY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Disposal pursuant to this article of inoperable vehicles removed from private property by city, § 23-49(c). 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this article, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1201. See also, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1213, 46.2-1217. 
 
Sec. 22-786. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof that: 
(1)  Is inoperable and is left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours; or 
(3)  Has remained on private property, including but not limited to any commercial parking place, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the service, repair maintenance or sale of motor vehicles, whether or not such vehicle was brought onto or left at such property with or without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours. 
Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle such vehicles. 
(Code 1973, § 23-245; Code 1988, § 22-786) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200.  
Sec. 22-787. - Authority to take into custody. 
The city, acting through the chief of police, may take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle. In such connection, the city may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire persons, equipment and facilities or firms or corporations who shall be independent contractors for the purpose of removing, preserving and storing abandoned motor vehicles. 
(Code 1973, § 23-246; Code 1988, § 22-787) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1201.  
Sec. 22-788. - Notice to owner of vehicle taken into custody. 
(a)  If the chief of police takes into custody an abandoned motor vehicle pursuant to section 22-787 he shall notify, within 15 days thereof, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of record of the motor vehicle and all persons having security interest therein of record, that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held, inform the owner and any persons having security interest of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle within three weeks after the date of the notice, upon payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and state that the failure of the owner or persons having security interest to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, and all persons having any security interest, of all right, title and interest in the vehicle, and consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction. 
(b)  If records of the state department of motor vehicles contain no address for the owner or no address of any person shown by such records to have a security interest, or if the identity and addresses of the owner and all persons having a security interest cannot be determined with reasonable certainty, notice by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the motor vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice pursuant to this section. Such notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles. Any such notice shall be within the time requirements prescribed for notice by mail and shall have the same contents required for a notice by mail. 
(c)  The consequences and the fact of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle shall be as set forth in a notice given in accordance with and pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1973, § 23-247; Code 1988, § 22-788) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1202.  
Sec. 22-789. - Sale. 
(a)  If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided for in section 22-788, the city, or its authorized agent, shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-617, sell the vehicle at public auction. The purchaser shall take title to the vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership of others, shall receive a sales receipt at the auction and shall be entitled to, upon application therefor pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-603, a certificate of title and registration card therefor. The sales receipt at such a sale shall be sufficient title only for purposes of transferring the vehicle to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking or dismantling, and in such case, no further titling of the vehicle shall be necessary. 
(b)  From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle pursuant to this section, the city, or its authorized agent, shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to section 22-788. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or any person having security interests therein, as their interests may appear, for 90 days, and then shall be deposited into the treasury of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 23-248; Code 1988, § 22-789; Ord. No. 1989-83, 9-26-1989) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1203.  
Sec. 22-790. - Vehicles abandoned in garages. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof left for more than ten days in a garage operated for commercial purposes, or for more than ten days after the period when, pursuant to contract, the vehicle was to remain on the premises, after notice, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, within 15 days thereof, to the owner of record and all persons having security interests of record therein, to pick up the vehicle, shall be deemed an abandoned motor vehicle, and may be reported by the garagekeeper to the city. All abandoned motor vehicles left in garages may be taken into custody by the city in accordance with section 22-787 and shall be subject to the notice and sale provisions contained in sections 22-788 and 22-789. If, however, such vehicle is reclaimed in accordance with section 22-788, the person reclaiming such vehicle shall, in addition to the other charges required to be paid, pay the charges of the garagekeeper. If such vehicle is sold pursuant to section 22-789, the garagekeeper's charges, if any, shall be paid from, and to the extent of, the excess of the proceeds of the sale after paying the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving and storing such vehicle which resulted from placing such vehicle in custody and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to section 22-788. Except as otherwise provided in this article, nothing herein shall be construed to limit or restrict any rights conferred upon any person under Code of Virginia, §§ 43-32—43-36. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "garagekeeper" means any operator of a commercial parking place, motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, maintenance or sale of motor vehicles whether or not the motor vehicle had been brought to such location with the consent of the owner or person in control of the property. 
(Code 1973, § 23-249; Code 1988, § 22-790) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1204.  
Sec. 22-791. - Demolition of inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, any abandoned motor vehicle which is found, by a person designated by the city manager, to be inoperable and which, by virtue of its condition, cannot be feasibly restored to operable condition, may be disposed of to a demolisher, without the title and without the notification procedures required by this article. The demolisher, upon taking custody of such vehicle, shall notify the state department of motor vehicles, on forms and in the manner prescribed by the commissioner of such department, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, no other report or notice shall be required in such instance. 
(b)  Any demolisher who acquires a motor vehicle under this section for purposes of wrecking, dismantling or demolition shall not be required to obtain a certificate of title for the vehicle in his own name. After the vehicle has been demolished, processed or changed so that it physically is no longer a motor vehicle, the demolisher shall surrender to the state department of motor vehicles for cancellation the certificate of title or sales receipt therefor. The department shall issue such forms, rules and regulations governing the surrender of sales receipts and certificates of title as are appropriate. 
(c)  A demolisher shall keep an accurate and complete record of all motor vehicles purchased or received by him in the course of his business. These records shall contain the name and address of the person from whom each such motor vehicle was purchased or received and the date when such purchases or receipts occurred. Such records shall be open for inspection by the chief of police at any time during normal business hours. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-250, 23-251; Code 1988, § 22-791) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1205, 46.2-1206.  
Secs. 22-792—22-800. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES CONSTITUTING TRAFFIC HAZARD OR ILLEGALLY PARKED OR ABANDONED, ETC.[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for, and provisions similar to, this article, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213. 
 
Sec. 22-801. - Authorized—Generally. 
(a)  The chief of police or any police officer designated by him is hereby authorized and directed to remove or cause to be removed to the city compound designated by the city manager: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer found on the streets or public grounds of the city unattended by the owner or operator, which vehicle constitutes a hazard to traffic or is parked in such a manner as to be in violation of law. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that is left unattended for more than ten days upon any public property or any privately owned property other than the property of the owner of such vehicle or that is abandoned upon such public property or privately owned property without the permission of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. 
(3)  Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer that is stalled or rendered immobile, as the result of adverse weather conditions or other emergency situations, on any public roadway within the city. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall be presumed to be abandoned if: 
(1)  It lacks either a current license plate or a valid state inspection certificate or sticker and; 
(2)  It has been at a specific location for four days without being moved. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be removed under this section from privately owned premises without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. Any person at whose request a vehicle is removed from privately owned property shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of the removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 23-233; Code 1988, § 22-801; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005)  
Sec. 22-802. - Same—When vehicle left on street or public ground for more than three days. 
When any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is found unattended, otherwise than as set forth in section 22-801, in the same place on any street or public ground continuously for a period longer than three consecutive days, and the chief of police has given the owner of record of such vehicle at least two days' notice in writing of his intention to remove, or cause to be removed, such vehicle from such street or public ground to the city compound, or has made a diligent attempt to notify such owner, but has been unable to do so, such vehicle shall be considered as abandoned and the chief of police is authorized and empowered to remove, or cause to be removed, the vehicle to the city compound to be there held subject to the conditions and provisions set forth in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 23-237; Code 1988, § 22-802)  
Sec. 22-803. - Procedure when owner appears during process of removal. 
If any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is about to be removed or is in process of being removed from the street or public grounds under the provisions of this article and the owner thereof or his agent appears and claims the vehicle and agrees forthwith to remove it from the street or public grounds, the vehicle shall be delivered to such owner or agent upon demand therefor and upon furnishing satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or agency. If the owner or agent fails, refuses or neglects to forthwith remove the vehicle, it shall be nevertheless removed from the street or public grounds by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 23-238; Code 1988, § 22-803)  
Sec. 22-804. - Report to chief of police and notice to vehicle owner. 
The officer removing or causing the removal of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer under this article shall immediately make a written report thereof to the chief of police, setting forth the date, time and place of, and the reason for, such removal, and the license number of the vehicle removed. As promptly as possible after the removal, unless the vehicle has been sooner released, the chief of police shall notify in writing the owner of record of the vehicle, if known, that the vehicle has been impounded. 
(Code 1973, § 23-234; Code 1988, § 22-804)  
Sec. 22-805. - Redemption of vehicle. 
(a)  No vehicle impounded under the provisions of this article shall be released or removed from the city compound, except upon payment by the owner thereof, or his duly authorized representative, to the city, who shall issue a receipt therefor of a towing charge in accordance with the schedule of fees set by the city manager in section 37-250, plus a storage charge, if the vehicle has been impounded for a period of more than 24 hours, as set forth in appendix A to this Code, per day or fraction thereof, plus the cost of publication of any notice required by this article, plus cost of investigation as to ownership and liens required by this article. The city manager may release any such vehicle from the city compound without the payment of such charges and costs, or any part thereof, whenever he deems it proper so to do. The owner, or his duly authorized representative, upon delivery of the vehicle to him shall sign a receipt for the same. The payment of the costs herein set forth, or the release of any impounded vehicle without the payment of any or all of such costs, shall not operate to relieve the offender from liability for any line or penalty for the violation of any law or ordinance on account of which the vehicle was impounded. 
(b)  All amounts received by the city for charges and costs as set forth in this section shall be paid to the city treasurer at such times as the city manager shall prescribe. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-235, 23-236; Code 1988, § 22-805; Ord. No. 1991-41, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1996-17, § 1, 3-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-806. - Sale of vehicle. 
(a)  If the owner of any vehicle impounded under this article fails or refuses to pay the charges and costs set forth in this article, or if the identity or whereabouts of the owner is unknown or unascertainable, after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to such owner at his last known address and to the holder of a lien of record in the office of the state department of motor vehicles against the vehicle, the city may, after holding the vehicle 30 days and after due notice of sale, dispose of same at public sale and the proceeds of such sale shall be forwarded by him to the city treasurer. If the value of the vehicle is determined by three disinterested dealers or garagemen to be less than $150.00, it may be disposed of by private sale or junked. 
(b)  The city shall pay from the proceeds of a sale under this section the cost of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale, and the balance of such funds shall be held by him for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. If no claim is made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale, after the payment of such costs, the funds, if any, shall be deposited to the general fund of the city. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city within 90 days from the date of such sale, and if timely application is made therefor, the city shall pay the same to the owner without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor shall any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after 90 days from the date of such sale. 
(Code 1973, § 23-239; Code 1988, § 22-806)  
Sec. 22-807. - Sale of personal property found in unattended or abandoned vehicles. 
Any personal property found in any unattended or abandoned motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be sold incident to the sale of such vehicle pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1973, § 23-227; Code 1988, § 22-807) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1214.  
Chapter 23 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Abatement of nuisances by health department personnel, § 2-426; abatement of nuisances resulting from violation of provisions concerning collection of garbage and refuse, § 16-31; abatement of nuisances resulting from housing code violations, § 17-26; premises used for unlawful possession, distribution, etc., of controlled substances or marijuana declared to be common nuisance, § 24-40; abatement of nuisances resulting from failure to connect to public sewer, § 38-35. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to abate nuisances, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-900 et seq., 15.2-1115; nuisances involving controlled substances, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-258.01; nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 48-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affidavit means the affidavit sworn to under oath prepared by the city in accordance with section 23-91 of this chapter. 
Alley means a public way, other than a street, designed for vehicular or pedestrian travel to provide access to or from the rear or side of the property. 
Commercial sex acts means any specific activities that would constitute a criminal act under Article 3 (§ 18.2-344 et seq.) of Chapter 8 of Title 18.2 of the Code of Virginia or a substantially similar local ordinance if a criminal charge were to be filed against the individual perpetrator of such criminal activity. 
Controlled substance means the same as that term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3401. 
Corrective action means (i) taking specific actions with respect to the buildings or structures on property that are reasonably expected to abate criminal blight on such real property, including the removal, repair, or securing of any building, wall, or other structure, or (ii) changing specific policies, practices, and procedures of the real property owner that are reasonably expected to abate criminal blight on real property. A local law-enforcement official shall prepare an affidavit on behalf of the city that states specific actions to be taken on the part of the property owner that the city determines are necessary to abate the identified criminal blight on such real property and that do not impose an undue financial burden on the owner. 
Criminal blight means a condition existing on real property that endangers the public health or safety of residents of the city and is caused by (i) the regular presence on the property of persons under the influence of controlled substances; (ii) the regular use of the property for the purpose of illegally possessing, manufacturing, or distributing controlled substances; (iii) the regular use of the property for the purpose of engaging in in commercial sex acts; or (iv) repeated acts of the malicious discharge of a firearm within any building or dwelling that would constitute a criminal act under Virginia Code, § 18.2-279 or a substantially similar local ordinance if a criminal charge were to be filed against the individual perpetrator of such criminal activity. 
Debris means dead or dying standing weeds, dead or dying standing trees, any tree or parts of a tree which have fallen due to natural causes or otherwise, trash, junk, discarded or abandoned parts of vehicles, appliances or machinery, and shall include, but not be limited to the open outdoor storage of personal property of any kind such as appliances or appliance parts, furniture, interior or exterior equipment or machinery, which is no longer used, including antiques, collectables, glassware and crockery, or any other material or substance which may provide a harbor for snakes or rats or anything or any condition which may be a fire menace or breeding place for mosquitoes, give off obnoxious or offensive odors or endanger the health or safety of the residents of the city. Debris shall not include any of the above property openly stored in a junkyard as defined and permitted pursuant to the zoning ordinance. 
Director means the director of permits and inspections and his representatives, when duly authorized by him to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Fixture means a pole, street light, tree, tree box, tree stake, fire hydrant, fire alarm box, trash receptacle, stand, wire, rope, public bridge, railroad trestle, drinking fountain, life buoy or any other lifesaving equipment, standard serving as a base or support for a directional sign, traffic regulation or control signal, sign or device and any other fixture or structure, whether publicly or privately owned or whether permanently or temporarily placed in, on or over a public way, but shall not include a fixture permanently attached to a building, structure, pole or standard on private property serving as a base or support for a sign and projecting over a part of a public way installed and maintained in accordance with law; provided, that it is used only for advertising the enterprise of the occupant of the premises. 
Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, which is not in operating condition, or which for a period of 60 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle or on which are displayed neither valid license plates nor a valid inspection decal or does display an inspection decal that has been expired for more than 60 days. 
Law-enforcement official means the chief of police or the chief's designee. The law-enforcement official shall coordinate with the building or fire code official of the city as otherwise provided under applicable laws and regulations. 
Non-weather resistant means any furniture, device or material capable of absorbing moisture, not resistant to mildew, rot or deterioration when subjected to exposure to the elements or any item containing electrical circuitry, wiring or devices not UL approved for exterior application. 
Occupant means a tenant or any person who is in control or possession of or actually occupies land in the city. 
Owner, except for purposes of article V of this chapter, means a person who holds beneficial ownership of any land in the city or an agent, executor, administrator, trustee or guardian having charge, care, management or control of any land in the city. For purposes of article V of this chapter, owner means solely the record owner of real property. 
Property means real property. 
Public way means a street including any unimproved sections, sidewalk, alley, road, highway, bridge, viaduct, subway, underpass, park, parkway, play field, playground and any other similar place in the city opened to and used by the public. 
Refuse means refuse as defined in section 16-1 of this Code. 
Sidewalk means a sidewalk as defined in section 1-2 of this Code. 
Street means a highway as defined in section 1-2 of this Code. 
Weeds means any grass or plants out of place, wild or uncontrolled growth or vegetation of every kind on any land, alley, sidewalk or street in the city, whether growing or severed from the land, of such height or of such profusion as to constitute or which is likely to constitute a harborage for rats, a place where mosquitoes or other harmful pests or insect infestations may breed or water may stagnate or which conceals or is likely to conceal deposits of garbage, trash or debris. 
(Code 1973, § 39-1; Code 1988, § 23-1; Ord. No. 1988-111, § 6(39-1), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-86, § 1, 9-26-1989; Ord. No. 1991-13, § 3, 2-12-1991; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 2, 7-26-2005; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 2, 2-12-2008; Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-28-2018) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definition of inoperable motor vehicle, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-905; similar definitions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907.  
Sec. 23-2. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 23-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 23-3. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABATEMENT GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-900, 15.2-901, 15.2-905, 15.2-907. 
 
Sec. 23-4. - Lien for abatement expenses incurred by city. 
There shall be a lien on any real estate for the amount of expense incurred by the city in abating any nuisance thereon after notice to the owner as provided by ordinance. Such lien shall rank on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes. Such lien shall not be good against a purchaser of such real estate for value without notice until the lien is docketed as required by section 23-5. 
(Code 1973, § 39-16; Code 1988, § 23-4; Ord. No. 1992-50, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001)  
Sec. 23-5. - Docket book. 
The city treasurer shall keep in his office a book entitled "Nuisance Abatement Lien Docket Book" in which shall be docketed the expense incurred by the city in abating any nuisance pursuant to any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city. Such expense shall be indexed in the name of the person owning the real estate on which the nuisance existed at the time the expense was incurred and shall be cross indexed in the land book in the name of such owner. 
(Code 1973, § 39-16; Code 1988, § 23-5)  
Sec. 23-6. - Interest on liens docketed. 
If a lien is docketed pursuant to section 23-5, interest shall be assessed thereon at the rate and in the manner set forth in section 35-5 of this Code, as amended, with such interest to accrue upon the principal amount of such lien only, together with such other charges as are prescribed for the abatement of the nuisance involved. 
(Code 1973, § 39-16; Code 1988, § 23-6; Ord. No. 1990-38, § 1, 5-15-1990)  
Sec. 23-7. - Annual report of money collected in connection with abatement by city. 
The treasurer shall annually report to the city manager the amount of money collected in connection with the abatement of nuisances by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 39-16; Code 1988, § 23-7; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 1, 5-26-1998)  
Sec. 23-8. - Abatement or removal of nuisances, recovery of costs. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city may maintain an action to compel a responsible party to abate, raze or remove a public nuisance. If the public nuisance presents an imminent and immediate threat to life or property, then the city may abate, raze or remove such public nuisance and the city may bring an action against the responsible party to recover the necessary costs incurred for the provision of public emergency services reasonably required to abate any such public nuisance. 
(b)  The term "nuisance" shall include, but not be limited to, dangerous or unhealthy substances which have escaped, spilled, been released or which have been allowed to accumulate in or on any place and all unsafe, dangerous or unsanitary public or private buildings, walls or structures which constitute a menace to the health and safety of the occupants thereof or the public. The term "responsible party" shall include, but not be limited to, the owner, occupier or possessor of the premises where the nuisance is located; the owner or agent of the owner of the material which escaped, spilled or was released and the owner or agent of the owner who was transporting or otherwise responsible for such material and whose acts or negligence caused such public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 23-8; Ord. No. 1990-78, § 23-8, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001)  
Sec. 23-9. - Enforcement of nuisance abatement liens. 
If a lien is docketed pursuant to section 23-5, then the cost of such abatement of nuisance, together with such other charges as are prescribed for the abatement of the nuisance involved and the accrued interest thereon, may be collected in any manner provided by law for the collection of state or local taxes. 
(Code 1988, § 23-9; Ord. No. 1990-38, § 2, 5-15-1990)  
Secs. 23-10—23-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS AND DEBRIS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted August 28, 2018, renamed art. III from "weeds and debris; drug blight" to "weeds and debris." 
Cross reference— Garbage and refuse, ch. 16; vegetation, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Removal or disposal of trash, cutting of grass and weeds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901. 
 
Sec. 23-26. - Prohibition; declaration of nuisance; abatement generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for the owner or occupant of any land or lot in the city to permit any grass or weeds to grow upon such land or lot to a height exceeding ten inches within 300 feet of any building or road or to permit any debris to remain at any place upon such land or lot. 
(b)  Weeds which have attained a height of ten inches or more shall be presumed to be detrimental to public health and a public nuisance, which presumption may be rebutted by competent evidence. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any land or lot within the city to permit any weeds or debris to remain upon such land or lot in such quantity and condition as to constitute a fire hazard. 
(d)  All weeds are hereby declared to be detrimental to public health and a public nuisance and shall be cut or removed from land, alleys, sidewalks and streets whenever it is necessary to do so in order to effectively abate the nuisance. 
(e)  All debris is hereby declared to be detrimental to public health and a public nuisance and shall be removed from land, alleys, sidewalks and streets whenever it is necessary to do so in order to effectively abate the nuisance. 
(Code 1973, §§ 39-1—39-4; Code 1988, §§ 23-1, 23-26; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 2, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-28-2018) 
State Law reference— Abatement, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-901, 15.2-907.  
Sec. 23-27. - Notice to abate—Required; contents. 
(a)  Whenever the director or his/her designee finds that grass or weeds exist on any land, alley, sidewalk or street, he shall give notice in writing of the existence of the nuisance to the owner or occupant, or both, or lienholder, of the land on which the nuisance exists, or to the owner or occupant, or both, or lienholder, of the land abutting the alley, sidewalk, or street on which the nuisance exists, and shall order the owner or occupant, or both, to cut and, when necessary, remove the grass or weeds within such reasonable time as the director or designee shall specify in the notice; provided, that in no event shall the time allowed be greater than ten days. Two notices issued during a calendar year shall constitute reasonable notice for the calendar year, and no additional notices shall be required. The notice shall provide that, if the grass or weeds are not cut, and/or removed from such land or premises and maintained in accord with this section, the same shall be done by the city or its agent, at the expense of the owner. 
(b)  Whenever the director or designee finds that debris exists on any land, alley, sidewalk or street, he shall give notice in writing of the existence of the nuisance to the owner or occupant, or both, or lienholder, of the land on which the nuisance exists, or to the owner or occupant, or both, or lienholder, of the land abutting the alley, sidewalk or street on which the nuisance exists and shall order the owner or occupant, or both, to remove the debris within such reasonable time as the director or designee shall specify in the notice. The notice shall provide that the debris shall be removed from such land or premises within ten days of the same and maintained in accord with this section, or the same shall be done by the city, at the expense of the owner. 
(c)  Whenever the director or his designee finds that a criminal blight exists on any land, alley, sidewalk or street, he shall give notice in writing of the existence of the criminal blight to the owner of the land on which the nuisance exists, or to the owner of the land abutting the alley, sidewalk or street on which the blighting influence exists and shall commence the process to abate the criminal blight set forth in article V hereof. 
(d)  The notice required to be given under this section shall set forth the location of the land, alley, sidewalk or street on which the nuisance exists. 
(e)  The city may, after notice is given as provided in this section maintain the subject property for a period of up to one year from the day following the service of said notice, unless and until notified by the property owner, or someone acting on the owner's behalf, in writing, that the property will be maintained by or for the owner, and the director is satisfied that such maintenance is being carried out satisfactorily. Cessation of maintenance by the owner or by the owner's agent during the period of one year as provided herein shall not be cause for the director to reissue a notice during such period, and the director may begin or resume the maintenance as provided herein. In any event, notice as provided in this section must be given each and every year thereafter, if the director determines that it is necessary to continue such maintenance. 
(Code 1973, §§ 39-5, 39-7; Code 1988, § 23-27; Ord. No. 1992-50, § 2, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1995-23, §§ 1, 2, 3-28-1995; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 2-10-2015 ; Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-28-2018)  
Sec. 23-28. - Same—Service. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 23-27, service of the notice required to be given under section 23-27 shall be made by mailing the notice to the last known street or post office address of the person or lienholder to whom it is directed or by delivery thereof to such person or lienholder and simultaneously posting the notice on the land or premises on which the nuisance exists or on the land or premises abutting the sidewalk, street, or alley on which the nuisance exists. Proof of so mailing or delivering a notice or the posting of such notice shall be sufficient evidence that the notice was served and the date of mailing or delivery or posting, as the case may be, shall be the date of service. 
(Code 1973, § 39-5; Code 1988, § 23-28; Ord. No. 1995-23, § 3, 3-28-1995; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2015-07, § 1, 2-10-2015 )  
Sec. 23-29. - Extension of time for abatement. 
Any person to whom notice is sent pursuant to this article, may request, within the time period set for compliance in the notice, an extension of such time period from the director. Where warranted by extenuating circumstances, the director or his designee may extend the date for compliance for an additional period not exceeding 30 days from the date set for compliance in the original notice. 
(Code 1973, § 39-5; Code 1988, § 23-29; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001)  
Sec. 23-30. - Abatement by city. 
If an owner or occupant fails, refuses or neglects to comply with a notice given pursuant to this article, or if notice is not required as provided in section 23-27(e), regardless if the property is vacant or not, the director or designee shall cause the nuisance to be abated and shall transmit to the city treasurer a statement of all costs incurred thereby, including in such costs a fee or charge as set forth in appendix A to this Code to cover the administrative expense incurred, all of which shall be added to the taxes assessed against the real estate on which the nuisance existed or abutting the alley, sidewalk or street on which the nuisance existed for the ensuing tax year and shall be collected with such taxes by any manner prescribed by law for the collection of city taxes. All such costs shall be docketed as a lien against the real estate in the manner prescribed by section 23-5, which lien shall remain in effect until removed by payment of such costs in full, and which lien shall rank on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes. 
(Code 1973, §§ 39-6, 39-7; Code 1988, § 23-30; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001)  
Sec. 23-31. - Exemptions from the provisions of section 23-26(a). 
To protect ecological sensitive areas the following properties are hereby exempt from the provisions of section 23-26(a). 
(1)  Hoffler Creek Wildlife Preserve. 
(2)  All tidal wetlands areas as defined by city codes. 
(3)  City owned and maintained parks and preserves. 
(Code 1988, § 23-10; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 3, 7-10-2001)  
Secs. 23-32—23-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INOPERABLE VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Garbage and refuse, ch. 16; vegetation, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt procedure for inoperable vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432. 
 
Sec. 23-46. - Prohibition against open storage on certain property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from view, on any property zoned or used for residential purposes, or on any property zoned for commercial or agricultural purposes, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer: 
(1)  Which is not in operating condition; 
(2)  Which has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle; or 
(3)  Which lacks either a current license plate or a current state inspection decal. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Property zoned for residential purposes. Property zoned for residential uses under chapter 40 of this Code. 
(2)  Property zoned for commercial purposes. Property zoned for nonresidential uses under chapter 40 of this Code. 
(3)  The term fully enclosed building or structure shall not include a tent or other shelter with cloth of fabric covering the exterior of an air supported structure. 
(4)  The term "shielded or screened from view" shall mean: 
a.  The covering of the vehicle with a fitted car cover; or 
b.  The placing of the vehicle behind a privacy fence of sufficient height to shield the vehicle from the view of a person standing at ground level from the outside of the property on which the subject vehicle is located; or 
c.  The placing of the vehicle behind a solid vegetated hedge of sufficient height or density to shield the vehicle from the view of a person standing at ground level from outside of the property on which the subject vehicle is located. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, no more than one inoperable motor vehicle may be kept on any property outside of a fully enclosed building or structure. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business that is regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. Additionally, no automobile repair facility in any zoning district may store outside of a fully enclosed building or structure, any inoperable motor vehicle that is not undergoing active repair with a valid service write-up providing the name of the customer, type of service to be performed, and the anticipated date of completion. If the anticipated date of completion has passed, the owner or operator of the facility shall document on the work order or produce other documentation of the expected date of completion and the reasons for the delay. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if the owner of an inoperable motor vehicle can demonstrate that he is actively restoring or repairing the vehicle, and if the vehicle is shielded or screened from view, the vehicle and one additional vehicle that is being used for the restoration and repair may remain on the property, provided that the additional vehicle is similarly shielded or screened from view. The term "active restoration and repair" shall mean that: 
(1)  The owner has established a reasonable, written timetable for the repair of the vehicle; 
(2)  The owner has the necessary parts on hand or on documented order; and 
(3)  The owner has a fully enclosed building or structure where all major repairs will take place. 
(Code 1973, § 39-9; Code 1988, § 23-46; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 1, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 1, 2-22-2005; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this article, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-905.  
Sec. 23-47. - Declaration of nuisance. 
The accumulation and storage of an inoperable motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in violation of section 23-46 shall constitute a nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 39-10; Code 1988, § 23-47; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 1, 2-22-2005)  
Sec. 23-48. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  If the director finds any inoperable motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer kept or stored in violation of section 23-46, he shall make a diligent search and inquiry to determine the record owner of the land upon which the vehicle is located, and shall notify such owner in writing by mail directed to his last known mailing address as shown on current real estate and tax assessment records, that a violation has been found and the nature thereof. The director may also place on the vehicle a brightly colored placard, which shall serve as notice to the landowner, and/or the owner of the vehicle that the vehicle is inoperable as defined in section 23-46(a). The notice shall require such owner to cause the vehicle to be brought into compliance, removed from the property forthwith or be taken to an authorized place of storage. The mailing of such notice shall be proof thereof, and the posting or delivery of such notice shall be equivalent to mailing. 
(b)  If the mailing address of the owner of the land upon which the vehicle is located is not known, and the owner has no agent in the city, such notice shall be posted upon such land as notice to the owner thereof. 
(c)  In the event that an inoperable motor vehicle is returned to the subject property after removal or is moved to any location in the city except a repair facility pursuant to the notice requirement in subsection (a) of this section, and all cited violations have not been corrected, a continuing violation will be deemed to exist. No further notice or other action shall be required on the part of the city prior to the towing of the vehicle from the site, and the assessment of all allowed costs and fees. 
(Code 1973, § 39-11; Code 1988, § 23-48; Ord. No. 1992-50, § 4, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 2, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 1997-36, § 1, 5-13-1997; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 1, 2-22-2005; Ord. No. 2005-37, § 1, 5-10-2005)  
Sec. 23-49. - Removal by city. 
(a)  If the violation described in the notice given pursuant to section 23-48 has not been remedied within ten days after the mailing, posting or delivery of such notice, the director, shall have the right to remove the vehicle from the premises and dispose of the vehicle. All costs incurred in the removal and disposal of such vehicle, including an administrative fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code per vehicle shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or to the owner of the premises from which it was removed and may be collected as taxes and levies are collected. 
(b)  All costs incurred under this section shall be docketed as a lien against the property on which the nuisance occurred in the manner prescribed in section 23-5, which lien shall remain in effect until removed by payment in full of such costs. 
(c)  Any inoperable vehicle removed pursuant to this section shall be disposed of in the following manner. When a vehicle is removed by the city or its contractors, the owner of the premises and the vehicle shall be notified in writing by the manager of vehicle services of the tow and the location of the vehicle. This notice shall set forth the requirement for the release of the vehicle and the date the vehicle will be disposed of if it is not claimed and properly removed. After the date of disposal has passed, the manager of vehicle services shall dispose of the vehicle at a public auction or if the vehicle fails to be sold at public auction, he may dispose of the vehicle in any manner that removes the vehicle from the compound and permanently disposes of the vehicle. A fee per vehicle sold as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be added to the towing, administrative fee, and storage charges for the disposal of the vehicle. Any proceeds from the public auction shall be used to offset any charges incurred in the removal, storage, auction and disposal of the vehicle. Should the funds realized from the auction of the vehicle be insufficient to cover all charges, the remaining balance shall be placed as a lien against the property from which it was removed as provided in this section. 
(d)  Where the owner of the property has been assessed with the cost of removal of an inoperable motor vehicle as defined in this chapter, there shall be placed a lien on the real estate from which said vehicle was removed. The lien and costs may be collected in the same manner local taxes are collected. 
(e)  No vehicle shall be released until the registered owner/lienholder attests on a form approved by the city attorney that: 
(1)  The vehicle, upon release, will be housed in a fully enclosed building or structure, or removed from the city until all repairs needed to make the vehicle operable are completed and all required licenses and inspection decals are properly displayed; or 
(2)  The vehicle, upon release, will be immediately transported to a repair facility where it will remain until all necessary repairs are completed and licenses and inspection decals are properly displayed; or 
(3)  The vehicle, upon release, will be brought into compliance by correcting all violations of the criteria specified in section 23-46(a). 
(f)  In the event that an inoperable motor vehicle is returned to the subject property after removal or is moved to any location in the city except a repair facility pursuant to the notice requirement in subsection (a) of this section, and all cited violations have not been corrected, a continuing violation will be deemed to exist. No further notice or other action shall be required on the part of the city prior to the towing of the vehicle from the site, and the assessment of all allowed costs and fees. 
(g)  In the event that notice of an inoperable motor vehicle has been given in accordance with section 23-48 and the vehicle is not accessible for towing due to its location behind a locked gate, fence, car or other physical obstruction, the owner of the property shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor if the obstructions is not promptly removed at the request of the director. 
(Code 1973, §§ 39-13, 39-14; Code 1988, § 23-50; Ord. No. 1992-50, § 5, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1995-11, § 4, 1-24-1995; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 1, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 1, 2-22-2005; Ord. No. 2005-37, § 1, 5-10-2005)  
Secs. 23-50—23-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ABATEMENT OF CRIMINAL BLIGHT ON REAL PROPERTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted August 28, 2018, renamed art. V from "removal or repair of buildings or other structures harboring illegal drug activity" to "abatement of criminal blight on real property" to "weeds and debris." 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907. 
 
Sec. 23-90. - Prohibition of criminal blight; declaration of nuisance; abatement generally. 
(a)  Any criminal blight is hereby declared to be detrimental to the public health and safety and a public nuisance and shall be removed from real property or the activity or policies or practices causing or enabling the blighting influence discontinued or modified whenever it is necessary to do so in order to effectively abate the nuisance. 
(b)  In addition to enforcement procedures established elsewhere, the city may require the owner of real property to undertake corrective action, or the city may undertake corrective action, with respect to such property in accordance with the procedures established in this article V. 
(c)  A criminal blight proceeding pursuant to this article V, to the extent filed with a court of law, shall be a civil proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-28-2018)  
Sec. 23-91. - Affidavit and notice requirements. 
(a)  To initiate an enforcement action under this article, the city manager or her designee shall execute an affidavit citing Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907, to the effect that (i) criminal blight as defined in section 23-1 of this chapter exists on the property and in the manner described therein; (ii) the city has used diligence without effect to abate the criminal blight; and (iii) the criminal blight constitutes a present threat to the public's health, safety, or welfare. 
(b)  The city manager or her designee shall then send a notice to the owner of the property, to be sent by (i) certified mail, return receipt requested; (ii) hand delivery; or (iii) overnight delivery by a commercial service or the United States Postal Service, to the last address listed for the owner on the city's assessment records for the property, together with a copy of such affidavit, advising that the owner has up to 30 days from the date thereof to undertake corrective action to abate the criminal blight described in such affidavit and that the city will, if requested to do so, assist the owner in determining and coordinating the appropriate corrective action to abate the criminal blight described in such affidavit. 
(c)  If the property owner notifies the locality in writing during the 30-day period that additional time to complete the corrective action is needed, the city shall allow such owner an extension for an additional 30-day period to take such corrective action. 
(Code 1988, § 23-91; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 3, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-28-2018) 
State Law reference— Affidavit and notice, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907(B)(1)a., b.  
Sec. 23-92. - Failure to take corrective action. 
If no corrective action is undertaken by the owner of the property within 30 days from the date of the notice from the city as provided for in section 23-91, or during any extension provided pursuant to subsection 23-91(c), the city manager or her designee shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, an additional notice to the owner of the property, to the last address listed for the owner on the city's assessment records for the property. The second notice shall include (1) an affidavit prepared by the chief of police or her designee on behalf of the locality that states specific actions to be taken on the part of the property owner that the city determines are necessary to abate the identified criminal blight on such real property and that do not impose an undue financial burden on the owner; (2) a reasonable description of the corrective action contemplated to be taken by the city; (3) the date on which the city may either commence corrective action to abate the criminal blight on the property or commence legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain a court order to require that the owner take such corrective action or, if the owner does not take corrective action, a court order to revoke the certificate of occupancy for the property. The aforesaid date shall be no earlier than 15 days after the date of mailing of the second notice. Upon receipt of the second notice, the owner shall have a right, upon reasonable notice to the city, to seek judicial relief, and the city shall initiate no corrective action while a proper petition for relief is pending before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1988, § 23-92; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 3, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-28-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907(B)(1)c.  
Sec. 23-93. - Assessment of costs. 
If the city undertakes the corrective action with respect to the property after complying with the notice provisions found herein, the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected by the city in the same manner as taxes are collected. All such costs and expenses may be docketed as a lien against the real estate in the manner prescribed by section 23-5 and accrue interest as provided in section 23-6. Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local real estate taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940 et seq. and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3965 et seq. 
(Code 1988, § 23-93; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 3, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-28-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907(B)(2).  
Sec. 23-94. - Corrective action by owner. 
If the owner of such property takes timely corrective action pursuant to this article, the city shall deem the criminal blight abated and shall close the proceeding without any charge or costs to the owner and shall promptly provide written notice to the owner that the proceeding has been terminated satisfactorily. The closing of a proceeding shall not bar the city from initiating a subsequent proceeding if the criminal blight recurs. 
(Code 1988, § 23-94; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 3, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-28-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907(C).  
Sec. 23-95. - Abridgement of rights. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, diminish, limit, or waive any rights or remedies of an owner of property at law or any permits or nonconforming rights the owner may have under Chapter 22 (§ 15.2-2200 et seq.) of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia or under a local ordinance. If an owner in good faith takes corrective action, and despite having taken such action, the specific criminal blight identified in the affidavit of the locality persists, such owner shall be deemed in compliance with this section. Further, if a tenant in a rental dwelling unit, or a tenant on a manufactured home lot, is the cause of criminal blight on such property and the owner in good faith initiates legal action and pursues the same by requesting a final order by a court of competent jurisdiction, as otherwise authorized by law, against such tenant to remedy such noncompliance or to terminate the tenancy, such owner shall be deemed in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1988, § 23-95; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 3, 7-10-2001; Ord. No. 2018-76 , § 1(Exh. A), 8-28-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907(D).  
Sec. 23-96. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The city council declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Code 1988, § 23-96; Ord. No. 2001-31, § 3, 7-10-2001)  
Secs. 23-97—23-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MOSQUITO CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 
 
Sec. 23-101. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to the powers granted for abatement of nuisances under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115 and in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, this article establishes a program for mosquito control, including, but not limited to, identification and treatment of breeding sources, public education, and enforcement for the purpose of controlling mosquito breeding, which may affect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens. 
(Code 1988, § 23-101; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 1-28-2003)  
Sec. 23-102. - Enforcement. 
The city manager or his designee is authorized to implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 23-102; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 1-28-2003)  
Sec. 23-103. - Mosquito breeding places; notice and abatement. 
(a)  All premises shall be maintained in a manner so as to prevent the breeding of mosquitoes thereon. No owner, agent, occupant or person in control of any premises in the city may dig or permit a hole wherein any water may settle and remain in such a way as to contribute to the breeding of mosquitoes. Any such person who fails to treat or abate a mosquito breeding place after having been issued written notice of the same, and within the period of time so fixed in the written notice, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Any water that has so collected is deemed to constitute a public nuisance detrimental to the public health and welfare. 
(b)  Collections of water to be considered as included within the provisions of this article are those which are contained in ditches, ponds, retention ponds, swimming and decorative pools, lakes, creeks, depressions, privies, vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, wells, barrels, troughs (except drinking troughs in constant use), urns, cans, tubs, buckets, bottles, defective house gutters or any other containers in which water can collect. 
(c)  Approved methods of treatment or abatement of collections of water regulated by this article may include one or more of the following: 
(1)  Screening with wire net at least 22 meshes to the linear inch or other material which will prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)  Complete emptying of all unscreened containers, together with a thorough drying and cleaning and storage in an enclose structure to prevent the collection of liquid in said containers. 
(3)  Use of an effective and approved larvicide or insecticide. 
(4)  Stocking with mosquito-destroying fish or top minnows (Gambusia Affinis), or other natural predators. 
(5)  Filling or draining such contained water in a manner satisfactory to the city manager or his designee, or by other environmentally approved methods. 
(6)  Prompt and proper disposal of tin cans, tires, crockery, bottles, barrels or other articles or artificial containers likely to hold water. 
(7)  Repairing of defective house gutters, tanks that are out of order and the like. 
(8)  Other methods proven to be effective in controlling mosquitoes, as approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  Upon receipt of notice that there is evidence of mosquito breeding on the premises, the owner, his agent, or the occupant of the premises shall immediately initiate measures to treat and eliminate mosquito-breeding sources. Treatment and/or removal of the cited conditions shall be completed within the time period specified in the notice of the mosquito-breeding conditions. 
(Code 1988, § 23-103; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 1-28-2003)  
Sec. 23-104. - Inspection of premises; right of entry. 
The city manager or his designee, upon presentation of appropriate identification, may request permission to enter upon any premises where entry is necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. If consent for entry is denied, a search warrant may be requested in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Code 1988, § 23-104; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 1-28-2003)  
Sec. 23-105. - Violation of article. 
(a)  Upon the failure of an owner, his agent, the occupant, or any other person in control of the premises to correct or abate the conditions causing or contributing to mosquito breeding within the time specified in the notice of the violation, issuance of a summons may be requested by the city manager or his designee. No other person shall be authorized to request a summons for violation of this article. 
(b)  In addition to any criminal remedies, the city manager or his designee may take all necessary measures to abate or obviate the condition or nuisance and may charge and collect the cost thereof from the owner, his agent, any occupant or person in control of the property in any manner provided by law for the collection of state or local taxes under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. An administrative fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code or 25 percent of the cost of abatement, whichever is less, shall also be assessed in addition to the actual cost of the nuisance abatement. In no event, however, shall the fee be less than as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 23-105; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 1-28-2003)  
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Hypnotism. 
If any person shall hypnotize or mesmerize or attempt to hypnotize or mesmerize any person, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to hypnotism or mesmerism performed by a licensed physician or surgeon, or at his request, in the practice of his profession. 
(Code 1973, § 21-170; Code 1988, § 24-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-2. - Retaining or exposing dead bodies. 
No person shall retain or expose, or allow to be retained or exposed, the dead body of any human being to the peril or prejudice of the life or health of any person. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8; Code 1988, § 24-5) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; cemeteries, ch. 9.  
Sec. 24-3. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning given here. 
Adult. Any person at least 18 years of age. 
Lawful activity. Any activity which is not otherwise illegal, where a minor acts under the supervision of an adult, with the knowledge and permission of his parents or guardian. 
Minor. Any person under the age of 17 years. 
Parent. Any person having legal custody of a minor either as a natural or adoptive parent, or as a legal guardian, or as a person who stands in loco parentis, or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court. 
Remain. To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily in a place, to hang out/around. 
To permit. As used in subsection (g) of this section this phrase shall refer to that knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in his custody. This phrase is intended to provide an objective standard for parental responsibility, so as to require neglectful or careless parents to adhere to a reasonable community standard. 
(b)  Curfew for minors. It shall be a violation of this section for any minor 17 years of age and younger to be and remain in or upon any public place, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, alley, playground, park or place of amusement in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(c)  Exceptions. In the following cases, a minor in or upon a public place under the circumstances prohibited by subsection (b) of this section, shall not be in violation of this section: 
(1)  When the minor is in possession of a written permission statement as provided for in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  When the minor is accompanied by a parent, a legal guardian or an adult as defined in subsection (a)(2) of this section authorized by the parent to supervise such minor. 
(3)  When the minor is engaging in the duties of bona fide employment or while traveling directly, without undue delay or detour from home to the place of employment or from the place of employment to the home. 
(4)  In cases of reasonable necessity the determination of reasonable necessity shall be made prior to any legal action by consulting the parents/guardians as soon as practicable. In determining reasonable necessity, consideration may be given to the fact that a minor is returning directly home and is in transit from an event or activity attendance which was authorized by his parent that was scheduled to end well before 11:00 p.m. and unforeseen circumstances beyond the control of the minor caused him to be out after 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  When the minor is on the sidewalk of the place where he resides, or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor if by the neighbor's permission. 
(6)  Inter/intrastate travel in motor vehicles. This is intended, from excess of caution, to exempt from regulation bona fide intrastate or interstate travel through, beginning and/or ending, in the city. 
(d)  Written permission. Written permission by the parent can authorize any minor to pursue any lawful activity as defined in subsection (a)(5) of this section. The written permission shall contain the names of the minor and the parent, be signed by at least one parent, and shall include the parent's home address, home and work telephone numbers, and the minor's date of birth. The written permission shall specify the date and purpose for the minor being in public places during hours in which he would, without written permission, be in violation of this section. The written permission shall include all of the above information, and the minor shall carry it on his person. 
(e)  First violation. Any minor, detained for a first violation of this section, shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  Where the minor is cooperative and provides a home address within the city, the officer may transport the minor to his home and release such minor to a responsible adult. A verbal warning shall be given to the parent, along with a copy of the curfew for minors ordinance. In the event the minor is released to the parent, it shall be evidenced by the parent's signature on a Portsmouth Police Department Youth Card. 
(2)  Where the minor resides outside the city limits, or no responsible adult can be contacted, the officer shall transport the minor to the police department. The officer will contact the on-call intake worker to facilitate placement of the minor for protective custody if the parent cannot be reached within a reasonable time. 
(3)  A record of this event containing a brief description of the circumstances shall be kept on file by the police department. 
(f)  Second or subsequent violation. Any minor, detained for a second or subsequent violation of this section within a 12-month period, shall be subject to any order of disposition authorized by Code of Virginia, § 16.1-278.4, entitled "children in need of services." 
(g)  Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent to permit a minor to act in violation of the provisions of this section. It shall not be a defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. Upon the initial detention of any minor, notice of such violations along with a copy of the curfew for minors ordinance shall be given to the parents, either in person, or by certified mail. Upon a second or subsequent detention of any minor, the parent shall be charged with a violation of this section, and subject to the conditions and limitations as the court may order with respect to such child and the parents. Where the court finds a hearing that a parent has willfully contributed to, encouraged, or caused a violation of this section, that parent shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(h)  Severability. Severability is intended throughout and within this section. If any provision (including inter alia any exception, part, phrases or term), is for any reason held invalid, or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, then the remainder of this section shall continue in full force and effect, and its application to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected. 
(i)  Intent. The council enacts this section prescribing, in accordance with prevailing community standards, regulations for the conduct of minors in public places at night, for the good of minors, for the support and furtherance of the institution of the family, and for the general public good, safety and welfare. The council does not intend hereby to prohibit or interfere with any lawful activity. The council intends hereby to ensure that minors in public places at night after curfew are provided with reasonable adult supervision. The curfew for minors ordinance has been a significant factor in deterring juvenile delinquency in the past, and that it should now be updated and amplified in compliance with changes in the law and in response to increases in drug-related crime and crime in general. Our stability as a community is based on the institution of the family; that parental responsibility for the whereabouts of their children is the norm, and that legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility, because they encourage parent responsibility and decrease juvenile delinquency. The council is aware that proceedings before a juvenile and domestic relations court pursuant to this section constitute state offenses governed by Code of Virginia, § 16.1-278.6. 
(Code 1973, § 21-167; Code 1988, § 24-8; Ord. No. 1992-66, § 1, 7-28-1992; Ord. No. 1993-44, § 1, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 2012-43, § 1, 8-14-2012) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11; minors playing or loitering in poolrooms, § 3-2; admission of minors to commercial recreation centers, § 3-79. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt curfew for minors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926; violations disposed of as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-278.4, 16.1-278.5.  
Sec. 24-4. - "Trick or treat" activities. 
(a)  If any person over the age of 12 years shall engage in the activity commonly known as "trick or treat" or any other activity of similar character or nature under any name whatsoever, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting any parent, guardian or other responsible person, having lawfully in his custody a child 12 years old or younger, from accompanying such child who is playing "trick or treat" for the purpose of caring for, looking after or protecting such child. 
(b)  If any person shall engage in the activity commonly known as "trick or treat" or any name whatsoever after 8:00 p.m., he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-178; Code 1988, § 24-9) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-5. - Abandoned or discarded refrigerators and other airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight container thereof. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-168; Code 1988, § 24-13) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319.  
Sec. 24-6. - Electric fences. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 4 misdemeanor for any person to construct or maintain an electrically charged fence within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 21-169; Code 1988, § 24-14) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Violations, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324.1; construction of electrical fences, Code of Virginia, §§ 55-298.1, 55-298.2.  
Sec. 24-7. - Filling of abandoned well or pit. 
(a)  Any person who has caused to be dug on his own land or the land of another any well or pit shall fill such well or pit with earth so that the same shall not be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowls before such well or such pit is abandoned. Any person owning land whereon any such well or pit is located shall in the same manner fill with earth any such well or pit which has been abandoned, provided such person has knowledge of the existence of such well or pit. In the case of mining operations, in lieu of filling the shaft or pit, the owner or operator thereof, on ceasing operations in such shaft or pit, shall securely fence the same and keep the same at all times thereafter securely fenced. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-174; Code 1988, § 24-15) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-316.  
Sec. 24-8. - Covers to be kept on certain wells. 
(a)  Every person owning or occupying any land on which there is a well having a diameter greater than six inches and which is more than ten feet deep shall at all times keep the same covered in such a manner as not to be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowls. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-175; Code 1988, § 24-16) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-318.  
Sec. 24-9. - Swimming in polluted water. 
No body of water, whether natural or artificial, which contains sewage, waste or other contaminating or polluting ingredients rendering the water hazardous to health shall be used for swimming or bathing purposes by any person. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10; Code 1988, § 24-17) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Swimming pools, lakes, etc., water quality, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1110.  
Sec. 24-10. - "Going-out-of-business" sales. 
(a)  Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct a sale for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business, or to modify the word "sale" in any advertisement with the words "going-out-of-business" or any other words which tend to insinuate that the retail business is to be discontinued and the merchandise liquidated, unless such person first obtains a special sale permit to conduct such sale from the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  Inspection. At the time of making application for such a special sale permit, the applicant shall submit for inspection to the commissioner of the revenue the advertisement for such sale and the commissioner of the revenue shall inspect the conducting of such sale to ensure that it is being advertised and conducted in conformity with the required special sale permit. 
(c)  Submission of inventory. All applications for special sale permits shall be accompanied by an inventory, including the kind and quantity of all goods which are to be offered for sale during the sale, and only the goods specified in the inventory list may be advertised or sold during the sale period. Goods not included on the inventory of special sale goods shall not be commingled with or added to the special sale goods. 
(d)  Permitted length of sale; extension. Each special sale permit shall be valid for a period of no longer than 60 days, and any extension of that time shall constitute a new special sale and shall require an additional permit and inventory and inspection of advertisement as provided for herein. A maximum of one additional permit beyond the initial 60-day permit may be granted solely for the purpose of liquidating only those goods contained in the initial inventory list and which remain unsold. 
(e)  Inclusion of permit number on advertisements. Any person who advertises such sale shall conspicuously include in the advertisement the special sales permit number assigned for the sale by the commissioner of the revenue and the effective dates of the sale as authorized in the permit. 
(f)  Fee. The fee for the issuance of each special sale permit shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(g)  Violation. A violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 24-20; Ord. No. 1992-51, § 1, 6-23-1992) 
State Law reference— Going out of business, permit required, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-223, 18.2-224.  
Sec. 24-11. - Convictions; additional court cost; processing fee. 
(a)  Every person convicted of a violation of any state statute or city ordinance shall be assessed the sum as set forth in appendix A to this Code as part of the costs in each criminal case in the district and circuit courts in addition to any other established court costs. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the case is heard, remitted to the city treasurer, and held by the city treasurer subject to appropriation to the sheriff for the funding of courthouse security personnel. 
(b)  A processing fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code is authorized against any individual admitted to the city jail following a conviction of any violation. Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1613.1, the clerk of the court in which the case is heard shall collect the fee and deposit it into the account of the city treasurer for use by the sheriff's office to defray the costs of processing arrested persons into local jails. 
(Code 1988, § 24-21; Ord. No. 2002-42, § 1, 7-9-2002) 
State Law reference— Processing fee authorized, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1613.1.  
Secs. 24-12—24-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES, MARIJUANA, ETC.[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Controlled substances, drug control act, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3400 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24-36. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the terms "controlled substances," "marijuana," and "Schedules I, II, III, IV, V and VI" are used in this article, such terms refer to those terms as they are used or defined in the Drug Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3400 et seq. 
(b)  The term "imitation controlled substance" when used in this article means a counterfeit controlled substance or a pill, capsule, tablet or substance in any form whatsoever which is not a controlled substance, which is subject to abuse, and: 
(1)  Which by overall dosage unit appearance, including color, shape, size, marking and packaging or by representations made, would cause the likelihood that such a pill, capsule or tablet will be mistaken for a controlled substance unless such substance was introduced into commerce prior to the initial introduction into commerce of the controlled substance which it is alleged to imitate; or 
(2)  Which by express or implied representations purports to act like a controlled substance as a stimulant or depressant of the central nervous system and which is not commonly used or recognized for use in that particular formulation for any purpose other than for such stimulant or depressant effect, unless marketed, promoted or sold as permitted by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
(c)  In determining whether a pill, capsule, tablet or substance in any other form whatsoever is an "imitation controlled substance," there shall be considered, in addition to all other relevant factors, comparisons with accepted methods of marketing for legitimate nonprescription drugs for medicinal purposes rather than for drug abuse or any similar nonmedicinal use, including consideration of the packaging of the drug and its appearance in overall finished dosage form, promotional materials or representations, oral or written, concerning the drug, and the methods of distribution of the drug and where and how it is sold to the public. 
(Code 1973, § 21-8; Code 1988, § 24-36) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-247.  
Sec. 24-37. - Sale of certain substances to minors constitutes nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell or otherwise distribute, without prescription, to a minor any pill, capsule or tablet containing any combination of caffeine and ephedrine sulfate. A violation of this section shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-18.2; Code 1988, § 24-43) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-248.5(B).  
Sec. 24-38. - Commitment for treatment of persons convicted of certain offenses. 
(a)  Whenever any person who has not previously been convicted of any offense under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-254 et seq. or under any statute of the United States or of any state relating to narcotic drugs, marijuana, stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic drugs or has not previously had a proceeding against him for violation of such an offense dismissed as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-251 is found guilty of violating any law concerning the use, in any manner, of drugs, controlled substances, narcotics, marijuana, noxious chemical substances, and like substances, the judge or court shall require such person to undergo a substance abuse screening pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-251.01 and to submit to such periodic substance abuse testing, to include alcohol testing, as may be directed by the court. The cost of such testing ordered by the court shall be paid by the commonwealth and taxed as a part of the costs of the criminal proceedings. The judge or court shall also order the person to undergo such treatment or education for substance abuse, if available, as the judge or court deems appropriate based upon consideration of the substance abuse assessment. The treatment or education shall be provided by a program licensed by the state department of mental health, mental retardation and substance abuse services or by a similar program available through the state department of corrections if the court imposes a sentence of one year or more or, if the court imposes a sentence of 12 months or less, by a similar program available through a local or regional jail, a community-based corrections program established pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 9.1-174, or an alcohol safety action program (ASAP) certified by the Commission on Virginia Alcohol Safety Action Program (VASAP). 
(b)  The court trying the case of any person alleged to have committed any offense designated by this article or by the Drug Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3400 et seq., or in any other criminal case in which the commission of the offense was motivated by or closely related to the use of drugs and determined by the court, pursuant to a substance abuse screening and assessment, to be in need of treatment for the use of drugs may commit, based upon a consideration of the substance abuse assessment, such person, upon his conviction, to any facility for the treatment of persons with substance abuse, licensed by the state department of mental health, mental retardation and substance abuse services, if space is available in such facility, for a period of time not in excess of the maximum term of imprisonment specified as the penalty for conviction of such offense or, if sentence was determined by a jury, not in excess of the term of imprisonment as set by such jury. Confinement under such commitment shall be, in all regards, treated as confinement in a penal institution and the person so committed may be convicted of escape if he leaves the place of commitment without authority. A charge of escape may be prosecuted in either the jurisdiction where the treatment facility is located or the jurisdiction where the person was sentenced to commitment. The court may revoke such commitment at any time and transfer the person to an appropriate state or local correctional facility. Upon presentation of a certified statement from the director of the treatment facility to the effect that the confined person has successfully responded to treatment, the court may release such confined person prior to the termination of the period of time for which such person was confined and may suspend the remainder of the term upon such conditions as the court may prescribe. 
(c)  The court trying a case in which commission of the offense was related to the defendant's habitual abuse of alcohol and in which the court determines, pursuant to a substance abuse screening and assessment, that such defendant is in need of treatment, may commit, based upon a consideration of the substance abuse assessment, such person, upon his conviction, to any facility for the treatment of persons with substance abuse licensed by the department of mental health, mental retardation and substance abuse services, if space is available in such facility, for a period of time not in excess of the maximum term of imprisonment specified as the penalty for conviction. Confinement under such commitment shall be, in all regards, treated as confinement in a penal institution and the person so committed may be convicted of escape if he leaves the place of commitment without authority. The court may revoke such commitment at any time and transfer the person to an appropriate state or local correctional facility. Upon presentation of a certified statement from the director of the treatment facility to the effect that the confined person has successfully responded to treatment, the court may release such confined person prior to the termination of the period of time for which such person was confined and may suspend the remainder of the term upon such conditions as the court may prescribe. 
(Code 1973, § 21-12; Code 1988, § 24-47) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-254.  
Sec. 24-39. - Attempts to commit offense. 
Any person who attempts to commit any offense defined in this article or in the Drug Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 54-524.1 et seq. which is a misdemeanor shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor; provided, however, any person convicted of attempting to commit such a misdemeanor for which a lesser punishment may be imposed may be punished according to such lesser penalty. 
(Code 1973, § 21-13; Code 1988, § 24-48) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-257.  
Sec. 24-40. - Certain premises deemed common nuisance. 
(a)  Any office, store, shop, restaurant, dance hall, theater, poolroom, clubhouse, storehouse, warehouse, dwelling house, apartment, building of any kind, vehicle, vessel, boat or aircraft which, with the knowledge of the owner, lessor, agent of any such lessor, manager, chief executive officer, operator or tenant thereof, is frequented by persons under the influence of illegally obtained controlled substances or marijuana, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3401, or for the purpose of illegally obtaining possession of, manufacturing or distributing controlled substances or marijuana, or which is used for the illegal possession, manufacture or distribution of controlled substances or marijuana, shall be deemed a common nuisance. Any such owner, lessor, agent of any such lessor, manager, chief executive officer, operator, or tenant who knowingly permits, establishes, keeps or maintains such a common nuisance is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor for a first offense. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent any such common nuisance or visit any such place for the purpose of illegally buying, dispensing or using controlled substances, controlled paraphernalia or marijuana. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-14; Code 1988, § 24-49; Ord. No. 1990-68, § 1, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1990-88, § 1, 8-14-1990; Ord. No. 1992-55, § 1, 6-23-1992) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 and 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11; nuisances generally, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsection (a), Code of Virginia, § 18.2-258.  
Sec. 24-41. - Penalties imposed for violations of article to be in addition to civil or administrative sanctions. 
Any penalty imposed for violation of this article shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any civil or administrative penalty or sanction authorized by law. 
(Code 1973, § 21-15; Code 1988, § 24-50) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-259.  
Secs. 24-42—24-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WEAPONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— City prohibited from adopting ordinance, etc., governing the purchase, possession, transfer, ownership, carrying, storage or transporting of firearms, ammunition, or components or combination thereof other than those expressly authorized by statute, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-915; weapons, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-279 et seq.; concealed weapons, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
 
Sec. 24-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ballistic knife means any knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a spring-operated mechanism. 
Bowie knife means a stout single-edged hunting knife with part of the back edge curved concavely to a point and sharpened. 
Brass knuckles means a set of metal finger rings or guards attached to a transverse piece and worn over the front of the doubled fist for use as a weapon. 
Dirk means a long straight-bladed dagger. 
Hook means a curved or bent device for catching, holding or pulling. 
Razor means a keen-edged instrument for shaving or cutting hair. 
Slingshot means a cord adapted so as to throw stones or other projectiles through a rapid swinging movement of the arm. 
Spring stick means a spring-loaded stick activated by pushing a button, which rapidly and forcefully telescopes the weapon to several times its original length. 
Stun weapon means any mechanism that is designed to emit an electronic, magnetic, or other type of charge that exceeds the equivalency of a five-milliamp 60-hertz shock and is used for the purpose of temporarily incapacitating a person. 
Switchblade knife means a pocket knife having the blade spring operated so that pressure on a release catch causes it to fly open. 
Taser means any mechanism that is designed to emit an electronic, magnetic, or other type of charge or shock through the use of a projectile and is used for the purpose of temporarily incapacitating a person. 
(Code 1973, § 21-38; Code 1988, § 24-66; Ord. No. 1988-58, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-1988) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions of "spring stick," "ballistic knife," "stun weapon" and "taser," Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-308, 18.2-308.1.  
Sec. 24-67. - Discharging firearm across or within streets. 
(a)  If any person discharges a firearm in or across any road, or within the right-of-way thereof, or in any street, he shall, for each offense, be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to firing ranges or shooting matches maintained, and supervised or approved, by law enforcement officers and military personnel in performance of their lawful duties. 
(Code 1973, § 21-37; Code 1988, § 24-70; Ord. No. 1993-51, § 1, 6-22-1993) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-113; discharging firearms in or across street, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-286.  
Sec. 24-68. - Discharging bows, crossbows, slingshots in public places. 
If any person willfully discharges or causes to be discharged any arrows, nails or bullets from a bow or crossbow, or stones from a sling or any other similar implement in any public place or place of public gathering he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-32; Code 1988, § 24-71) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-69. - Hunting with firearms while under influence of intoxicant or narcotic drug. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt with firearms in the city while under the influence of alcohol, or while under the influence of any narcotic drug or any other self-administered intoxicant or drug of whatsoever nature. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. Game wardens, sheriffs and all other law enforcement officers shall enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 21-36; Code 1988, § 24-73) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-285.  
Sec. 24-70. - Carrying dangerous weapon to place of religious worship. 
If any person carrying any gun, pistol, bowie knife, dagger or other dangerous weapon, without good and sufficient reason, to a place of worship while a meeting for religious purposes is being held at such place, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-34; Code 1988, § 24-76) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-283.  
Sec. 24-71. - Sale, barter, etc., of certain toy firearms prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall sell, barter, exchange, furnish, or dispose of by purchase, gift or in any other manner any toy gun, toy pistol, toy rifle or other toy firearm, if the same shall, by means of powder or other explosive, discharge blank or ball charges. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each sale of any such firearm hereinbefore specified to any person shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the sale of what are commonly known as cap pistols. 
(Code 1973, § 21-35; Code 1988, § 24-80) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-284.  
Sec. 24-72. - Sale, gift, etc., of air rifles to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase for or sell, lease, give or lend to any minor an air rifle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the care, control or custody of a minor knowingly to permit or suffer such minor to own, use or have in his possession within the city an air rifle. The fact that a minor is found with, or is proven to have had, in his possession, an air rifle shall be prima facie evidence that the parent, guardian or other person having control of such minor did knowingly permit or suffer the minor to own, use or have in his possession an air rifle. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-39; Code 1988, § 24-82) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 24-73—24-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GAMBLING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Gambling in parks, § 25-116. 
State Law reference— Gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gambling device means: 
(1)  Any device, machine, paraphernalia, equipment, or other thing, including books, records and other papers, which are actually used in an illegal gambling operation or activity; and 
(2)  Any machine, apparatus, implement, instrument, contrivance, board or other thing, including but not limited to those dependent upon the insertion of a coin or other object for their operation, which operates, either completely automatically or with the aid of some physical act by the player or operator, in such a manner that, depending upon elements of chance, it may eject something of value or determine the prize or other thing of value to which the player is entitled; provided, however, that the return to the user of nothing more than additional chances or the right to use such machine is not deemed something of value within the meaning of this subsection; and provided further, that machines that only sell, or entitle the user to, items of merchandise of equivalent value that may differ from each other in composition, size, shape or color, shall not be deemed gambling devices within the meaning of this subsection. 
Such devices are no less gambling devices if they indicate beforehand the definite result of one or more operations but not all the operations. Nor are they any less a gambling device because, apart from their use or adaptability as such, they may also sell or deliver something of value on a basis other than chance. 
Illegal gambling means the making, placing or receipt, of any bet or wager in this city of money or other thing of value, made in exchange for a chance to win a prize, stake or other consideration or thing of value, dependent upon the result of any game, contest or any other event the outcome of which is uncertain or a matter of chance, whether such game, contest or event, occurs or is to occur inside or outside the limits of this city shall constitute illegal gambling. 
Interstate gambling means the conduct of an enterprise for profit which engages in the purchase or sale within the city of any interest in a lottery of another state or country whether or not such interest is an actual lottery ticket, receipt, contingent promise to pay, order to purchase or other record of such interest. 
Operator means any person who conducts, finances, manages, supervises, directs or owns all or part of an illegal gambling enterprise, activity or operation. 
(Code 1973, § 21-46; Code 1988, § 24-131; Ord. No. 1992-47, § 2, 6-9-1992) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325.  
Sec. 24-132. - Illegal gambling generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who illegally gambles or engages in interstate gambling shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. If an association or pool of persons illegally gambles, each person therein shall be guilty of illegal gambling. 
(Code 1973, § 21-47; Code 1988, § 24-132; Ord. No. 1992-47, § 1, 6-9-1992) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326.  
Sec. 24-133. - Winning by fraud. 
If any person while gambling cheats or by fraudulent means wins or acquires for himself or another money or any other valuable thing, he shall be fined not less than five nor more than ten times the value of such winnings. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 21-48; Code 1988, § 24-133) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-327.  
Sec. 24-134. - Forfeiture of money, gambling devices, etc., seized from illegal gambling enterprise. 
All money, gambling devices, office equipment and other personal property used in connection with an illegal gambling enterprise or activity, and all money, stakes and things of value received or proposed to be received by a winner in any illegal gambling transaction, which are lawfully seized by any law enforcement officer or which shall lawfully come into his custody, shall be forfeited to the commonwealth by order of the court in which a conviction under this article is obtained. Such court shall order all money so forfeited paid over to the commonwealth, and by order shall make such disposition of other property so forfeited as the court deems proper, including award of such property to any state agency or charitable organization for lawful purposes, or in case of the sale thereof the proceeds therefrom to be paid over to the commonwealth; provided, however, that such forfeiture shall not extinguish the rights of any person without knowledge of the illegal use of such property who is the lawful owner or who has a lien on the same which has been perfected in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1973, § 21-53.1; Code 1988, § 24-137) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-336.  
Sec. 24-135. - Certain acts not deemed consideration in prosecution under article. 
In any prosecution under this article, no consideration shall be deemed to have passed or been given because of any person's attendance upon the premises of another, his execution, mailing or delivery of an entry blank, his answering of questions, verbally or in writing, his witnessing of a demonstration or other proceeding; or any one or more thereof, where no charge is made to, paid by, or any purchase required of him in connection therewith. 
(Code 1973, § 21-52; Code 1988, § 24-139) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-332.  
Sec. 24-136. - Exceptions from article; contests of speed or skill. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any contest of speed or skill between men, animals, fowl or vehicles, where participants may receive prizes or different percentages of a purse, stake or premium dependent upon whether they win or lose or dependent upon their position or score at the end of such contest. 
(b)  Any participant who, for the purpose of competing for any such purse, stake or premium offered in any such contest, knowingly and fraudulently enters any contestant other than the contestant purported to be entered or knowingly and fraudulently enters a contestant in a class in which he or it does not belong, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-53; Code 1988, § 24-140) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-333.  
Sec. 24-137. - Exception for games of chance in private residences. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make it illegal to participate in a game of chance conducted in a private residence, provided such private residence is not commonly used for such games of chance and there is no operator, as defined in section 24-131. 
(Code 1973, § 21-53; Code 1988, § 24-141) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334.  
Sec. 24-138. - Exception for authorized bingo games and raffles. 
Nothing in this article shall apply to a bingo game or raffle conducted in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-340.1—18.2-340.14 and article V of chapter 3 of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 21-54; Code 1988, § 24-142) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334.2.  
Sec. 24-139. - Exception for state lottery. 
Nothing in this article shall apply to any lottery conducted by the commonwealth pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-4000 et seq. 
(Code 1988, § 24-143) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-334.3.  
Secs. 24-140—24-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SEXUAL OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 24-166. - Adultery. 
Any person, being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his spouse shall be guilty of adultery, punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-63; Code 1988, § 24-166) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-365.  
Sec. 24-167. - Fornication. 
Any person, not being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any other person shall be guilty of fornication, punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-56; Code 1988, § 24-167) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-344.  
Sec. 24-168. - Nonforcible carnal knowledge of child. 
(a)  If any person carnally knows, without the use of force, a child 13 years of age or older but under 15 years of age, with the consent of such child, and the accused is a minor, and such consenting child is less than three years the accused's junior, the accused shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In calculating whether such child is three years or more a junior of the accused minor, the actual dates of birth of the child and the accused, respectively, shall be used. 
(Code 1973, § 21-65; Code 1988, § 24-168) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-63.  
Sec. 24-169. - Lewd and lascivious cohabitation. 
If any persons, not married to each other, lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together, or, whether married or not, be guilty of open and gross lewdness and lasciviousness, each of them shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and upon a repetition of the offense, and conviction thereof, each of them shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-57; Code 1988, § 24-169) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 or 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-345.  
Sec. 24-170. - Massages, baths, etc., administered by persons of opposite sex. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any establishment, either public or private, to operate a massage salon, bath parlor or similar business, where any massage, bath or similar service involving physical contact is administered by a person of the opposite sex. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist duly licensed by the commonwealth or to other duly licensed or authorized health care personnel administering health services to patients under their care. Also, this section shall not apply to barbershops or beauty parlors in which massages are given to the scalp, the face, the neck or shoulders. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-67; Code 1988, § 24-170) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-171. - Soliciting for prostitution or immoral acts. 
Any person who shall, within the limits of the city, solicit another, by word, sign or gesture, to commit any act that is lewd, lascivious, indecent or prostitute, shall be guilty of soliciting for prostitution or other immoral purposes, which shall be a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-58.1; Code 1988, § 24-172) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 24-172—24-204. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OBSCENITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt ordinance prohibiting obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.2; obscenity, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24-205. - Showing previews of certain motion pictures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any trailer or preview of any motion picture which has a motion picture industry rating which would not permit persons in the audience viewing the feature motion picture to see the complete motion picture from which the trailer or preview is taken. 
(Code 1973, § 21-79; Code 1988, § 24-205) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-386.  
Sec. 24-206. - Urinating or defecating in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place or area where the public gathers or has access, other than in facilities designed for such purpose. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-89; Code 1988, § 24-207) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-207. - Profane swearing. 
If any person profanely curses or swears in public, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. A person charged with a violation of this section may be tried and convicted in his absence. 
(Code 1973, § 21-81; Code 1988, § 24-208; Ord. No. 1988-58, § 1, 6-14-1988; Ord. No. 1994-65, § 1, 6-28-1994) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11; use of profane, etc., language by operator of vehicle for hire, § 37-1. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388.  
Secs. 24-208—24-245. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE 
 
Sec. 24-246. - Resisting or obstructing city officers, employees and agents. 
No person shall resist any police officer, or obstruct or hinder any employee of the city in the discharge of his duty, or any contractor or other person in the execution of any work for the city. A violation of this section shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-180; Code 1988, § 24-246) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Obstructing law enforcement officers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460(A).  
Sec. 24-247. - Giving fictitious or false information to city officer, agent or employee. 
Any person who shall knowingly give or report any fictitious name or false information in response to any investigation being conducted by any police officer, agent or employee of the city in the discharge of his duty, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-181; Code 1988, § 24-247) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— False name, information, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-208, 18.2-209, 18.2-472.1; false alarms, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212; false information or statements in investigation, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460.  
Sec. 24-248. - Obstructing members of rescue squad in performance of mission. 
Any person who unreasonably or unnecessarily obstructs a member of a rescue squad, whether governmental, private or volunteer, in the performance of his rescue mission or who shall fail or refuse to cease such obstruction or move on when requested to do so by a member of a rescue squad going to or at the site of a rescue mission, shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-183; Code 1988, § 24-248) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-414.1.  
Sec. 24-249. - Impersonating certain public safety personnel; penalty. 
Any person who willfully impersonates, with the intent to make another believe he is, a certified emergency medical services personnel, firefighter, including any special forest warden designated pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2235, fire marshal, or fire chief is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 24-249; Ord. No. 1993-51, § 2, 6-22-1993) 
Cross reference— Penalty for a class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11; impersonating a peace officer, § 27-4. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174.1.  
Sec. 24-250. - Riots and unlawful assemblies. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article, any unlawful use, by three or more persons acting together, of force or violence which seriously jeopardizes the public safety, peace or order is a riot. 
(b)  Whenever three or more persons assembled share the common intent to advance some lawful or unlawful purpose by the commission of an act of unlawful force or violence likely to jeopardize seriously public safety, peace or order, and the assembly actually tends to inspire persons of ordinary courage with well-grounded fear of serious and immediate breaches of public safety, peace or order, then such assembly is an unlawful assembly. 
(Code 1973, §§ 21-84, 21-85; Code 1988, § 24-250) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-405, 18.2-406.  
Sec. 24-251. - Failure to provide adequate security or crowd control. 
Any person who has negligently failed to provide adequate security or crowd control at a sporting event, restaurant or other business or commercial activity that draws large crowds of people may be liable in a separate civil action for the cost associated with any emergency response by the police department or emergency medical services personnel of the city cause by the sponsor, owner or tenant of any sporting event, restaurant, nightclub or other business or commercial establishment who negligently failed to provide adequate security or crowd control. Such persons shall be liable to the city in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Code 1988, § 24-251; Ord. No. 1995-74, § 1, 6-13-1995)  
Sec. 24-252. - Remaining at scene after warning to disperse. 
Every person, except the owner or lessee of the premises, his family and nonrioting guests, and public officers and persons assisting them, who remains at the place of any riot or unlawful assembly after having been lawfully warned to disperse, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-86; Code 1988, § 24-252) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-407.  
Sec. 24-253. - Open container of alcoholic beverage in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is standing, lying or sitting in a public park, playground or public street in the city to possess any open container the contents of which includes an alcoholic beverage. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  This prohibition will not apply to those persons who are in public areas designated by the city where the possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages has been authorized by the state alcoholic beverage control board, or its successor in interest if any. 
(Code 1988, § 24-253; Ord. No. 1993-45, § 1, 6-22-1993) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages in public place, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-308.  
Sec. 24-254. - Disorderly houses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to keep, maintain or operate, for himself or for any other person or as an officer of or agent for any corporation, association, club, lodge or other organization, or under the guise of any corporation, association, club, lodge or other organization, any disorderly house or place where disorderly persons meet or may meet for the purpose of illegally dispensing or indulging in intoxicating liquors, gaming or boisterous or other disorderly conduct. Each day's keeping of any such place shall constitute a separate offense, and in any prosecution for this offense, the general reputation of such place may be proved. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent or visit any disorderly place referred to in subsection (a) of this section for the purpose of illegally dispensing or indulging in intoxicating liquors, gaming or boisterous or other disorderly conduct. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-95; Code 1988, § 24-254) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 or 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-255. - Unlawful excessive sound. 
(a)  Excessive sound prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to create excessive sound, as described in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings indicated, for purposes of applying and enforcing this section: 
Calibrator. A scientific device that is commonly used for the purpose of calibrating sound meters. 
dBA. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. 
Sound. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristics of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
Sound level. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or C as specified in the American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ASA 47-1983, or a later revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound level meter. An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and any applicable weighting network used to measure sound pressure levels. 
Zone. Any reference to property being in a particular "zone" shall mean the zoning district category of the property, as per chapter 40.1 of this Code. 
(c)  Per se offenses. The following activities are deemed to comprise creating excessive sound in violation of this section, without any requirement of scientific measurement of sound levels: 
(1)  A person blowing a car horn when it is not reasonably necessary to do so for legitimate safety or emergency purposes. 
(2)  A person operating a sound system in a motor vehicle at a sound level that, when heard in another vehicle with the windows closed, interferes with normal conversation, interferes with normal use or enjoyment of a car radio, interferes with use of a communication system (such as a cell phone, car telephone, citizens band radio, or police radio), or creates physically perceptible vibrations. 
(3)  A person allowing an animal to make sound that unreasonably and repeatedly disturbs another person in his or her residence after being requested to stop. 
(4)  A person operating a motor vehicle that generates loud exhaust sound without having a muffler that meets all applicable motor code requirements. 
(5)  Sound that unreasonably interferes with the functioning of a court of law, religious activities at an established place of worship, a medical facility, or the conduct of government activities in a governmental building. 
(d)  Offenses requiring scientific measurement of sound levels. The following sound levels shall be deemed to be excessive sound in violation of this section, when measured outside the real property line of the sound source. The zone shall be determined by where the sound is measured, not where it is generated. 
(1)  Residential zones; night. In a residential zone between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., sound meeting or exceeding 55 dBA. 
(2)  Residential zones; day. In a residential zone between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., sound meeting or exceeding 65 dBA. 
(3)  Commercial zones. In a commercial zone, sound meeting or exceeding 75 dBA. 
(e)  Scientific measurement procedures. 
(1)  The decibel level of any noise regulated by the preceding subsection may be measured by the use of a sound level meter. Such measurements shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the level of noise at issue in any court or legal proceeding to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(2)  The accuracy of the sound level meter may be tested by a calibrator. Any sworn report of the results of any test of the calibrator for the accuracy of a sound level meter shall be admissible in court in any criminal or civil proceeding, as evidence of the facts therein stated. 
(3)  An individual operating a sound level meter pursuant to the provisions of this section shall issue a certificate to indicate: 
(i)  That the sound level meter used to take the decibel level reading was operated in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications; 
(ii)  That the city has on file a sworn report which states that the sound level meter has been tested within the past 12 months and has been found to be accurate; 
(iii)  The name of the accused; 
(iv)  The location of the noise; 
(v)  The date and time that the reading was made: 
(vi)  The zone in which the reading was made; and 
(vii)  The decibel level reading. 
(4)  Such certificate, when attested by the operator taking the decibel level reading, shall be admissible in court in any criminal or civil proceeding as evidence of the facts therein stated and of the decibel level reading. A copy of the certificate shall be delivered to the accused upon request. 
(f)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The operation of construction devices used in construction activities between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(2)  The operation of lawn care maintenance equipment such as power mowers, chain saws, and string trimmers, and vehicles for the removal of debris, garbage or refuse with properly working mufflers between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(3)  The repair, maintenance or construction of federal, state, regional, or local governmental facilities. 
(4)  Emergency work to repair equipment or facilities. 
(5)  The operation of railroad and railway equipment and vehicles. 
(6)  Sound generated by any emergency governmental function, including but not limited to emergency vehicles. 
(7)  Recreational activities or events on publicly owned property, where authorized by the city manager or his designee. 
(8)  Sound generated by boats or ships in navigable waterways, or by aircraft. 
(9)  Duly permitted or authorized demolition activities. 
(10)  Churches engaged in religious activities. 
(11)  Burglar alarms or vehicle alarms, except that this exemption shall not apply if the owner of the property or vehicle fails to terminate the sounding of the alarm within a reasonable period of time. 
(12)  Other activities specifically authorized in advance in writing by the chief of police or his designee. 
(g)  Penalties. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the penalty for a violation of this section shall be as set for a Class IV misdemeanor. For any person who is convicted of a second or subsequent offense of this section within 12 months of a prior conviction, the penalty shall be as set forth for a Class III misdemeanor. 
(h)  Other remedies. This section shall not be deemed to limit the ability of any person to bring a common law civil proceeding to abate any excessive sound that is alleged to comprise a public or private nuisance. In addition, the City of Portsmouth and any person shall be entitled to seek equitable relief to enjoin a violation of this section. The prohibitions and penalties set forth in this section shall be deemed cumulative to any other prohibitions penalties that may be set forth elsewhere. 
(Code 1973, §§ 21-96, 21-97; Code 1988, § 24-255; Ord. No. 1989-84, § 1, 9-26-1989; Ord. No. 1994-48, § 1, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 2009-89, §§ 1, 2, 9-8-2009) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11; restrictions on blowing of locomotive whistles, § 29-3.  
Sec. 24-256. - Abusive and insulting language generally. 
If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such other person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language, under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-91; Code 1988, § 24-256) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11; use of offensive language by operator of vehicle for hire, § 37-1. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416.  
Sec. 24-257. - Slander and libel. 
(a)  Any person who shall falsely utter and speak, or falsely write and publish, of and concerning any female of chaste character, any words derogatory of such female's character for virtue and chastity, or imputing to such female acts not virtuous and chaste, or who shall falsely utter and speak, or falsely write and publish, of and concerning another person, any words which, from their usual construction and common acceptation, are construed as insults and tend to violence and breach of the peace or shall use grossly insulting language to any female of good character or reputation, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The defendant in a prosecution under this section shall be entitled to prove, in mitigation of the punishment, the provocation which induced the libelous or slanderous words or any other fact or circumstances tending to disprove malice or lessen the criminality of the offense. 
(Code 1973, 21-90; Code 1988, § 24-258) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-417.  
Sec. 24-258. - Public drunkenness. 
If any person is intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug, or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center a law enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1973, § 21-93; Code 1988, § 24-259; Ord. No. 1990-68, § 1, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1994-65, § 1, 6-28-1994) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388.  
Sec. 24-259. - Prohibited conduct in public places. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following types of conduct: 
(1)  To unreasonably or unnecessarily obstruct, impede, or restrict the free passage of others along any portion of a sidewalk or public plaza. 
(2)  To unreasonably or unnecessarily obstruct, impede, or restrict the free passage of others into or from private property. 
(3)  To lie or sit upon a mattress, or to lie or sleep, while on a public sidewalk or on the ground in a public plaza. 
(4)  While on a public sidewalk or public plaza, or while in a public parking area, to erect and/or to occupy a tent or other temporary protective structure. This paragraph shall not apply to any person acting with written city authorization or as part of a city-authorized festival or event. 
(5)  To fail to remove such tent or other protective structure described in the preceding paragraph, and also all debris or articles associated therewith. 
(6)  To lie upon a bench that is on a sidewalk or in a public plaza. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "public plaza" means only: 
(1)  The sidewalks, steps, and public areas surrounding or adjacent to High Street Landing and the North Landing. 
(2)  The public ways and parking areas along and adjacent to the seawall. 
(3)  The steps, portico, and plaza areas that are a part of or immediately adjacent to the Main Public Library. 
(4)  The plaza area of Middle Street between High Street and County Street, adjacent to the Children's Museum of Virginia. 
(c)  This section shall not be interpreted or applied to: 
(1)  Lawful picketing, demonstrations, or the exercise of the right of free speech. 
(2)  Any person experiencing a medical emergency 
(3)  Persons observing parades, festivals, or other public events 
(4)  Persons in an orderly line awaiting an opportunity to purchase tickets to a movie or other performance event. 
(d)  Before charging any person with an offense under this section, the enforcing officer shall first inform the person that the conduct in question is prohibited, direct the person to cease the conduct and move on, and give the person a reasonable opportunity to comply. Thereafter, if there is no compliance, the person may be charged. If a person has received such a warning and within 24 hours again engages in conduct which comprises a violation of this section, no further warning shall be required. 
(Code 1988, § 24-260; Ord. No. 1995-87, § 1, 7-25-1995; Ord. No. 2007-104, § 1, 11-27-2007) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit loitering, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926.  
Sec. 24-260. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-104, § 2, adopted November 27, 2007, repealed § 24-260, which pertained to definition of loitering. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 24-261. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of a violation of section 24-259 shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1988, § 24-262; Ord. No. 1995-87, § 1, 7-25-1995) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-262. - Aggressive panhandling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to engage in aggressive panhandling. The term "aggressive panhandling" requires threatening, intimidating, or harassing conduct and means: 
(1)  Harassment by following and continuing to insist on a gift of money from another person in a public place after the initial request for money from that person has been denied; 
(2)  Requesting the gift of money from another person in a public place, with the request accompanied by an unauthorized touching of that person; 
(3)  Requesting the gift of money from another person in a public place, with the request accompanied or followed by the intentional blocking or interfering by any means with the person's free passage along the public place; or 
(4)  Requesting the gift of money from another person in a public place, with the request accompanied by conduct which creates a reasonable apprehension of imminent physical harm or assault. 
(b)  The mere requesting of a gift of money in a public place without engaging in any of the forms of threat, intimidation, or harassment set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not be unlawful. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 24-263; Ord. No. 1997-68, 12-9-1997)  
Secs. 24-263—24-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 
 
Sec. 24-276. - Obstructing justice by threats or force. 
(a)  If any person without just cause knowingly obstructs a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness, attorney for the commonwealth or any law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties as such or fails or refuses without just cause to cease such obstruction when requested to do so by such judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness, attorney for the commonwealth or law enforcement officer, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  If any person, by threats or force, knowingly attempts to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness, or any law enforcement officer, lawfully engaged in his duties as such, or to obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court, he shall be deemed to be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to such conduct as would constitute a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460(C). 
(Code 1973, § 21-98; Code 1988, § 24-276; Ord. No. 1989-62, § 1, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 1990-88, § 2, 8-14-1990; Ord. No. 1993-51, § 1, 6-22-1993) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-277. - Officer refusing, delaying, etc., to execute process for criminal. 
If any officer willfully and corruptly refuses to execute any lawful process requiring him to apprehend or confine a person convicted of, or charged with, an offense, or willfully and corruptly omits or delays to execute such process, whereby such person shall escape and go at large, such officer shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-106; Code 1988, § 24-278) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-469.  
Sec. 24-278. - Officer corruptly or partially summoning juror. 
If any sheriff or other officer corruptly, or through favor or ill will, summons a juror, with intent that such juror shall find a verdict for or against either party, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and forfeit his office; and he shall be forever incapable of holding any office of honor, profit or trust under the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Code 1973, § 21-103; Code 1988, § 24-280) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-465.  
Sec. 24-279. - Corruptly procuring juror to be summoned. 
If any person procures or attempts to procure a juror to be summoned, with intent that such juror shall find a verdict for or against either party, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-104; Code 1988, § 24-281) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-466.  
Sec. 24-280. - Extortion by officer. 
If any officer, for performing an official duty for which a fee or compensation is allowed or provided by law, knowingly demands and receives a greater fee or compensation than is so allowed or provided, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-107; Code 1988, § 24-283) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-470.  
Sec. 24-281. - Fraudulent issuance of fee bills. 
If any person authorized by law to charge fees for services performed by him and issue bills therefor fraudulently issues a fee bill for a service not performed by him, or for more than he is entitled to, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and shall forfeit his office and be forever incapable of holding office of honor, profit or trust under the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Code 1973, § 21-108; Code 1988, § 24-284) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-471.  
Sec. 24-282. - Mistreatment or interference with police animals. 
Any person who, without causing bodily injury, willfully torments, beats, kicks, strikes or otherwise mistreats an animal owned by the police department or who willfully interferes with the lawful performance of such animal in a police activity shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Any person who willfully touches such animal in any manner after being directed not to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-98.1; Code 1988, § 24-289; Ord. No. 1989-62, § 1, 6-27-1989) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 or 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11; cruelty to animals generally, § 4-7.  
Secs. 24-283—24-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 24-311. - Authorization of police department to arrest persons for trespassing on private property. 
The owner, lessee, custodian, or person lawfully in charge of any property may designate the police department as a "person lawfully in charge of the property" for the purpose of forbidding another to go or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises as specified in the designation. The designation shall be in writing on a form approved by the city attorney and on file with the police department. The designation shall be admissible in evidence in any applicable trespass prosecution, without requiring the presence or testimony of such actual owner, lessee, or custodian. 
(Code 1988, § 24-311; Ord. No. 2005-53, § 1, 6-28-2005) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt this section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1717.1.  
Sec. 24-312. - Manufacture, sale, etc., of devices to shield against electronic detection of shoplifting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, offer for sale, distribute or possess any specially coated or laminated bag or other device primarily designed and intended to shield shoplifted merchandise from detection by an antitheft electronic alarm sensor, with the intention that the same be used to aid in the shoplifting of merchandise. A violation of this section shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-149.2; Code 1988, § 24-313) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-105.2.  
Sec. 24-313. - Trespass at night upon church or school property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of some person authorized to give such consent, to go or enter upon, in the nighttime, the premises or property of any church or upon any school property for any purpose other than to attend a meeting or service held or conducted in such church or school property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not a student, to enter upon or remain upon any school property in violation of: (i) any direction to vacate the property by a person authorized to give such direction, or (ii) any posted notice which contains such information, posted at a place where it reasonably may be seen. Each time such person enters upon or remains on the premises after such direction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of: (i) subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and (ii) subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  For purposes of this section: (i) "school property" includes a school bus as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, and (ii) "church" means any place of worship and includes any educational building or community center owned or leased by a church. 
(Code 1973, § 21-120; Code 1988, § 24-317; Ord. No. 1988-58, § 1, 6-14-1988; Ord. No. 1989-62, § 1, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 1993-51, § 1, 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 1994-65, § 1, 6-28-1994) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-128.  
Sec. 24-314. - Entering Afton Square Mall during certain hours prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 2 misdemeanor for any person to go on or enter upon any portion of Afton Square Mall between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Code 1973, § 21-176; Code 1988, § 24-318) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 24-315. - Destruction of posted signs; posting land of another. 
Any person who shall mutilate, destroy or take down any "posted," "no hunting" or similar sign or poster on the lands or waters of another, or who shall post such sign or poster on the lands or waters of another, without the consent of the landowner or his agent, shall be deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor and his hunting license shall be revoked for a period not exceeding the expiration date of such license. 
(Code 1973, § 21-126; Code 1988, § 24-324) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-135.  
Sec. 24-316. - Removal or repair of defacement of buildings, walls, fences and other structures. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously damage or deface any public buildings, facilities and personal property or any private buildings, facilities and personal property. The penalty for violation is a class 1 misdemeanor. The punishment for any such violation in which the defacement is: (i) more than 20 feet off the ground, (ii) on a railroad or highway overpass, or (iii) committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with any criminal street gang, as that term is defined by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-46.1, shall include a mandatory minimum fine of $500.00. 
(b)  Upon a finding of guilt under this section in any case tried before the court without a jury, in the event the violation constitutes a first offense that results in property damage or loss, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt, upon motion of the defendant, may defer further proceedings and place the defendant on probation pending completion of a plan of community service work. If the defendant fails or refuses to complete the community service as ordered by the court, the court may make final disposition of the case and proceed as otherwise provided. If the community service work is completed as the court prescribes, the court may discharge the defendant and dismiss the proceedings against him. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is a conviction only for the purposes of applying the ordinance in subsequent proceedings. 
(c)  This section shall direct that the community service, to the extent feasible, include the repair, restoration or replacement of any damage or defacement to property within the city, and may include clean-up, beautification, landscaping or other appropriate community service within the city. A designee of the city manager shall supervise the performance of any community service work required and to report thereon to the court imposing such requirement. At or before the time of sentencing, the court shall receive and consider any plan for making restitution or performing community service submitted by the defendant. The court shall also receive and consider the recommendations of the supervisor of community service in the city concerning the plan. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person convicted of a violation of this section shall be placed on probation or have his sentence suspended unless such person makes at least partial restitution for such property damage or is compelled to perform community services, or both, as is more particularly set forth in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-305.1. 
(e)  If the city seeks to clean or cover the defacement, it shall give notice to the owner and lessee, if any, of any private building or facility that has been defaced that, within 15 days of receipt of such notice, if the owner or lessee does not clean or cover the defacement or object to the removal of the defacement, the city may clean or cover the defacement at the city's expense. The director of permits and inspections may undertake or contract for such removal or repair of defacement of any public building, wall, fence or other structure or any public building, wall, fence or other structure where such defacement is visible from any public right-of-way. 
(Code 1988, § 24-325; Ord. No. 1995-74, § 1, 6-13-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt this section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1812.2.  
Sec. 24-317. - Damaging, defacing, etc., public property generally. 
(a)  If any person willfully and maliciously breaks any window or door of any courthouse, house of public worship, college, schoolhouse or other public building or library; or willfully and maliciously injures or defaces any courthouse, house of public worship or any other public building; or willfully and maliciously destroys or carries away any property belonging to or in any of such buildings shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor if the damage is less than $1,000.00. 
(b)  Any person who willfully and unlawfully injures or defaces any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, map, picture, manuscript or other property belonging to any library, reading room, museum or other property located in any library, reading room, museum or other educational institution, or unlawfully removes the same thereof, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, provided the damage to the property or the value of the property carried away is less than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1973, § 21-128; Code 1988, § 24-326; Ord. No. 1990-68, § 1, 6-26-1990) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-138.  
Sec. 24-318. - Damaging or defacing city property. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to willfully and maliciously damage or deface any real or personal property owned or operated or maintained by the city. This includes, but is not limited to, parks, playgrounds, playfields, recreation facilities, public buildings and facilities and fixtures thereof, and any personal property therein or thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 21-127.1; Code 1988, § 24-327) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; authority of city manager to offer reward in cases involving damage to city property, § 2-167; damaging parking meters, §§ 22-610, 22-641; damaging park property, § 25-99; damaging property of department of public utilities, § 38-4. 
State Law reference— Damaging public property, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-138.  
Sec. 24-319. - Possession or duplication of keys to building or other property owned by city. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly possess any key to the lock of any building or other property owned by the city, without receiving permission from a person duly authorized to give permission to possess such key. 
(b)  No person, without receiving permission from a person duly authorized to give such permission, shall knowingly duplicate, copy or make a facsimile of any key to a lock of a building or other property owned by the city. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-186; Code 1988, § 24-328) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-503.  
Sec. 24-320. - Unlawful use of, or injury to, telephone and telegraph lines; copying or obstructing messages. 
Any person who shall: 
(1)  Maliciously injure, molest, cut down or destroy any telephone or telegraph line, wire, cable, or pole or the material or property belonging thereto; 
(2)  Maliciously cut, break, tap or make any connection with any telephone or telegraph line, wire, cable or instrument of any telegraph or telephone company which has legally acquired the right-of-way by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise; 
(3)  Maliciously copy in any unauthorized manner any message, either social, business, or otherwise, passing over any telephone or telegraph line, wire or cable in this state; 
(4)  Willfully or maliciously prevent, obstruct or delay by any means or contrivance whatsoever the sending, conveyance or delivery of this state of any authorized communication by or through any telephone or telegraph line, wire or cable under the control of any telephone or telegraph company doing business in this state; or 
(5)  Maliciously aid, agree with, employ or conspire with any unauthorized person unlawfully to do or cause to be done any of the acts hereinbefore mentioned; shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 21-130; Code 1988, § 24-330) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-164.  
Sec. 24-321. - Damaging, tampering with, etc., vehicles, boats, etc. 
(a)  Any person who shall individually or in association with one or more others willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, aircraft boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or who shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other devices, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set into motion such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This subsection shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel by the holder of a lien on such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or by the agents or employees of such lienholder. 
(Code 1973, §§ 21-135—21-137; Code 1988, § 24-336) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; boats, ch. 6; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 22; railroads, ch. 29. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-146—18.2-148.  
Secs. 24-322—24-429. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - REGULATION OF SMOKING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Food and food establishments, ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 24-430. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Bar or lounge means any area or room utilized primarily for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the sale of food is merely incidental to the sale of alcoholic beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar or lounge area, the terms "bar or lounge area" shall not encompass the entire restaurant or any dining area. 
Food store means any supermarket or grocery store which is designed and arranged to display food products and which has as its primary business purpose the sale of food products to consumers for consumption off the premises and not for resale, and which derives a substantial portion of its income therefrom. 
Health care facilities means any office or institution providing individual care and treatment of disease, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, offices of any physician, dentist, psychologist, psychiatrist, physiologist, podiatrist, optometrist or optician. 
Public meeting means any meeting or assembly held in a public building or building leased for public purpose which is opened to the public for the conduct of the affairs of, and the transaction of business by, any legislative or administrative body or agency of the city, including boards, commissions, authorities, councils, committees, subcommittees and other subordinate groups thereof, receiving or expending and supported in whole or in part by public funds. 
Restaurant means any establishment designed and arranged to sell or offer for sale to customers any food or food products for consumption on the premises, regardless whether the food is prepared or cooked on or off the premises, and shall include restaurant facilities which are an integral part of a retail store, motel, hotel, catering establishment or other similar facility. 
Retail store means any establishment whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale to consumers, not for resale, any goods, wares, merchandise, articles or other things and all activities, operations and services connected therewith or incidental thereto. Retail stores shall not include food stores, hotels, motels, restaurants and those restaurant facilities which are an integral part of a retail store, motel, hotel, catering establishment or other similar facilities. 
Shared work area means any enclosed area on any premises owned or leased by the city or the Portsmouth Public Schools and in which two or more employees are assigned to work for most of their workday, where such employees share common work spaces, equipment or facilities and where each employee is aware of or readily available to observe the activities of others taking place in his work area. 
Smoking or to smoke means the act of smoking or carrying a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind or lighting a cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind. 
(Code 1988, § 24-430; Ord. No. 1989-50, § 1, 6-13-1989)  
Sec. 24-431. - Smoking prohibited in certain public places. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking shall be prohibited in the following public places: 
(1)  Elevators in buildings generally used by and open to the public; 
(2)  Waiting rooms, lobbies, wards, hallways and other public areas of health care facilities; 
(3)  Any building owned or leased by the city or the Portsmouth School Board and used for public purposes except in areas where smoking is permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Any art gallery, library, museum or similar cultural facility, supported in whole or in part with public funds; 
(5)  Any elementary or secondary school building or child care facility, whether public or private, in common areas such as classrooms, hallways, auditoriums and public meeting rooms; 
(6)  Places of entertainment such as theatres, concert halls, gymnasiums, bowling alleys, auditoriums and enclosed arenas, except smoking in performances as part of the production. Provided, however, that smoking may be permitted in lawfully designated areas pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
(7)  Public restrooms, unless separate facilities are provided for smokers and nonsmokers; 
(8)  In a designated no smoking area of any restaurant that is subject to the provisions of section 24-432 of this article; 
(9)  Any retail store and any food store in which more than four persons are regularly employed at any one time; 
(10)  Any public meeting. 
(Code 1988, § 24-431; Ord. No. 1989-50, § 1, 6-13-1989)  
Sec. 24-432. - Designated no smoking area in restaurant. 
(a)  Any restaurant having a seating capacity of 50 or more persons shall have a designated no smoking area sufficient to meet customer demand. Restaurants may not determine that no such demand exists. Restaurants with a seating capacity of less than 50 persons are encouraged, but not required, to designate no smoking areas. Any restaurant required to have a designated no smoking area shall post signs conspicuous to ordinary public view at each entrance to the establishment indicating that a no smoking area is available. 
(b)  In determining whether a restaurant is subject to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, the following shall not be included: 
(1)  Seats in the bar or lounge area of a restaurant; 
(2)  Seats in any separate room of a restaurant which is used exclusively for private functions; 
(3)  Seats in any room of a restaurant which is closed and not available for seating. 
(Code 1988, § 24-432; Ord. No. 1989-50, § 1, 6-13-1989)  
Sec. 24-433. - Where smoking not regulated. 
The prohibitions of this article shall not apply within the following areas: 
(1)  Lawfully designated smoking area which meets the conditions set forth in section 24-434; 
(2)  The area of a theatre, concert hall, gymnasium, auditorium or other place of entertainment commonly referred to as a lobby if physically separated from the spectator area; 
(3)  Office or work areas in buildings owned or leased by the city or the Portsmouth School Board which are not shared work areas; 
(4)  Shared work areas of buildings owned or leased by the city or the Portsmouth School Board where each and every employee regularly assigned to the shared work area consents in writing to smoking; 
(5)  Areas of enclosed shopping centers or malls that are external to the retail stores and are used by customers as a route of travel from one store to another, and that consist primarily of walkways and seating arrangements; 
(6)  Any tobacco shop or store primarily concerned with selling tobacco and smoking implements; 
(7)  Courthouses owned or leased by the city; 
(8)  Bars and lounge areas; 
(9)  Health care facilities or portions thereof which engage primarily in the treatment of patients suffering from alcohol and other chemical dependency or abuse, or psychiatric disorders or illnesses when implementation of smoking prohibitions would, in the written opinion of attending physicians, produce a significant risk of worsening a patient's mental health. 
(Code 1988, § 24-433; Ord. No. 1989-50, § 1, 6-13-1989)  
Sec. 24-434. - Designated smoking area. 
The owner or person in charge of any building, structure, space, place or area in which smoking is prohibited may designate separate rooms or areas in which smoking is permitted; provided that: 
(1)  Rooms or areas in which smoking is permitted and which are so designated shall be separate to the extent reasonably practicable from those rooms or areas entered by the public in the normal course of use of the particular business or institution; 
(2)  In designated smoking areas, ventilation systems and existing physical barriers shall be used when reasonably practicable to minimize the toxic effect of smoking adjacent to nonsmoking areas; and 
(3)  Such designated smoking areas shall not be so large in number or area in any one building that the fundamental purposes of this article are defeated. 
(Code 1988, § 24-434; Ord. No. 1989-50, § 1, 6-13-1989)  
Sec. 24-435. - Posting of signs. 
Any person who owns, manages or otherwise controls any building or area in which smoking is regulated by this article shall post in an appropriate place in a clear, conspicuous and sufficient manner "smoking permitted" signs or "no smoking permitted" signs (or the international "no smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). Printing on such signs shall be at least one inch in height and the international symbol shall have a circle of at least four inches in diameter. 
(Code 1988, § 24-435; Ord. No. 1989-50, § 1, 6-13-1989)  
Sec. 24-436. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the prohibitions or restrictions of this article to fail to comply with its provisions. Any such person violating any such provision or failing to comply with the requirements of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this article shall continue constitutes a separate violation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area prohibited or restricted by the provisions of this article; provided, however, that no such person shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this article unless such person shall have been requested to extinguish a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind and having been so requested failed to do so. Any such person violating any provision or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this article shall be fined up to $25.00. 
(Code 1988, § 24-436; Ord. No. 1989-50, § 1, 6-13-1989)  
Sec. 24-437. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the director of public health or his designee, or any other department or person designated by the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 24-437; Ord. No. 1989-50, § 1, 6-13-1989)  
Sec. 24-438. - Other applicable laws or regulations. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited or restricted by other applicable laws or regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 24-438; Ord. No. 1989-50, § 1, 6-13-1989)  
Chapter 25 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Amusements, ch. 3; boats, and waterways, ch. 6; trees and shrubs on city property, § 36-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish and maintain parks and playgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1801; authority to establish and conduct system of public recreation, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1806. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 25-1—25-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 25-46. - Established. 
The advisory board of recreation and parks heretofore established is hereby redesignated and shall henceforth be referred to and known as the parks and recreation commission. 
(Code 1973, § 24-17; Code 1988, § 25-46)  
Sec. 25-47. - Composition; appointment and term of members. 
The parks and recreation commission shall consist of nine members. The members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council for terms of three years. 
(Code 1973, § 24-18; Code 1988, § 25-47; Ord. No. 1990-129, § 10, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 25-48. - Ex officio members. 
(a)  The city council may appoint three ex officio members to the parks and recreation commission who will take part in all activities of the commission, except that they shall not have the right to vote on any matter. 
(b)  One nonvoting member shall be an employee of the school board of the city; one nonvoting member shall be an employee of the Portsmouth Redevelopment and Housing Authority; and one nonvoting member shall be an employee of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 24-18.1; Code 1988, § 25-48)  
Sec. 25-49. - Compensation of members. 
The members of the parks and recreation commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 24-19; Code 1988, § 25-49)  
Sec. 25-50. - Vacancies in membership. 
Any vacancy in the membership of the parks and recreation commission shall be filled by the city council for the expired portion of the term. 
(Code 1973, § 24-20; Code 1988, § 25-50)  
Sec. 25-51. - Removal of members. 
Any member of the parks and recreation commission may be removed by the city council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1973, § 24-21; Code 1988, § 25-51)  
Sec. 25-52. - Adoption of rules. 
The parks and recreation commission may adopt reasonable rules for the conduct of its business. 
(Code 1973, § 24-22; Code 1988, § 25-52) 
Cross reference— General procedural rules for commissions appointed by council, § 2-28(b).  
Sec. 25-53. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of the parks and recreation commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1973, § 24-23; Code 1988, § 25-53)  
Sec. 25-54. - Selection, term of chairman; creation, filling of other offices. 
The parks and recreation commission shall choose annually one of its at-large members to be chair for a term of one year and until his successor is chosen and qualified. The parks and recreation commission may create and fill such other offices as it may determine is necessary. 
(Code 1973, § 24-24; Code 1988, § 25-54)  
Sec. 25-55. - Date of regular meetings. 
The parks and recreation commission shall hold regular monthly meetings on a date to be fixed by such commission. 
(Code 1973, § 24-25; Code 1988, § 25-55)  
Sec. 25-56. - Calling of special meetings. 
Special meetings of the parks and recreation commission may be called at any time on the call of the chair or any two members thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 24-26; Code 1988, § 25-56)  
Sec. 25-57. - Meetings to be public. 
All meetings of the parks and recreation commission shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1973, § 24-27; Code 1988, § 25-57)  
Sec. 25-58. - Records of proceedings. 
The parks and recreation commission shall keep a record of all its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(Code 1973, § 24-28; Code 1988, § 25-58)  
Sec. 25-59. - Planning ground areas on master plan. 
The parks and recreation commission shall plan in detail the ground areas designated for parks and recreation areas on the city's master park and recreation plan. When any such designated area includes school property, such plan shall be prepared jointly with the school board and due consideration shall be given to the present and future needs of the school program. The purpose of such planning shall be to effect the greatest possible utilization of school property in the community recreation program. 
(Code 1973, § 24-29; Code 1988, § 25-59)  
Sec. 25-60. - Development, maintenance of areas on master plan. 
The parks and recreation commission shall develop and maintain the areas shown on the city's master parks and recreation plan according to the officially approved detailed plans. Where any such area includes school property, its development and maintenance shall be accomplished by agreement between the commission and the school board. 
(Code 1973, § 24-30; Code 1988, § 25-60)  
Sec. 25-61. - Conducting, supervising programs. 
The parks and recreation commission shall conduct a citywide recreation program and may provide, conduct and supervise any form of recreation which will contribute to the welfare and happiness of the citizens of the city, utilizing suitable facilities and properties owned or controlled by the city, or otherwise with the consent of the owners or other persons in charge thereof; in no case, however, shall school property be used when needed by school authorities in the interest of the educational program. 
(Code 1973, § 24-31; Code 1988, § 25-61)  
Sec. 25-62. - Promoting public interest, understanding in program. 
The parks and recreation commission shall promote public interest in and understanding of the city's parks and recreation program. 
(Code 1973, § 24-32; Code 1988, § 25-62)  
Sec. 25-63. - Contracting with consultants. 
The parks and recreation commission shall have the authority to contract with consultants for such services as it may require within the limit of the funds appropriated therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-33; Code 1988, § 25-63)  
Sec. 25-64. - Acceptance, expenditure of gifts; reduction of appropriations. 
The parks and recreation commission shall have the power to accept, administer and expend for operating and capital expenses, funds received as gifts or from sources other than the city; provided, however, that funds received as gifts in trust shall be handled in accordance with the terms of such trust. Funds received from sources other than the city shall be accounted for and deposited to the credit of the city for the use of the parks and recreation commission, except that funds received as gifts in trust shall be accounted for in a special fund created and maintained for such purpose and designated as the parks and recreation commission fund. The parks and recreation commission shall have no authority to enter into any contract or incur obligations binding upon the city, the cost of which will exceed the unencumbered cash balance of the fund at the time when the obligation is incurred. If the parks and recreation commission receives and expends for operating or capital expenses any funds not included in its budget as approved by the city council, the city council may direct that the amount appropriated for city funds be reduced by the amount so expended from outside such budget. 
(Code 1973, § 24-34; Code 1988, § 25-64)  
Sec. 25-65. - Advising director of matters submitted for consideration. 
The parks and recreation commission shall advise the director of all matters submitted to such commission for its consideration. 
(Code 1973, § 24-35; Code 1988, § 25-65; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997)  
Sec. 25-66. - Listing of recommended capital improvements. 
The parks and recreation commission shall submit annually to the city manager, when requested by him, a list of recommended capital improvements for parks and recreation purposes, including the acquisition of land and buildings and the development, improvement and maintenance thereof. Such list shall set forth such projects as the commission deems necessary or desirable to be accomplished during the succeeding six-year period and shall be arranged in order of priority, with recommendations as to which projects shall be accomplished in which years with the estimated costs thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 24-36; Code 1988, § 25-66)  
Sec. 25-67. - Reports. 
The parks and recreation commission shall submit a report of its operations to the city council annually at the end of each fiscal year and such other reports as may be requested from time to time by the council or the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 24-37; Code 1988, § 25-67)  
Sec. 25-68. - Review of actions by council. 
All actions of the parks and recreation commission shall be subject to review by the city council, which may take such action thereon as it deems advisable. 
(Code 1973, § 24-38; Code 1988, § 25-68)  
Secs. 25-69—25-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PARK REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 25-86. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Bathing area means any beach or water area designated by or under authority of the city manager as a bathing area. 
Director means the director of parks, recreation, and leisure services or designee. 
Footpath or trail means any path or trail maintained for pedestrians. 
Owner means any person owning, leasing, operating, or having the exclusive use of a vehicle, animal or any other property under a lease or otherwise. 
Park, unless specifically limited, means and includes all designated parks, golf courses and other recreational areas owned by the city. 
Permit, except as otherwise provided in this article, means any written license issued by or under authority of the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 24-49; Code 1988, § 25-86) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 25-87. - Rules of construction. 
In the interpretation of this article, its provisions shall be construed as follows: 
(1)  Any requirement or prohibition of any act shall, respectively, extend to and include the causing or procuring, directly or indirectly of such act; 
(2)  No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily performed by any officer or employee of the city in line of duty or work as such, or by any person, his agents or employees, in the proper and necessary execution of the terms of any agreement with the city; and 
(3)  Any act otherwise prohibited by this article, provided it is not otherwise prohibited by law or local ordinance, shall be lawful if performed under, by virtue of and strictly within the provisions of a permit so to do, and to the extent authorized thereby. 
(Code 1973, § 24-50; Code 1988, § 25-87)  
Sec. 25-88. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-87; Code 1988, § 25-88) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 25-89. - Use permits generally. 
A permit to use a park or to do any act in a park shall authorize the same only insofar as it may be performed in strict accordance with the terms and conditions thereof. Any violation by its holder or his agents or employees of any term or condition thereof shall constitute grounds for its revocation by the director, whose action therein shall be final. In case of revocation of any permit, all moneys paid for or on account thereof shall, at the option of the director, be forfeited to and retained by the city. The holder of such permit, together with his agents or employees who violated such terms and conditions, shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for all damages and loss suffered by it in excess of money so forfeited and retained; but neither such forfeiture and retention by the city of the whole or any part of such moneys nor the recovery or collection thereby of such damages, or both, shall in any manner relieve such person from liability to punishment for any violation of any provision of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 24-51; Code 1988, § 25-89)  
Sec. 25-90. - Permit for use of designated portions of parks. 
The director is hereby authorized to issue a permit for the use of designated portions of parks upon the payment of fees to be established and upon the execution of a written agreement establishing the terms and conditions of the use. 
(Code 1973, § 24-176; Code 1988, § 25-90)  
Sec. 25-91. - Fee for reservation of picnic shelters at City Park. 
Picnic shelters may be reserved at City Park upon payment of a reservation fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1973, §§ 24-172, 24-175; Code 1988, § 25-93; Ord. No. 1989-41, § 3, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 1990-40, § 1, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1994-37, § 1, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1995-24, § 1, 3-28-1995; Ord. No. 1998-17, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 1999-12, § 1, 4-27-1999) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 25-91.1. - Fee to ride Pokey Smoky II at City Park. 
The fee to ride the Pokey Smoky II at City Park shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2011-25, § 1, 5-4-2011) 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2011-25 states that this ordinance will take effect July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 25-91.2. - Admission fee for the Splash Park at the Neighborhood Facility. 
There shall be no fee for admission to the Splash Park at the Neighborhood Facility. 
( Ord. No. 2011-25, § 1, 5-4-2011; Ord. No. 2013-40, § 1, 8-13-2013) 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2011-25 states that this ordinance will take effect July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 25-91.3. - City Park boat ramp parking. 
The parking fee for the City Park boat ramp shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 11, 5-12-2020)  
Sec. 25-92. - Fees for use of athletic, recreational and special activity facilities. 
(a)  Fees for the rental of athletic, recreational and special activity facilities shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following categories: 
(1)  Gym, per hour. 
(2)  Social hall, per hour. 
(3)  Meeting hall/room, per hour. 
(4)  Gym, athletic practice sessions only, per hour. 
(5)  Damage deposit required for gym, except for athletic practice sessions per rental. 
(6)  Damage deposit required for meeting room per rental. 
(7)  Damage deposit required for social hall per rental. 
(b)  Fees for special activities coordinated by or collected by the department of parks, recreation and leisure services shall be set by the city manager. This special activity fee shall include a fee to be paid per team for softball, volleyball, basketball, and tennis, and for participation in Friendship Garden Weddings, other special activities and athletic programs not specified herein. 
(c)  For purposes of this subsection (c) and the related fees set out in Appendix A to this Code, the term youth means any person under 18 years of age, the term adult means any person between and including the ages of 18 and 54, and the term senior means any person 55 years or older. Fees for individual use of recreational facilities operated by the department of parks, recreation and leisure services and determined by the city manager to be subject to this subsection shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following categories: 
(1)  Adult Membership Card (annual) 
(2)  Adult Replacement Card 
(3)  Youth Membership Card (annual) 
(4)  Youth Replacement Card 
(5)  Senior Membership Card (annual) 
(6)  Senior Replacement Card 
(7)  Visitor Pass (one week) 
(8)  Adult or Senior Day Pass 
(9)  Youth Day Pass 
(d)  For purposes of this subsection (d) and the related fees set out in Appendix A to this Code, the term adult class program means class programs primarily intended for participation by persons 18 years of age or older. Fees for multi-session adult class programs offered by the department of parks, recreation and leisure services shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(e)  For purposes of this subsection (e) and the related fees set out in Appendix A to this Code, the term fitness class program means an adult class program that is primarily related to physical fitness and the term senior means any person 55 years or older. Seniors who are residents of Portsmouth shall have the option of paying the annual rate or quarterly rate established in Appendix A for participation in fitness class programs. A senior paying the annual rate may participate in any fitness class program offered during the calendar year without paying the charge established pursuant to subsection (d) for the individual class program. A senior paying the quarterly rate may participate in any fitness class program offered during the applicable quarter without paying the charge established pursuant to subsection (d) for the individual class program. 
(Code 1973, § 24-6; Code 1988, § 25-94; Ord. No. 1990-80, § 1, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1994-37, § 2, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997; Ord. No. 1998-17, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 2015-80, § 1, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 2016-16, § 1, 3-8-2016) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 25-93. - Meetings and exhibitions. 
No person shall in any park erect any structure, stand or platform, hold any meeting, or exhibition, perform any ceremony, make any speech, or address except by permit. 
(Code 1973, § 24-51; Code 1988, § 25-95)  
Sec. 25-94. - Commercial enterprises. 
No person shall, in any park, without a permit, sell or offer for sale, hire, lease or let out, any object or merchandise, property privilege, service or any other thing, or engage in any business or erect for such purposes, any building, booth, tent, stall or any other structure whatsoever. 
(Code 1973, § 24-53; Code 1988, § 25-96)  
Sec. 25-95. - Subletting park property. 
No person to whom property of any park has been entrusted for personal use shall hire, lease, let out, or sell the same to any other person. 
(Code 1973, § 24-54; Code 1988, § 25-97)  
Sec. 25-96. - Commercial vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate a bus, taxicab or other commercial vehicle designed or used for transportation of passengers or property within any park, recreational area, or playground without a permit specifically authorizing the operation of a commercial vehicle within such park, recreational area, or playground. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-56; Code 1988, § 25-99) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11; vehicles for hire, ch. 37.  
Sec. 25-97. - Advertising. 
No sign, notice, or advertisement of any nature shall be erected or posted at any place within any park without permission in writing from the director; nor shall any musical instrument, radio, talking machine, or drum be operated or any noise be made for the purpose of attracting attention to any exhibition of any kind. 
(Code 1973, § 24-57; Code 1988, § 25-100)  
Sec. 25-98. - Soliciting alms or contributions. 
(a)  No person shall, within any park, recreational area, or playground, solicit alms or contributions for any purpose. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be sentenced for the first offense to pay a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $500.00 or undergo imprisonment for not more than six months, or both, and for the second and any subsequent offense to pay a line of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00 or to undergo imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. 
(Code 1973, § 24-58; Code 1988, § 25-101) 
Cross reference— Solicitation of contributions generally, § 26-46 et seq.  
Sec. 25-99. - Damaging; removing, etc., flowers, plants, etc. 
(a)  No person shall remove, destroy, cut down, scar, mutilate, injure, take or gather in any manner any tree, flower, fern, shrub, rock, or plant or mineral in any park, recreational area or playground. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-59; Code 1988, § 25-102) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11; general prohibition against removing or damaging trees or shrubs on city property, § 36-28.  
Sec. 25-100. - Disposal of refuse, garbage, etc. 
No person shall deposit in any part of any park any garbage, sewage, refuse, waste, vegetables, foodstuffs, boxes, tin cans, paper, or other litter or other waste material or obnoxious material, except in containers designed for such purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 24-61; Code 1988, § 25-104) 
Cross reference— Garbage and refuse generally, ch. 16.  
Sec. 25-101. - Bathing, where permitted; clothing required. 
No person shall bathe, dive, jump, wade, or swim in the waters of any lake, river, stream, pond, pool, fountain or other waters in any park except at such times, and in such places, as the director may designate as bathing areas, and unless so covered with clothing as to prevent any indecent exposure of the person. 
(Code 1973, § 24-63; Code 1988, § 25-106)  
Sec. 25-102. - Dressing and undressing. 
Dressing and undressing, except in bathhouses, tents, or other enclosed camping vehicles is prohibited in any park. 
(Code 1973, § 24-64; Code 1988, § 25-107)  
Sec. 25-103. - Entering toilet set aside for opposite sex. 
No person in any park shall enter a toilet set aside for the opposite sex. 
(Code 1973, § 24-65; Code 1988, § 25-108)  
Sec. 25-104. - Picnicking. 
Picnicking is allowed only in the areas designed as picnic areas. 
(Code 1973, § 24-66; Code 1988, § 25-109)  
Sec. 25-105. - Sports and games, where permitted. 
No games or athletic contest shall be allowed except in such places as may be designated therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-68; Code 1988, § 25-111)  
Sec. 25-106. - Boating. 
Boating of any kind in a bathing area is prohibited except such boating as is necessary to keep such areas properly protected and policed. No person shall use privately owned boats or canoes on any park waters without a permit. 
(Code 1973, § 24-69; Code 1988, § 25-112) 
Cross reference— Boats and waterways, ch. 6.  
Sec. 25-107. - Riding or driving horses. 
No person shall use, ride, or drive a horse except in designated areas. 
(Code 1973, § 24-70; Code 1988, § 25-113) 
Cross reference— Animals and fowl, ch. 4.  
Sec. 25-108. - Animals at large. 
No person shall cause or permit any animal owned by him, in his custody, or under his control, to go at large within any park unless held in leash by a responsible person, and such leash shall not exceed seven feet in length. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the restrictions established by this section shall not apply in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Unleashed dogs shall be permitted in designated fenced areas within a park which have been expressly established by the city manager or the city manager's designee as areas where leashes are not required; and 
(2)  The city manager or the city manager's designee may authorize the presence of unleashed specially trained dogs on the park property for property maintenance activities conducted by or at the direction of the city, provided that all such activities shall be performed in compliance with all applicable state and federal laws; and 
(3)  In addition to and not in limitation of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, guide dogs, service dogs or other dogs accorded special status under federal or state disability or accommodation laws or regulations may be unleashed, but only as and to the extent necessary to accommodate the disability of the individual they are accompanying. 
(Code 1973, § 24-71; Code 1988, § 25-114; Ord. No. 2016-87 , § 2, 10-25-2016) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 25-109. - Hunting, molesting wildlife. 
No person within the confines of any park, shall hunt, pursue, trap, shoot, injure, kill or molest in any way any bird or animal, nor shall any person have any wild bird or animal in his possession within the park. 
(Code 1973, § 24-72; Code 1988, § 25-115)  
Sec. 25-110. - Fires, lighted cigarettes, etc. 
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire other than in places provided or designated for such purposes except by special permit. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person over 16 years of age from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. No person within the confines of any park shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigarette, cigar or other burning object. Any lighted match, cigarette, cigar, or other burning object must be entirely extinguished before being thrown away or discarded. 
(Code 1973, § 24-75; Code 1988, § 25-118) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 13.  
Sec. 25-111. - Smoking. 
No person shall smoke in any structure or place in any park where smoking is prohibited. Smoking may be forbidden by the director or his authorized agent in any part of any park when it is deemed the fire hazard makes such action advisable. 
(Code 1973, § 24-76; Code 1988, § 25-119)  
Sec. 25-112. - Vehicles, traffic, where prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle in any park or recreation area within or upon a safety zone, walk, golf cart path, fire truck trail, service road, or any part of any park or recreation area or playground not designated or customarily used for such purpose. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle in any park, recreation area or playground area except upon the paved roads or parking areas, or on such other areas as may, on occasion, be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director. 
(c)  No person shall use or ride any motorized vehicle, moped, motorcycle or motorized push scooter off of the roadway or in any area not designated or customarily used for vehicle travel in any park, parkway, beach, or any grounds for recreational or playground use, unless on authorized business for the city or pursuant to an authorized permit issued by the director. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1973, § 24-77; Code 1988, § 25-120; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997; Ord. No. 2005-104, § 1, 11-22-2005) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 22.  
Sec. 25-113. - Standing and parking. 
(a)  No owner or driver shall cause or permit a vehicle to stand anywhere in any park or recreation area or playground outside of designated parking spaces. Motorists in such areas may stop for a reasonable time in a driveway area to receive or discharge passengers. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle in any park, recreational area or playground area except in an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted direction or with the instruction of any park ranger or police officer who may be present. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1973, §§ 23-221, 24-78; Code 1988, § 25-121)  
Sec. 25-114. - Entering and leaving parks; vehicle operation. 
(a)  No person shall enter or leave any park, recreation area or playground area except by the roadways or streets designated and in the direction indicated for such purposes. 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle in any park in violation of the applicable provisions of the state and city traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles, or in violation of such regulations as are contained in this article and other chapters of this Code. 
(c)  Persons operating a vehicle in any park, recreation area, or playground area, shall obey all police officers and such persons authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in parks, recreational areas, and playground areas, and on the streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of this article and such supplementary regulations as may be issued by the director. 
(d)  Any person operating a vehicle in any park, recreation area or playground area shall observe all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(e)  A violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1973, § 24-79; Code 1988, § 25-122; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997)  
Sec. 25-115. - Speed limits. 
(a)  The maximum speed limit within a park shall be 15 miles per hour, provided that the city manager may decrease or increase the speed limits after an engineering and traffic investigation, and such new speed limit shall become effective when indicated upon the roadway by signs. Rates of speed in excess of the posted speed limit are prohibited. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1973, § 24-80; Code 1988, § 25-123)  
Sec. 25-116. - Gambling. 
(a)  Gambling in any park is prohibited and shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person bringing into any park or having in his possession while there, any implement or device commonly used, or intended for gambling purposes, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-81; Code 1988, § 25-124) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; gambling generally, § 24-131 et seq.  
Sec. 25-117. - Avoiding charges. 
No person shall make, use or gain admittance to, or attempt to use or gain admittance to, the facilities in any park for the use of which a charge is made unless he shall have paid the charge fixed for such use or admittance. 
(Code 1973, § 24-82; Code 1988, § 25-125)  
Sec. 25-118. - Indecent exposure. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to indecently expose himself in any park. 
(Code 1973, § 24-83; Code 1988, § 25-126)  
Sec. 25-119. - Disorderly conduct. 
No person shall disobey a lawful order of a park ranger or otherwise conduct himself in any riotous or disorderly manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1973, § 24-84; Code 1988, § 25-127)  
Sec. 25-120. - Closing hours generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without a permit issued by the director to go onto or enter upon any portion of any city park or recreation area during hours when the park or recreation area is designated as closed. Hours of opening and closing shall be designated by the director or designee, and posted therein for public information. 
(b)  Upon the application of any person desiring to use the city park boat ramp for purposes of launching or retrieving a boat during hours prohibited above, the director shall issue a permit for such use and such permit shall specify the date of such intended use and shall list the name of the applicant and all persons in his party. The applicant shall display his copy of the permit to any police officer or parks, recreation and general services department employee upon demand. 
(c)  No person shall enter any park area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use or encourage the use of any area in violation of posted notices. Any section or part of any park or recreation area may be declared closed to the public by the director at any time and for any interval of time either temporarily or at regular stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or confined to certain uses as the director shall determine. 
(d)  Police officers may remove or ask anyone to leave any public park or recreation area when that person's conduct is such as to disrupt the general permit or when allowing such person to remain in any public park or recreation area could lead to a more serious breach of the peace. Police officers may close the entire park when conditions exist that, if allowed to continue, could seriously jeopardize the safety and well-being of any persons within the park. 
(e)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-85; Code 1988, § 25-128; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 25-121. - Possession, consumption, etc., of alcoholic beverages, drugs, etc. 
(a)  Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, drugs, or controlled substances, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3401, or any other intoxicating substance in any part of any city park, recreation area, or playground area is prohibited except as noted herein. No person shall enter or be in any park or recreation area or playground area while under the influence of alcoholic beverages, drugs, any controlled substance or any other intoxicating substance. Alcoholic beverages may be consumed or served in areas designated as "Closed to the Public" and by persons with permission from the city manager, and who are in possession of the appropriate state alcoholic beverage control board permits. 
(b)  Any violation of these prohibitions as to the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages, the entering or being in any park, recreation area or playground area while under the influence of alcoholic beverages, drugs, any controlled substance, or any other intoxicating substances, or the consumption or serving of alcoholic beverages without permission of the city manager or without the appropriate state alcoholic beverage control board permit shall be punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. All other violations of this section shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-86; Code 1988, § 25-129) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 or 4 misdemeanors, § 1-11.  
Secs. 25-122—25-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSES 
 
Sec. 25-146. - Maintenance and operation. 
The care and operation of municipal golf courses shall be under the city manager and such agents as he may appoint. 
(Code 1973, § 24-98; Code 1988, § 25-146)  
Sec. 25-147. - Professional for each course. 
The city manager is authorized to appoint a golf professional for each of the municipal golf courses, who shall have charge of the care and operation of the respective golf courses and the collection of fees. The golf professional shall be responsible for the collection of all fees at the golf course. 
(Code 1973, § 24-99; Code 1988, § 25-147)  
Sec. 25-148. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees generally. Any person desiring to play golf shall first apply to the golf professional of the golf course and pay the fees as set forth in appendix A to this Code and any subsequent amendments thereto before starting to play. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, and the fees set out in Appendix A to this Code, the following definitions shall apply: 
Adult means any person 18 years of age or older. 
Junior means any person under 18 years of age. 
Senior means any person 55 years of age or older. 
Super senior means any person over 75 years of age. 
Weekday means Monday through Thursday. 
Weekend means Friday through Sunday. 
(c)  Reduction or waiver of fees. The fees for play at Bide-A-Wee Golf Course and The Links at City Park may be reduced or waived by the city manager to set and establish rates for golf subscriptions and for temporary off season, non-peak day, promotional golf package, junior and senior, and individual birthday play. The purpose of any rate adjustment shall be to assure maximum use at rates competitive with other area golf courses during periods of decreased play and to encourage the use of the courses and golf carts. 
(Code 1973, § 24-100; Code 1988, § 25-148; Ord. No. 1988-47, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1989-1, § 1(24-100), 1-10-1989; Ord. No. 1989-39, § 1, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 1990-40, § 2, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1990-80, § 2, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1991-22, § 1, 3-12-1991; Ord. No. 1991-43, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1992-36, § 1, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1992-78, § 1, 9-22-1992; Ord. No. 1993-30, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 1994-37, § 3, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1995-24, § 1, 3-28-1995; Ord. No. 1995-46, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1997-72, § 1, 12-9-1997; Ord. No. 2003-24, § 1, 4-22-2003; Ord. No. 2004-28, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 2007-45, § 1, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2009-62 , § 1, 6-23-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 2013-27, § 1, 5-14-2013) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 25-149. - Disposition of fees collected; report of such fees. 
Each golf professional shall pay all fees collected by him to the city treasurer daily, or whenever the city manager may direct, and file a copy of his report with the chief financial officer on the form provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 24-101; Code 1988, § 25-149; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 25-150. - Sale of soft drinks, etc. 
Each golf professional shall have the privilege of selling soft drinks, candy, tobacco, and golf supplies under regulations prescribed by the city manager. Such sales shall be conducted as to involve no expense or liability to the city. 
(Code 1973, § 24-102; Code 1988, § 25-150)  
Secs. 25-151—25-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NATIONAL GUARD ARMORY 
 
Sec. 25-201. - Use permit generally. 
(a)  The city manager may issue a permit to any person, except as hereinafter provided, for the use of the National Guard Armory upon the payment of the fees hereinafter established and upon compliance with the other requirements hereinafter set forth. No meeting or other activity shall be held at the armory other than that stated in the application. 
(b)  No such permit shall be granted to any person who, for security reasons, is not approved by the commanding officer of the National Guard unit using the armory. 
(c)  No such permit shall be granted to any person reported by the attorney general of the United States as having significance in connection with the national security. 
(d)  No such permit shall be granted to any person when there is danger of any breach of the peace, tumult, riot, resistance of law, or danger to person or property. 
(e)  No such permit shall be granted to any person when such use of the armory would interfere in any manner with the use thereof by the National Guard or endanger the security of the equipment stored therein. 
(Code 1973, § 24-139; Code 1988, § 25-201)  
Sec. 25-202. - Fees—Established. 
The fees as set out in appendix A to this Code for the following categories shall be charged for the use of the armory: 
(1)  For use by a nonprofit organization or private individual, per day or any fraction thereof. 
(2)  For use by a commercial organization, per day or any fraction thereof. 
(3)  As used herein, a "day" shall be defined as a period of eight hours beginning at the time the permittee is granted access to the armory. Additional hours, or fraction thereof, shall be charged by multiplying the number of additional hours and the hourly rate as established by subsections (1) or (2) of this section and as set out in appendix A to this Code (divided by eight) plus a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 24-140; Code 1988, § 25-202; Ord. No. 1989-40, § 1, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 1994-37, § 4, 5-10-1994) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 25-203. - Same—Payment. 
The fees provided for in section 25-202 shall be paid in full in advance. 
(Code 1973, § 24-141; Code 1988, § 25-203)  
Sec. 25-204. - Deposit against damages. 
(a)  Before any permit to use the armory may be issued, the applicant shall deposit with the city a cash deposit, bond or insurance policy in an amount not less than the amount set out in appendix A to this Code to cover the cost of damages sustained by the armory or any of the equipment, fixtures or facilities located therein by reason of the use or occupancy thereof by the applicant. 
(b)  Within 30 days following the use of the armory by the applicant, any such deposit or portion thereof, bond or insurance policy not necessary to cover the cost of any damages which may have been sustained as a result of the issuance of such permit shall be refunded or cancelled, as the case may be. 
(Code 1973, § 24-142; Code 1988, § 25-204)  
Sec. 25-205. - Police protection. 
The permittee shall provide such police protection as may be specified by the chief of police after considering the type of use, the hours of use and the probable attendance. 
(Code 1973, § 24-143; Code 1988, § 25-205)  
Sec. 25-206. - Cancellation or revocation of permit. 
The city may cancel or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of section 25-201 at any time for any reason without liability to the applicant or any other person. 
(Code 1973, § 24-144; Code 1988, § 25-206)  
Secs. 25-207—25-246. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOLS 
 
Sec. 25-247. - Admission fees. 
The director shall establish a fee schedule for admission fees to city swimming pools, such fee schedule to be submitted to the city manager for approval and not to exceed the charges as set out in appendix A to this Code for the following categories: 
(1)  Three years of age and younger. 
(2)  Four years of age and older. 
(3)  Annual membership—Unlimited use. 
(Code 1973, § 24-151; Code 1988, § 25-247; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997; Ord. No. 1998-17, § 1, 4-28-1998) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 25-248. - Safety rules and regulations. 
The director shall establish safety rules and regulations for city swimming pools and to post such rules at such swimming pools after asking the advice of the parks and recreation commission. 
(Code 1973, § 24-152; Code 1988, § 25-248; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997) 

Chapter 26 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Prohibition against peddlers making noise, § 24-255(b)(9). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS OF PERISHABLE FAMILY SUPPLIES GROWN OR PRODUCED BY THEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers who sell or offer for sale in person or by their employees ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale are not subject to the business, professional, occupational license tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717. 
 
Sec. 26-26. - Application of article. 
This article shall apply to peddlers of ice, wood, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, fish, oysters, game, vegetables, fruits, or other family supplies of a perishable nature grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. 
(Code 1973, § 25-16; Code 1988, § 26-26)  
Sec. 26-27. - License exemption. 
(a)  Peddlers subject to the provisions of this article, including their bona fide employees, shall not be required to obtain a license under chapter 20 of this Code, if they comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any police officer or other officer charged with the enforcement of chapter 20 of this Code may at any time question any peddler claiming exemption from city license taxation pursuant to this section and may require of such peddler an affidavit in support of any claim made by him that the produce then in or on his vehicle was grown or produced by him. It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for a peddler to make any false statement in such affidavit. 
(Code 1973, §§ 25-16, 25-19, 25-20; Code 1988, § 26-27) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 26-28. - Annual certificate to be filed with commissioner of revenue. 
(a)  Every peddler subject to the provisions of this article shall, on or before May 1 of each year, file with the commissioner of the revenue a certificate under oath in which shall be given the name and post office address of the peddler, the location of the land on which the family supplies of a perishable nature are grown or produced, or are to be grown or produced, whether the peddler is the owner thereof or renter, and in the latter case, the name of the landlord or owner and the time from which and to which the lease is to run. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for a peddler to make any false statement in a certificate filed under this section. 
(Code 1973, §§ 25-17, 25-20; Code 1988, § 26-28) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 26-29. - Issuance, contents and display of producer's vehicle tag. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a certificate as provided for in section 26-28 and such other evidence under oath as may be sufficient to establish the fact that the peddler is entitled to the exemption granted in section 26-27, the city treasurer shall furnish to the peddler a tag suitable to be displayed on his vehicle, on which tag shall be printed or stamped "City of Portsmouth _______ Producer No. _______," together with the year for which issued, which tag the peddler shall display upon his truck or other vehicle whenever he is engaged in peddling within the city. 
(b)  Any peddler failing to display the tag as required in subsection (a) of this section or permitting the tag obtained by him to be used in the sale of any family supplies of a perishable nature not grown or produced by him shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, §§ 25-18, 25-20; Code 1988, § 26-29) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 26-30—26-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Solicitation of contributions in parks, § 25-98. 
State Law reference— Solicitation of contributions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq.; ordinances regulating such solicitations, Code of Virginia, § 57-63. 
 
Sec. 26-46. - Definitions. 
Unless a different meaning is required by the context, the following terms as used in this chapter shall have the meanings hereinafter respectively ascribed to them: 
Charitable organization means any organization which is or holds itself out to be organized or operated for any charitable purpose or any organization which solicits contributions from the public. This definition shall not be deemed to include: 
(1)  Any church or convention or association of churches, primarily operated for nonsecular purposes and no part of the net income of which inures to the direct benefit of any individual; 
(2)  Any political party as defined in Code of Virginia, § 24.2-101 or any political campaign committee or political action committee or other political committee required by state or federal law to file a report or statement of contributions and expenditures; 
(3)  Any authorized individual who solicits, by authority of such organization, solely on behalf of a registered or exempt charitable organization or on behalf of an organization excluded from the definition of charitable organization. 
Charitable purpose means any charitable, benevolent, humane, philanthropic, or eleemosynary purpose and the purposes of influencing legislation or influencing the actions of any public official or instigating, prosecuting or intervening in litigation. 
Charitable sales promotion means advertised sales that feature the names of both the commercial co-venturer and the charitable or civic organization and which state that the purchase or use of the goods, services, entertainment, or any other thing of value that the commercial co-venturer normally sells, will benefit the charitable or civic organization or its purposes. To qualify as a charitable sales promotion, the consumer must pay the same price for the thing of value as the commercial co-venturer usually charges without the charitable sales promotion and the consumer retains the thing of value. 
Civic organization means any local service club, veterans post, fraternal society or association, volunteer fire or rescue groups, or local civic league or association of ten or more persons not organized for profit but operated exclusively for educational or charitable purposes, including the promotion of community welfare, and the net earnings of which are devoted exclusively to charitable, educational, recreational or social welfare purposes. 
Commercial co-venturer means any person who: 
(1)  Is organized for profit; 
(2)  Is regularly and primarily engaged in trade or commerce, other than in connection with soliciting for charitable or civic organizations or charitable purposes; and 
(3)  Conducts an advertised charitable sales promotion for a specified limited period of time. 
Contribution means any gift, bequest, devise or other grant or any money, credit, financial assistance or property of any kind or value, including the promise to contribute, except payments by the membership of an organization for membership fees, dues, fines or assessments, or for services rendered to individual members, and except money, credit, or financial assistance or property received from any governmental authority. The term "contribution" shall not include any donation of blood or any gift made pursuant to the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act (Code of Virginia, § 32.1-289 et seq.). 
Federated fundraising organization means any federation of independent charitable organizations which have voluntarily joined together, including but not limited to United Fund or Community Chest, for the purposes of raising and distributing money for and among themselves and where membership does not confer operating authority and control of the individual agencies upon the federated group organization. 
Fundraising expenses means the expenses of all activities that constitute or are an integral and inseparable part of a solicitation. 
Membership means those persons to whom, for payment of fees, dues, assessments, and the like, an organization provides services and confers a bona fide right, privilege, professional standing, honor or other direct benefit, in addition to the right to vote, elect officers or hold offices. The term "membership" shall not include those persons who are granted a membership upon making a contribution as the result of solicitation. 
Parent organization means that part of a charitable organization which coordinates, supervises or exercises control over policy, fundraising and expenditures, or assists or advises one or more chapters, branches or affiliates. 
Person means any individual, organization, trust, foundation, association, partnership, corporation, society, or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Professional fundraising counsel means any person who, for a flat fixed fee under a written agreement, plans, conducts, manages, carries on, advises or acts as a consultant, whether directly or indirectly, in connection with soliciting contributions for, or on behalf of, any charitable or like organization, but who actually solicits no contributions as part of such services. A bona fide salaried officer or employee of a registered or exempt charitable organization or a registered parent organization shall not be deemed to be a professional fundraising counsel. 
Professional solicitor means any person who, for a financial or other consideration, solicits contributions for or on behalf of a charitable or civic organization, whether such solicitation is performed personally or through his agents, servants or employees or through agents, servants or employees specially employed by or for a charitable or civic organization, who are engaged in the solicitation of contributions under the direction of such person, or any person who, for a financial or other consideration, plans, conducts, manages, carries on, advises or acts as a consultant to a charitable or civic organization in connection with the solicitation of contributions but does not qualify as a professional fundraising counsel. A bona fide salaried officer or employee of a registered or exempt charitable organization or a registered parent organization shall not be deemed a professional solicitor. 
Sale, sell and sold mean the transfer of any property or the rendition of any service to any person in exchange for consideration, including any purported contribution without which such property would not have been transferred or such services would not have been rendered. 
Solicit and solicitation mean the request or appeal, directly or indirectly, for any contribution on the plea or representation that such contribution will be used for a charitable purpose, including without limitation, the following methods of requesting such contribution: 
(1)  Any oral or written request; 
(2)  Any announcement to the press, over the radio or television, or by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal or campaign to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected therewith; 
(3)  The distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or other publication which directly or by implication seeks to obtain public support; or 
(4)  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, subscription, ticket or any service or tangible item in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable purpose or where the name of any charitable organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where, in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will be donated to any charitable purpose. 
"Solicitation," as defined herein, shall be deemed to occur when the request is made, at the place the request is received, whether or not the person making the same actually receives any contribution. 
(Code 1973, § 25-31; Code 1988, § 26-46; Ord. No. 1990-66, § 1, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48.  
Sec. 26-47. - Exemptions from article generally. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as being applicable to the American Red Cross or any of its local chapters. 
(b)  No charitable organization shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article if such organization has registered with state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services or if such organization is a chapter, branch or affiliate included in the consolidated report of an organization or federated organization which is so registered. Such organization shall, however, register with the city manager its name, the names of its solicitors and the dates and times that they will be soliciting in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 26-47) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 57-60(d), 57-63(d).  
Sec. 26-48. - Exemptions from certain provisions of article. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the registration requirements of section 26-55 and the requirements of section 26-60, but shall otherwise be subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Educational institutions that are accredited by the state board of education, by a regional accrediting association or by an organization affiliated with the National Commission on Accrediting, the Association Montessori International, the American Montessori Society, or the Virginia Association of Independent Schools, any foundation having an established identity with any of the aforementioned educational institutions and any other educational institution confining its solicitation of contributions to its student body, alumni, faculty and trustees and their families. 
(2)  Persons requesting contributions for the relief of any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation when all of the contributions collected, without any deductions whatsoever, are turned over to the named beneficiary for his use. 
(3)  Charitable organizations which do not intend to solicit and receive, during a calendar year, and have not actually raised or received during any of the three next preceding calendar years, contributions from the public in excess of $5,000.00, if all their functions, including fundraising activities, are carried on by persons who are unpaid for their services and if no part of their assets or income inures to the benefit of or is paid to any officer or member. Nevertheless, if the contributions raised from the public, whether all of such is or is not received by any charitable organization during any calendar year, shall be in excess of $5,000.00, it shall, within 30 days after the date it shall have received total contributions in excess of $5,000.00, register with and report to the city manager as required by this article. 
(4)  Organizations which solicit only within the membership of the organization by the members thereof. 
(5)  Organizations which have no office within the city, which solicit in the city from without the commonwealth solely by means of telephone or telegraph, direct mail or advertising in the national media. 
(6)  The term "charitable sales promotion" means advertised sales that feature the names of both the commercial co-venturer and the charitable or civic organization and which state that the purchase or use of the goods, services, entertainment, or any other thing of value that the commercial co-venturer normally sells, will benefit the charitable or civic organization or its purposes. To qualify as a charitable sales promotion, the consumer must pay the same price for the thing of value as the commercial co-venturer usually charges without the charitable sales promotion and the consumer retains the thing of value. 
(7)  Health care institutions have been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and defined herein as any facilities that have been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and that are: (i) licensed by the state Department of Health or the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services; (ii) designated by the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) as federally qualified health centers; (iii) certified by the HCFA as rural health clinics; or (iv) wholly organized for the delivery of health care services without charge; and any supporting organization that exists solely to support any such health care institutions. For the purposes of clause (iv), "delivery of health care services without charge" includes the delivery of dental, medical or other health services where a reasonable minimum fee is charged to cover administrative costs. 
(8)  Civic organizations as defined herein. 
(9)  Nonprofit debt counseling agencies licensed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 6.1-363.2 et seq. Agencies designated by the Virginia Department for the Aging pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.2-703(A)(6) as area agencies on aging. 
(10)  Labor unions, labor associations and labor organizations that have been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(11)  Trade associations that have been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(12)  Organizations that have been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that are organized wholly as regional emergency medical services councils in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 32.1-111.11. 
(13)  Nonprofit organizations that have been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and that solicit contributions only through: (i) grant proposals submitted to for-profit corporations, (ii) grant proposals submitted to other nonprofit organizations that have been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or (iii) grant proposals submitted to organizations determined to be private foundations under section 509(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(14)  Museum that has registered with the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer affairs as required by Code of Virginia, § 57-49 and that has been granted tax-exempt status under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  A charitable organization shall be subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 57-57 and 57-59, but shall otherwise be exempt from the provisions of this chapter for any year in which it confines its solicitations in the commonwealth to five or fewer contiguous cities and counties, and in which it has registered under the charitable solicitations ordinance, if any, of each such city and county. No organization shall be exempt under this subsection if, during its next preceding fiscal year, more than ten percent of its gross receipts were paid to any person or combination of persons, located outside the boundaries of such cities and counties, other than for the purchase of real property, or tangible personal property or personal services to be used within such localities. An organization that is otherwise qualified for exemption under this subsection that solicits by means of a local publication, or radio or television station, shall not be disqualified solely because the circulation or range of such medium extends beyond the boundaries of such cities or counties. 
(c)  No charitable organization shall be exempt under this section unless it shall submit, before any solicitation in any calendar year, to the city manager on forms to be prescribed by him, the name, address and purpose of the organization and a statement setting forth the reason for the claim for exemption. Parent organizations may file consolidated applications for exemptions for any chapters, branches or affiliates which they believe to be exempt from the registration provisions of this article. If exempted, the city manager shall issue annually, a letter of exemption which may be exhibited to the public. No registration fees shall be required of any exempt organization. The letter of exemption shall remain in effect as long as the organization continues to solicit in accordance with its claim for exemption. 
(Code 1973, § 25-42; Code 1988, § 26-48) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-60.  
Sec. 26-49. - Reciprocal agreements with other municipalities. 
The city manager may enter into a reciprocal agreement with the appropriate authority of any municipality within the commonwealth for the purpose of exchanging information with respect to charitable organizations, professional fundraising counsel and professional solicitors. Pursuant to such agreements, the manager may accept information filed by charitable organizations, professional fundraising counsel and professional solicitors with the appropriate authority of another locality within this commonwealth in lieu of the information required to be filed by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 25-33; Code 1988, § 26-49)  
Sec. 26-50. - Article does not authorize unlawful acts or omissions or decrease liability imposed by law. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as making lawful any act or omission which is now unlawful, or as decreasing the liability, civil or criminal, of any person, imposed by existing laws. 
(Code 1973, § 25-43; Code 1988, § 26-50) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-62.  
Sec. 26-51. - Judicial review of orders under article. 
Any person aggrieved by any final order to the city manager under this article is entitled to judicial review in accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Process Act (Code of Virginia, § 9-6.14:1 et seq.). Either party may appeal any final order of such court in the same manner as provided by law in cases of appeals of right. 
(Code 1973, § 25-44; Code 1988, § 26-51) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-67.  
Sec. 26-52. - Investigation to enforce article. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this article may have occurred, the manager, upon his own motion or upon complaint of any person, may investigate any charitable or civic organization, professional fundraising counsel or professional solicitor to determine whether such charitable or civic organization, professional fundraising counsel or professional solicitor has violated the provisions of this article. In the conduct of such investigation, the manager may: 
(1)  Require or permit any person to file a statement in writing, under oath or otherwise as the manager determines, as to all facts and circumstances concerning the matter to be investigated. 
(2)  Administer oaths or affirmations and, upon his motion or upon request of any party, subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, take evidence, and require the production of any matter which is relevant to the investigation, including the existence, description, nature, custody, condition and location of any books, documents or other tangibles and the identity and location of persons having knowledge of relevant facts or any other matter reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of material evidence. 
(b)  Any proceedings or hearings by the manager under this section, where witnesses are subpoenaed and their attendance is required for evidence to be taken or any matter is to be produced to ascertain material evidence, shall take place within the city. 
(c)  Upon failure to obey a subpoena and upon reasonable notice to all persons affected thereby, the city manager may apply to the circuit court of the city for an order imposing punishment for contempt of the subpoena or compelling compliance. 
(d)  No officer, agent, director or trustee of any charitable or civic organization, professional fundraising counsel or professional solicitor shall refuse or fail, after notice, to produce any books or any records of such organization. 
(Code 1973, §§ 25-39(m), 25-41; Code 1988, § 26-52) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 57-57(M), 57-59(b).  
Sec. 26-53. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Any person who willfully and knowingly violates or causes to be violated any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for the first offense to pay a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 or by confinement in jail for not more than six months, or both, and for the second and any subsequent offense by fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $2,500.00 or by confinement in jail for not more than one year, or both. 
(Code 1973, § 25-41; Code 1988, § 26-53; Ord. No. 1991-68, § 1, 6-25-1991) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-59(a).  
Sec. 26-54. - Actions to enjoin violations of article. 
(a)  Whenever the city attorney has reason to believe that any charitable or civic organization, professional fundraising counsel or professional solicitor is operating in violation of the provisions of this article, he may, in addition to all other actions authorized by law, bring an action in the name of the commonwealth against such charitable or civic organization, such professional fundraising counsel or professional solicitor, or their officers, directors or other agents, to enjoin the continuation of such violation, solicitation or collection, or the engaging therein, or the conducting of any acts in furtherance thereof and for such other relief as the court deems appropriate. 
(b)  In any action brought under subsection (a) of this section, the court may also award to the commonwealth a civil penalty of not more than $5,000.00 per violation, to be paid to the state literary fund, and reasonable expenses incurred by the city in investigating and preparing the case, not to exceed $250.00 per violation, and such expenses shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 25-41; Code 1988, § 26-54; Ord. No. 1990-66, § 2, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-59(c).  
Sec. 26-55. - Registration of organizations. 
(a)  Every charitable organization, except as otherwise provided in this article, which intends to solicit contributions within the city, or have funds solicited on its behalf, shall, prior to any solicitation, file an initial registration statement with the city manager upon forms acceptable to him. Each registration statement shall thereafter be refiled on or before the 15th day of the fifth calendar month of the next and each following fiscal year in which such charitable organization is engaged in solicitation activities within the city. It shall be the duty of the president, chairman or principal officer of such charitable organization to file the statements required herein. Such statements shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the organization and the purpose for which it was organized. 
(2)  The principal address of the organization, the address of any offices in the city and its designated agent for process within the commonwealth. If no such agent is designated, the organization shall be deemed to have designated the secretary of the commonwealth. If the organization does not maintain an office, the statement shall include the name and address of the person having custody of its financial records. 
(3)  The names and addresses of any chapters, branches or affiliates in the city. 
(4)  The place where and the date when the organization was legally established, the form of the organization, and a reference to any determination of its tax-exempt status under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the officers, directors, trustees and the principal salaried executive staff officer. 
(6)  A copy of a balance sheet and income and expense statement, with the opinion of an independent public accountant for the organization's immediately preceding fiscal year, or a copy of a financial statement certified by an independent public accountant covering, in a consolidated report, complete information as to all the preceding year's fundraising activities of the charitable organization, showing kind and amount of funds raised, fundraising expenses and allocation or disbursement of funds raised; provided that, no charitable organization which has registered with the city manager for the current and next preceding three years, or is exempt from such registration for such years, shall be required to file any financial information. The report required by this subsection shall comply with the accounting standards prescribed in section 26-60. Any organization with gross revenue of less than $25,000.00 may submit a balance sheet and income and expense statement verified under oath or affirmation by the treasurer of the organization. 
(7)  A statement showing the computation of the percentages provided for in subsection (b) of this section. 
(8)  A statement indicating whether the organization intends to solicit contributions from the public directly or have such done on its behalf by others. 
(9)  A statement indicating whether the organization is authorized by any other governmental authority to solicit contributions and whether it, or any officer, professional fundraiser or professional solicitor thereof, is or has ever been enjoined by any court or otherwise prohibited from soliciting contributions in any jurisdiction. 
(10)  The general purpose for which the contributions to be solicited shall be used. 
(11)  The name under which it intends to solicit contributions. 
(12)  The names of the individuals or officers of the organization who will have final responsibility for the custody of the contributions. 
(13)  The names of the individuals or officers of the organization responsible for the final distribution of the contributions. 
(14)  A statement indicating whether the organization, or any officer, professional solicitor or professional fundraiser thereof, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, a description of the pertinent facts. 
(b)  Each charitable organization shall, as a part of its registration statement, compute the percentage which its fundraising expenses for its preceding fiscal year bore to its support received directly from the public during such year. 
(c)  Each chapter, branch or affiliate located within the city, except an independent member agency of a federated fundraising organization, shall separately report the information required by this section or report the information to its parent organization which shall then furnish such information as to itself and all local affiliates, chapters and branches in a consolidated form. All affiliated organizations included in a consolidated registration statement shall be considered as one charitable organization for all purposes of this article. If a consolidated registration statement is filed, all statements thereafter filed shall be upon the same basis unless permission to change is granted by the city manager. 
(d)  Each federated fundraising organization located within the city shall report the information required by this section in a consolidated form. Any federated fundraising organization may elect to exclude from its consolidated report information relating to the separate fundraising activities of all of its independent member agencies. No member agency of a federated fundraising organization shall be required to report separately any information contained in such a consolidated report. Any separate solicitation campaign conducted by, or on behalf of, any such member agency in the city shall nevertheless be subject to all other provisions of this article. 
(e)  The registration forms shall be verified under oath or affirmation by an authorized officer of the charitable organization. 
(f)  Every charitable organization which submits an independent registration to the manager shall pay an annual registration fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code. A parent organization filing on behalf of one or more chapters, branches or affiliates or a federated fundraising organization filing on behalf of its member agencies shall pay a single annual registration fee. All fees paid hereunder shall be credited to the office of the city manager, for reimbursement of administrative expenses. 
(Code 1973, §§ 25-32, 25-40; Code 1988, § 26-55) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 57-49, 57-58, 57-63(a)(3).  
Sec. 26-56. - Commercial co-ventures. 
(a)  No commercial co-venturer shall conduct any charitable sales promotion in the city on behalf of a charitable or civic organization unless the charitable or civic organization is duly registered or granted the appropriate exempt status as provided by this article. 
(b)  Prior to any charitable sales promotion in the city, the commercial co-venturer shall have a written agreement with the charitable or civic organization on whose behalf the charitable sales promotion is to be conducted. Such agreement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the commercial co-venturer and two officers of the charitable or civic organization. 
(c)  The commercial co-venturer shall maintain all records in connection with the charitable sales promotion for a period of three years after the end date of the charitable sales promotion. All such records shall be made available to the city manager upon request. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-61.2.  
Sec. 26-57. - Reports by organizations with no local office and which solicit solely by telephone, mail, etc. 
Any charitable organization having no office or place of business within the commonwealth and soliciting in the city from without the city solely by telephone or telegraph, direct mail or advertising in local or national media, and any professional fundraising counsel or professional solicitor engaged by such an organization, shall file with the city manager any report which would otherwise be required of it or require that a determination of exemption be made. 
(Code 1973, § 25-33; Code 1988, § 26-56) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-51(b).  
Sec. 26-58. - Publication of warnings as to unregistered organizations. 
If the city manager determines that any charitable or civic organization not registered with his office and not exempt from registration, irrespective of whether such organization is subject to the jurisdiction of this city, has solicited or may be soliciting in this city, directly or indirectly, by any means including without limitation, by telephone or telegraph, by direct mail or by advertising in national media, he may, after ten days' written notice mailed to the charitable or civic organization, cause to be printed in one or more newspapers published in this city a notice in substantially the following form: 
WARNING—UNREGISTERED 
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION 
The organization named below has solicited contributions from Portsmouth citizens for allegedly charitable purposes. It has not registered with or been granted the appropriate exempt status by the city manager as required by law. Contributors are cautioned that their contributions to such organization may be used for noncharitable purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 26-57) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-52.  
Sec. 26-59. - Publication of warning solicitations by unregistered professional solicitors. 
(a)  If the city manager determines that any charitable or civic organization has contracted with a professional solicitor to solicit on its behalf and that the professional solicitor may be soliciting or has solicited in this city, directly or indirectly, by any means including, without limitation, by telephone or telegraph, by direct mail or by advertising in national media, and the professional solicitor has not registered with the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services as required by Code of Virginia, § 57-61, the city manager may, after five days' written notice mailed to the charitable or civic organization, cause to be printed in one or more newspapers published or distributed in the city a notice in substantially the following form: 
WARNING—UNREGISTERED 
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION 
BY PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR 
(b)  The charitable or civic organization named below has contracted with a professional solicitor to solicit on its behalf. The professional solicitor has not registered with the Commonwealth of Virginia as required by law. Contributors are cautioned that their contributions may be used for noncharitable purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 25-34; Code 1988, § 26-58) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-52.1.  
Sec. 26-60. - Records to be kept by organizations. 
Every charitable organization shall keep true fiscal records for all fiscal years in accordance with the standards set out in Code of Virginia, § 57-53. Such records shall be retained for a period of at least three years after the end of the period to which they relate. 
(Code 1973, § 25-35; Code 1988, § 26-59) 
State Law reference— Records to be kept, Code of Virginia, § 57-53.  
Sec. 26-61. - Contracts between organizations and fundraising counsel or professional solicitors. 
(a)  Every contract or agreement between professional fundraising counsel and a charitable or civic organization must be in writing and shall be filed with the city manager within ten days after such contract or written agreement is entered into. 
(b)  Every contract, or a written statement of the nature of the arrangement to prevail in the absence of a contract, between a professional solicitor and a charitable or civic organization shall be filed with the city manager at least ten days prior to the commencement of the contract. 
(c)  All agreements and arrangements between professional fundraising counsel and charitable or civic organizations must be reduced to writing before executed or acted upon. 
(Code 1973, § 25-36; Code 1988, § 26-60) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-54.  
Sec. 26-62. - Documents and information filed under article constitute public records; charge for copies thereof. 
Registration statements, reports, professional fundraising counsel contracts or professional solicitor contracts and all other documents and information required to be filed under this article shall become public records in the office of the city manager and shall be open to the general public for inspection at such time and under such conditions as the manager may prescribe. A charge not exceeding the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code per page may be made for any copy of such documents and information as may be furnished any person by the manager. 
(Code 1973, § 25-38; Code 1988, § 26-61) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-56.  
Sec. 26-63. - False or incorrect information in statements or reports required by article. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly give false or incorrect information to the city manager in filing statements or reports required by this article, whether such report or statement is verified or not. 
(Code 1973, §§ 25-39(a), 25-41; Code 1988, § 26-62) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 57-57(O), 57-59(a).  
Sec. 26-64. - Allowing solicitations by unregistered professional solicitors. 
No charitable or civic organization shall allow a professional solicitor to solicit on its behalf if the professional solicitor has not registered pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 57-61. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(j); Code 1988, § 26-63) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(J).  
Sec. 26-65. - Disclosure required of professional solicitors. 
(a)  Every professional solicitor who solicits contributions from a prospective contributor in the city shall identify himself and his employer, shall disclose that he is a paid solicitor and shall further disclose, in writing, the fact that a financial statement for the last fiscal year is available from the state office of consumer affairs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a professional solicitor to solicit contributions from a potential donor in the city without clearly and conspicuously disclosing to the potential donor, prior to orally requesting a contribution, or contemporaneously with a written request for a contribution, at the point of solicitation, the minimum percentage of any amount contributed which will be received by the charitable or civic organization for its own use. 
(Code 1973, § 25-34; Code 1988, § 26-64) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 57-55.1, 57-55.2.  
Sec. 26-66. - Receipts required for certain contributions. 
No charitable or civic organization shall accept any contribution exceeding $5.00 in cash or tangible property without providing, on request of the donor, a written receipt acknowledging such contribution on behalf of the organization. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(g); Code 1988, § 26-65) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(G).  
Sec. 26-67. - Unlawful solicitations generally. 
(a)  No charitable or civic organization, professional fundraising counsel or professional solicitor shall solicit in the city without being duly registered as required by law. 
(b)  No professional solicitor shall solicit on behalf of a charitable or civic organization unless the charitable or civic organization has registered or been granted the appropriate exempt status under this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(k); Code 1988, § 26-66; Ord. No. 1990-66, § 2, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(K).  
Sec. 26-68. - Soliciting without authority from organization. 
(a)  No person shall make any representation that he is soliciting contributions for or on behalf of a charitable or civic organization or shall use or display any emblem, device or printed matter belonging to or associated with a charitable or civic organization for the purpose of soliciting or inducing contributions from the public without first being authorized to do so by the charitable or civic organization. 
(b)  No professional solicitor shall solicit in the name of or on behalf of any charitable or civic organization unless such solicitor has written authorization of two officers of such organization, a copy of which shall be filed with the manager. Such written authorization shall bear the city signature of the solicitor and shall expressly state on its face the period for which it is valid, which shall not exceed one year from the date issued. Such authorization shall be carried by the solicitor when making solicitations and shall be exhibited, on request, to persons solicited, police officers or agents of the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(e), (f); Code 1988, § 26-67; Ord. No. 1990-66, § 2, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(E), (F).  
Sec. 26-69. - Soliciting by certain persons prohibited. 
No person, and no organization of which such person is an officer, professional fundraising counsel or professional solicitor, shall solicit within the city if: 
(1)  Such person has been convicted in any jurisdiction of embezzlement, larceny or other crime involving the obtaining of money or property by false pretenses or the misapplication of funds impressed with a trust, unless such person has received a pardon for such offense or the public is informed of such conviction in a manner approved in writing by the city manager before any solicitation occurs; or 
(2)  Such person has ever been enjoined by any court or otherwise prohibited from soliciting in any jurisdiction, unless the city manager shall first determine in writing that such person is entitled to solicit in such jurisdiction at the time of soliciting within the city or that the reason for such injunction or prohibition does not involve moral turpitude. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(h); Code 1988, § 26-68) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(H).  
Sec. 26-70. - Soliciting for benefit of nonresident who fails to supply information to city manager. 
No person shall solicit within the city for the benefit of any other person located without the city. If such other person refuses to supply any information which the city manager deems necessary to assure himself that the provisions of this article are complied with. A solicitation shall be deemed to be on behalf of every person who receives, directly or indirectly, more than ten percent of the gross amount collected. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(i); Code 1988, § 26-69) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(I).  
Sec. 26-71. - Misleading solicitations generally. 
(a)  No charitable organization shall use or exploit the fact of registration under this article so as to lead the public to believe that such registration in any manner constitutes an endorsement or approval by the city. The use of the following statement shall not be deemed a prohibited exploitation: "Registered with the City of Portsmouth as required by law. Registration does not imply endorsement of a public solicitation for contributions." 
(b)  No person shall, in connection with the solicitation of contributions or the sale of tangible personal property or services represent, or lead anyone by any manner, means, practice or device whatsoever to believe that the person on whose behalf such solicitation or sale is being conducted is a bona fide charitable organization or that the proceeds of such solicitation or sale will be used for charitable purposes, if he has reason to believe such not to be the fact. 
(c)  No person shall employ in any solicitation or collection of contributions for a charitable purpose any device, scheme or artifice to defraud or obtain money or property by any misrepresentation or misleading statement. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(a), (b), (l); Code 1988, § 26-70) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(A), (B), (L).  
Sec. 26-72. - Misrepresentations as to sponsors, endorsers, etc. 
(a)  No person shall, in connection with the solicitation of contributions or the sale of tangible personal property or services for charitable purposes, represent or lead anyone by any manner, means, practice or device whatsoever to believe that any other person sponsors or endorses such solicitation of contributions, sale of tangible personal property or services for charitable purposes or approves of such charitable purposes or a charitable organization connected therewith when such other person has not given written consent to the use of his name for these purposes. 
(b)  Any member of the board of directors or trustees of a charitable organization or any other person who has agreed to either serve or to participate in any voluntary capacity in the campaign shall be deemed thereby to have given his consent to the use of his name in such campaign. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the publication of names of contributors without their written consent in an annual or other periodic report issued by a charitable organization for the purpose of reporting on its operations and affairs to its membership or for the purpose of reporting contributions to contributors. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(c); Code 1988, § 26-71) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(C).  
Sec. 26-73. - Misrepresentations as to income tax deductions. 
(a)  No person shall denominate any membership fee or purchase price of goods or services sold as a contribution or as a donation or in any other manner represent or imply that the member or the purchaser of such goods or services will be entitled to an income tax deduction for his cost or any portion thereof unless: 
(1)  A signed opinion of counsel or an internal revenue service ruling or determination letter holding such cost to be deductible has been obtained; or 
(2)  The member or purchaser is informed in writing that such cost may not be deductible. 
(b)  No person shall represent or imply that a contributor will be entitled to any income tax deduction for his contribution unless a signed opinion of legal counsel or an Internal Revenue Service ruling or determination letter holding gifts to such organization to be deductible has been obtained. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(d); Code 1988, § 26-72; Ord. No. 1990-66, § 2, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(D).  
Sec. 26-74. - Unlawful use of funds raised by solicitation. 
No person shall use or permit the use of the funds raised by a charitable solicitation for any purpose other than the solicited purpose or, with respect to funds raised by general appeals, the general purposes of the charitable or civic organization on whose behalf the solicitation was made. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39(n); Code 1988, § 26-73; Ord. No. 1990-66, § 2, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(N).  
Sec. 26-75. - Donation of tickets to events. 
No person shall represent, in any solicitation, that tickets to events will be donated for use by another unless he complies with the following requirements: 
(1)  He shall have obtained commitments, in writing, from persons or charitable or civic organizations stating that they will accept donated tickets and specifying the number of persons for whom they are willing to accept tickets; 
(2)  He shall not collect or accept more contributions for donated tickets than the number of ticket commitments he has received from persons or charitable or civic organizations; 
(3)  He shall have printed in advance on each ticket the exact number of persons to be admitted by the ticket and the dollar price or value of each ticket; 
(4)  He shall distribute the tickets in a timely fashion to those having given commitments; and 
(5)  He shall maintain during the solicitation and for a period of three years thereafter records reflecting the name and address of each contributor and the amount of money and number of tickets donated by each such contributor; and the written commitments of each person or charitable or civic organization to accept tickets and specifying the number of persons on whose behalf tickets were to be accepted, as required in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 26-74; Ord. No. 1990-66, § 3, 6-26-1990)  
Sec. 26-76. - Funding of terrorist activities or organizations. 
No person shall knowingly use or permit the use of funds raised by a solicitation or by contribution to benefit or provide support, directly or indirectly, in cash or in kind, to terrorists, terrorist organizations, terrorist activities or to family members of any terrorist. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(R).  
Sec. 26-77. - Professional solicitation on behalf of charitable or civic organization. 
No professional solicitor shall solicit on behalf of a charitable or civic organization unless the charitable or civic organization has registered or been granted the appropriate exempt status under this chapter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 57-57(P).  
Chapter 27 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Resisting police officer, § 24-246; giving false information to police officer, § 24-247; mistreatment or interference with police animals, § 24-282; fire and police retirement system, § 30-151 et seq.; automatic security alarms programmed to dial police department, § 31-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— General powers and duties of local police force, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1704, 15.2-1710; criminal records exchange, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-387 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Composition of police department. 
The positions in the police department of the city shall consist of a chief and such officers and employees as may, from time to time, be deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 2-186; Code 1988, § 27-1) 
Cross reference— Chief of police or police department line officer designated by chief to act as sergeant-at-arms at council meetings, § 2-65; application of civil service system to employees of police department, § 2-136; representative from police department to attend meetings of emergency medical service advisory commission, § 2-691.  
Sec. 27-2. - Appointment of chief of police. 
The chief of police department shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 2-187; Code 1988, § 27-2)  
Sec. 27-3. - Bondsmen soliciting or loitering at police station. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 4 misdemeanor for any person to solicit for compensation bail bonds from any person detained at the police station or to loiter or remain in the police station after executing any bail bond requested of him. 
(Code 1973, § 8-29; Code 1988, § 27-3) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 27-4. - Impersonating officer. 
Any person who shall falsely assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties and privileges incident to the office of sheriff, police officer, marshal or other peace officer or who shall falsely assume or pretend to be any such officer shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 29-1; Code 1988, § 27-4) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; impersonating fire, rescue and emergency services personnel, § 24-249. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174.  
Sec. 27-5. - Unlawful use of police uniform and badge. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the police department to wear the duly prescribed uniform of the police department or any distinctive part of such uniform, or a uniform, any part of which is similar in color to or is otherwise a distinctive part of the duly prescribed uniform of the police department to wear or otherwise exhibit a badge prescribed for members of the department or a badge similar thereto. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 29-2; Code 1988, § 27-5) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Unlawful wearing of officer's uniform or insignia, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-175.  
Sec. 27-6. - False alarms of criminal activities. 
(a)  The following terms when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection: 
(1)  Alarm means any device which, when actuated by the occurrence of a criminal act requiring police response, transmits a signal to a central alarm system, a third party or directly to the emergency operations center or produces an audible or visible signal designed to notify persons within audible or visual range of the signal. 
(2)  False alarm means a signal from an alarm resulting in a response by the police department when an emergency situation did not exist. 
(b)  Following police response to the actuation of a false alarm, the alarm user shall provide to the responding officer any and all information required for the filing of a false alarm report. 
(c)  No service charge shall be imposed upon the first occurrence of a false alarm. A service charge as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be imposed for a second false alarm occurrence, for the third and fourth occurrences, for the fifth through ninth occurrences, and for subsequent occurrences within a 12-month period; except that where it is demonstrated to the chief of police that a false alarm was generated by adverse weather conditions, electrical or telephonic power failures, and other causes, including equipment malfunctions, not resulting from the negligence of the alarm user, his agents and employees, a service charge shall not be assessed. The service charge shall be payable within five days of written notification to the alarm user of the assessment. 
(Code 1973, §§ 29-76—29-78; Code 1988, § 27-6; Ord. No. 2004-25, § 1, 6-15-2004) 
Cross reference— Security alarms, ch. 31.  
Sec. 27-7. - Fees; police services and documents. 
The fees as set forth in appendix A to this Code are established for the following police administrative services and documents: 
(1)  Criminal record check. 
(2)  Fingerprinting. 
(3)  Identification photos. 
(4)  Reports (offense, accident, police). 
(5)  Photographs. 
(6)  911 tape copy. 
(7)  Mugshot. 
(8)  Videotape copy. 
(9)  Copies (per page). 
(10)  Research and copying (per hour). 
(11)  Concealed handgun permit. 
(Code 1988, § 27-7; Ord. No. 2004-25, § 2, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 2013-28, § 1, 5-14-2013)  
Secs. 27-8—27-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Auxiliary police officers, appointment, revocation, uniform, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1731 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-26. - Appointment and limitation on number of members; revocation of appointment. 
The city manager shall appoint as auxiliary police officers as many persons of good character as he shall deem necessary, not to exceed 100, and their appointment shall be revocable at any time by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 29-14; Code 1988, § 27-26) 
State Law reference— Appointment, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1733.  
Sec. 27-27. - Members not compensated or subject to civil service system. 
The members of the auxiliary police force shall serve as such without compensation and shall not be subject to the provisions of any law providing a civil service system for the members of the regular police force. 
(Code 1973, § 29-19; Code 1988, § 27-27) 
Cross reference— Civil service, § 2-136 et seq. 
State Law reference— Auxiliary police forces in cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-17-31 et seq.  
Sec. 27-28. - Authority of city manager to prescribe uniform, organization and regulations. 
The city manager shall have the authority to prescribe the uniform, organization and such rules and regulations as he shall deem necessary for the operation of the auxiliary police force. 
(Code 1973, § 29-15; Code 1988, § 27-28) 
State Law reference— Uniforms, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1733.  
Sec. 27-29. - When members may be called into service. 
(a)  The city manager may call into service such auxiliary policemen as may be deemed necessary: 
(1)  In time of public emergency; 
(2)  At such times as there is an insufficient number of regular police officers to preserve the peace, safety and good order of the community; 
(3)  At any time for the purpose of training such auxiliary police officers. 
(b)  The chief of police may call into service members of the auxiliary police force who have been trained in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1731(B) in order to aid and assist regular police officers in the performance of their duties. 
(c)  The chief of police may call into service persons who were members of the auxiliary police force prior to July 1, 1987, and who had been trained in accordance with the requirements in effect prior to that date, in order to aid and assist regular police officers in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1973, § 29-16; Code 1988, § 27-29) 
State Law reference— Calling auxiliary policemen into service, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1734.  
Sec. 27-30. - Powers and immunities of members. 
(a)  The members of the auxiliary police force called into service by the city manager shall have all the powers and authority and all the immunities of constables at common law. 
(b)  The members of the auxiliary police force called into service by the chief of police shall have all the powers and authority and all the immunities of full-time law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1973, § 29-17; Code 1988, § 27-30) 
State Law reference— Members called into service by the chief of police, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1734.  
Sec. 27-31. - Jurisdictional limitations of members. 
The members of the auxiliary police force shall not be required to act beyond the limits of the jurisdiction of the city except when called upon to protect any public property belonging to the city which may be located beyond its boundaries. 
(Code 1973, § 29-18; Code 1988, § 27-31) 
State Law reference— Jurisdictional limits, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1735.  
Sec. 27-32. - Members to wear uniforms. 
The members of the auxiliary police force shall wear the uniform prescribed by the city manager at all times while serving as auxiliary policemen. 
(Code 1973, § 29-20; Code 1988, § 27-32) 
State Law reference— Uniforms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1734.  
Secs. 27-33—27-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY IN CUSTODY OF POLICE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Unclaimed property, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1734. 
 
Sec. 27-51. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "unclaimed personal property" shall mean any personal property belonging to another which has been acquired by a law enforcement officer pursuant to his duties, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the Virginia Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act, Code of Virginia, § 55-210.1 et seq. Such term shall not apply to bicycles, motor vehicles and their contents, contraband items, lost and found items or currency. Unclaimed bicycles and mopeds may be disposed of in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720. Unclaimed firearms may be disposed of in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1721. 
(Code 1973, § 29-31; Code 1988, § 27-51; Ord. No. 1990-81, § 1, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719.  
Sec. 27-52. - Sale. 
(a)  Any unclaimed property which has been in the possession of the police department and unclaimed for a period of more than 60 days shall be subject to public sale or retention for use by the police department. Prior to the sale or retention for use of any unclaimed item by the police department, the chief of police shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain from the commonwealth's attorney in writing a statement advising that the item is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks, notice that there will be a public display and sale of unclaimed personal property. Such property, including property selected for retention by the police department, shall be described generally in the notice together with the date, time and place of the sale and shall be made available for public viewing at the sale. 
(b)  If any goods, wares, merchandise or chattels which are of perishable nature, or which shall be expensive to keep, shall at any time remain unclaimed in the custody of the police department, the chief of police may sell the same at public auction, at such time and after such notice as to him shall seem proper. 
(Code 1973, §§ 29-32, 29-33; Code 1988, § 27-52; Ord. No. 1995-44, § 1, 4-25-1995) 
Cross reference— Sale of unclaimed bicycles impounded by police department, § 5-38(d). 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsection (a) above, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719.  
Sec. 27-53. - Disposition of property or proceeds. 
(a)  The chief of police or his duly authorized agent shall pay from the proceeds of a sale under this article the costs of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale. The balance of the proceeds shall be held by the chief of police for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. Any unclaimed item retained for use by the police department shall become the property of the city and shall be retained only if, in the opinion of the police chief, there is a legitimate use for the property by the police department and retention of the item is a more economical alternative than purchase of a similar or equivalent item. 
(b)  If no claim is made by the owner for the property or proceeds within 60 days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the city, and the retained property may be placed into use by the police department. 
(c)  The owner of the property shall be entitled to apply to the city within three years from the date of sale and, if timely application is made therefor, and satisfactory proof of ownership of the proceeds or property is made, the city treasurer or the chief of police, as applicable, shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale to the owner of the property, or return the property to the owner, without interest or other charges or compensation. No claim shall be made nor any suit, action or proceeding instituted for the recovery of such proceeds or property after three years from the date of sale. 
(Code 1973, § 29-34; Code 1988, § 27-53; Ord. No. 1995-44, § 1, 4-25-1995) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1719.  
Secs. 27-54—27-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REGISTRATION OF FELONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Sex Offender and Crimes Against Minors Registry Act, Code of Virginia, § 9.1-900 et seq. 
 
Sec. 27-71. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 29-51; Code 1988, § 27-71) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 27-72. - Exemptions from article as to persons pardoned or on probation. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall apply to any person who has received or who shall receive a full and unconditional pardon for each or any crime whereof he has been convicted, or to any person who is or shall be on probation under the laws of the state, or whose probation period under the laws of the state has expired without any revocation of such probation having been made. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to a person whose conviction occurred more than ten years prior to his arrival in the city. 
(Code 1973, §§ 29-46, 29-50; Code 1988, § 27-72)  
Sec. 27-73. - When required. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of any offense punishable as a felony in this state or elsewhere, who comes into the city from any point outside of the city, and remains in the city for a period exceeding 24 hours shall report to and register with the chief of police, within 24 hours after his arrival within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Every person residing in the city who is convicted outside the city of any offense punishable as a felony in this state or elsewhere shall, within 24 hours after his return to the city, report to and register with the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, §§ 29-44, 29-45; Code 1988, § 27-73)  
Sec. 27-74. - Statement of registrant. 
Persons required to report and register by section 27-73 shall furnish to the chief of police a statement, in writing, signed by such person and giving the following information: 
(1)  His true name and all aliases which he has used or under which he may have been known. 
(2)  A full and complete description of his person. 
(3)  The kind, character and nature of each crime of which he has been convicted. 
(4)  The place where any of such crimes were committed and the place of conviction of the same. 
(5)  The name under which he was convicted in each instance and the date thereof. 
(6)  The name, if any, and the location of each prison, reformatory, jail and other penal institution in which he was confined, or to which he was sentenced. 
(7)  The location and address of his residence, stopping place, living quarters or place of abode in the city, and each one thereof if more than one; or, the address or location of his intended residence, stopping place, living quarters or place of abode therein, and each one thereof, with a description of the character of each such place, whether a hotel, apartment house, dwelling house or otherwise, giving the street number thereof, if any, or such description of the address or location thereof as will so identify the same as to make it possible of location, and the length of time for which he expects or intends to reside within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 29-44; Code 1988, § 27-74)  
Sec. 27-75. - Photographing and fingerprinting of registrant. 
At the time of reporting and registering pursuant to section 27-73, the person so reporting shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the chief of police, and such photograph and fingerprints shall be made a part of the permanent record provided for in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 29-44; Code 1988, § 27-75)  
Sec. 27-76. - Report of change of address. 
In the event that any person required to be registered under this article changes any place of residence, stopping place or living quarters to any new or different place within the city, other than any place last shown in the statement furnished to the chief of police, he shall, within 24 hours after the making of such change, notify the chief of police, in a written and signed statement, of such change of address and shall furnish in such written statement his new address. 
(Code 1973, § 29-47; Code 1988, § 27-76)  
Sec. 27-77. - Furnishing false or misleading information. 
It shall be unlawful for any person required by any provision of this article to furnish any statement or report, to furnish therein any false or fictitious address, or any address other than a true address or intended address, or to furnish, in making any such report or statement any false, untrue or misleading information or statement relating to any information required by any provisions of this article to be furnished. 
(Code 1973, § 29-47; Code 1988, § 27-77)  
Sec. 27-78. - Disposition and use of statements, photographs, etc. 
(a)  The statements, photographs and fingerprints provided for in this article shall at all times be kept by the chief of police in a file separate and apart from other files and records maintained and kept by the police department and shall not be open to inspection by the public or by any person other than a regular member of the police department; provided, however, that any such photograph or duplicates thereof may be exhibited to persons other than police officers of the city for the purpose of assisting in identifying perpetrators of any crime. 
(b)  Copies of the statements, photographs and fingerprints referred to in this article may be transmitted to any law enforcement officer when request is made in writing by such law enforcement officer asking for the record of a certain person named therein, or for the record of a person whose photograph or fingerprints reasonably correspond with photographs or fingerprints submitted with such request; provided, that such written request states that such record is deemed necessary for the use of such law enforcement officer in or concerning the investigation of any crime, or any person who is accused of committing a crime, or any crime which is reported to have been committed; and provided further, that such request in writing shall state that the record will be used only for such purpose. 
(Code 1973, §§ 29-48, 29-49; Code 1988, § 27-78) 
State Law reference— Dissemination of criminal history record information, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-389.  
Secs. 27-79—27-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PRIVATE DETECTIVES AND PRIVATE DETECTIVE AGENCIES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Private security services, Code of Virginia, § 9.1-138 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 27-96—27-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 27-111. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a private detective or to operate a private detective agency in the city unless he has a current permit from the chief of police. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of any person engaged in the business of private detective or operating a private detective agency in the city to perform investigative or detective work in the city unless he has a current permit from the chief of police to do so. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, §§ 29-62, 29-69; Code 1988, § 27-111) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 27-112. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall not be applicable to any officer of the police force of the state or of any city, town or county thereof nor to any employee of the United States or any of its agencies when such officer or employee is acting within the scope of and in the course of his employment. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall not be applicable to any private detective who has been issued a permit by any other city, county or town in the state to engage in the business of a private detective where such permit was issued under an ordinance establishing standards substantially similar to those contained in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 29-68; Code 1988, § 27-112)  
Sec. 27-113. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit under this division shall make application therefor to the chief of police on a form prescribed by him, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and office address of the applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, an association, a firm, partnership or corporation. 
(2)  If the applicant is an individual, his residence address; if the applicant is an association, a firm or partnership, the names and residence addresses of the members thereof, if the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of the officers thereof. 
(3)  The place and period of residence and employment of each individual member or officer for five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  The nature and length of experience in investigative and detective work which such individual, members or officers have had. 
(b)  The application shall be dated and shall be signed by the individual applicant or the members of the association, firm or partnership applying or, for and on behalf of the corporation applying, by the president and secretary thereof, and the signers shall make oath that the information set forth in the application is true and correct. 
(Code 1973, § 29-63; Code 1988, § 27-113)  
Sec. 27-114. - Investigation of application; issuance or denial of permit. 
The chief of police shall investigate promptly each application for a permit under this division, and if he finds: 
(1)  That the individual or the members of the association, firm or partnership or the officers of the corporation applying for the permit are of good moral character; 
(2)  That the individual, the members of the association, firm or partnership or the officers of the corporation, as the case may be, have never been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor directly related to the occupation or have never violated any regulations directly related to the occupation; and 
(3)  That the applicant is registered and licensed by the commonwealth to do private investigative or detective work; he shall grant the permit; otherwise, he shall refuse the permit. 
(Code 1973, § 29-64; Code 1988, § 27-114)  
Sec. 27-115. - Not transferable. 
No permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1973, § 29-65; Code 1988, § 27-115)  
Sec. 27-116. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police at any time, after giving at least five days' written notice and opportunity to be heard to the permittee, may suspend for such length of time as he may deem proper or revoke any permit which he has granted under the provisions of this division for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation by the permittee in the procurement of the permit. 
(2)  A false report knowingly made by the permittee with regard to any matter about which the permittee was employed. 
(3)  Divulgence by the permittee to any person other than his client of any information which he obtained from or for his client except when authorized by his client to make such divulgence or when required by law to do so. 
(4)  False swearing in any judicial proceeding or suborning perjury by the permittee. 
(5)  Conviction of the permittee of a felony. 
(6)  If the permittee is an association, a firm, partnership or corporation, commission by any member or officer thereof or by any employee thereof who performs investigative or detective work therefor of any of the aforesaid acts. 
(7)  Revocation or suspension of the permittee's registration or license by the commonwealth. 
(b)  The notice to be given to the permittee may be sent to him by certified mail to the address given by him in his application for a permit, which mailing shall constitute sufficient service of the notice. 
(Code 1973, § 29-66; Code 1988, § 27-116)  
Sec. 27-117. - Appeals from decisions of chief of police. 
From any decision of the chief of police refusing to grant, suspending or revoking any permit pursuant to this division, the applicant or permittee, as the case may be, shall have a right of appeal to the circuit court. 
(Code 1973, § 29-67; Code 1988, § 27-117)  
Chapter 28 - PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 28-1—28-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this article, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4111. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 28-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coin means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
Dealer means any person engaged in the business of purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems, removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by such person or buying, acquiring or selling precious metals or gems removed from such manufactured articles. "Dealer" shall include any employer or principal on whose behalf a purchase is made and any employee or agent who makes any such purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal. The definition shall not be construed so as to include any person engaged in the following: 
(1)  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this division. 
(2)  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a duly qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of the estate being administered by such fiduciary in the administration of an estate. 
(3)  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by such retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
(4)  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business. 
(5)  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers or by mail originating outside the commonwealth. 
(6)  Purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a byproduct. 
Gem means any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
Precious metal means any item except coins composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum or platinum alloys. 
(Code 1973, § 18-50; Code 1988, § 28-26) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4100.  
Sec. 28-27. - Article not applicable to sale or purchase of coins. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. 
(Code 1988, § 28-27) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4109(B).  
Sec. 28-28. - Article not applicable to financial institutions dealing in gold and silver bullion. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof, engaged in buying and selling gold and silver bullion. 
(Code 1973, § 18-50; Code 1988, § 28-28) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4109(C).  
Sec. 28-29. - Waiver of article provisions for certain exhibitions and shows. 
The chief of police may waive by written notice any provision of this article, except section 28-36, for particular numismatic, gem or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations, provided that the purpose of the exhibitions or shows is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions or shows. 
(Code 1973, § 18-58; Code 1988, § 28-29) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4109(A).  
Sec. 28-30. - Violations of article. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-59; Code 1988, § 28-30) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 or 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4110(A).  
Sec. 28-31. - Inspection of records required by article listed in such records. 
Every dealer shall admit to his premises during regular business hours the chief of police or his designee or any law enforcement official of the state or federal governments, and shall permit such officer to examine all records required by this article, and to examine any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen and search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing, or known or believed by him to have been stolen. 
(Code 1973, § 18-51; Code 1988, § 28-31; Ord. No. 1991-69, § 1, 6-25-1991) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4101.1.  
Sec. 28-32. - Bond or letter of credit. 
(a)  Every dealer, at the time of obtaining a permit under division 2 of this article, shall enter into a recognizance to the city secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the commonwealth, in the penal sum of $10,000.00, conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this article. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the city in the sum of $10,000.00. 
(b)  A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
(c)  If any person shall be aggrieved by the conduct of any dealer who has violated the provisions of this article, he may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against such dealer and his surety, provided that recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment, if any, which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
(Code 1973, § 18-56; Code 1988, § 28-32) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 54.1-4106, 54.1-4107.  
Sec. 28-33. - Notice of closing and reopening of business; location of business. 
If the business of a dealer is not operated without interruption, Saturdays, Sundays and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of the business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 18-57; Code 1988, § 28-33) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108(E).  
Sec. 28-34. - Credentials and statement of ownership required from seller. 
No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency with a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one other corroborating means of identification, and obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. 
(Code 1973, § 18-52; Code 1988, § 28-34) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4102.  
Sec. 28-35. - Record of purchases. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each such purchase shall be retained by the dealer for not less than 24 months. These records shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  The date and time of receiving the items purchased; 
(3)  The full name, residence address, workplace, home and work telephone numbers, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color and other identifying marks; 
(4)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card, such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; and 
(5)  A statement of ownership from the seller. 
(b)  The information required by subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer, and a copy shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours of the time of purchase to the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 18-51; Code 1988, § 28-35; Ord. No. 1990-76, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4101(A), (B).  
Sec. 28-36. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes, or has reason to believe, is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(Code 1973, § 18-53; Code 1988, § 28-36) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4103.  
Sec. 28-37. - Retention of purchases. 
(a)  A dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of ten calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police pursuant to section 28-35. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the city. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of ten calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
(Code 1973, § 18-54; Code 1988, § 28-37) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4104.  
Sec. 28-38. - Record of sales. 
Each dealer shall keep and maintain for at least 24 months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of each person to whom he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by section 28-37. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased such item. 
(Code 1973, § 18-55; Code 1988, § 28-38) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4105.  
Secs. 28-39—28-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 28-51. - Required. 
No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer within the city, unless he has a current permit so to do issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1973, § 18-57; Code 1988, § 28-51) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108(A).  
Sec. 28-52. - Application; fee. 
Any person desiring a permit required by this division shall file with the chief of police an application form which shall include the applicant's full name and any aliases and his address, age, date of birth, sex and fingerprints; the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any; and the location of the applicant's place of business. Such application shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 18-57; Code 1988, § 28-52) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108(B).  
Sec. 28-53. - Inspection and approval of applicant's weighing device. 
Before a permit required by this division may be issued, the applicant must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by the local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 18-57; Code 1988, § 28-53) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108(C).  
Sec. 28-54. - Issuance or denial. 
Upon the filing of a proper application for a permit under this division and compliance with the provisions of this division, the applicant shall be issued a permit by the chief of police, provided the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven years prior to the date of the application. The permit shall be denied, if the applicant has previously been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under this division or any ordinance of another jurisdiction similar in substance to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 18-57; Code 1988, § 28-54) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108(B).  
Sec. 28-55. - Not transferable. 
No permit issued under this division shall be transferable. 
(Code 1973, § 18-57; Code 1988, § 28-55) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108(D).  
Sec. 28-56. - Term; renewal. 
A permit issued under this division shall be valid for one year from the date issued, unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed in the same manner as the permit was initially obtained, with an annual permit fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 18-57; Code 1988, § 28-56) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108(D).  
Sec. 28-57. - Revocation. 
Upon the first conviction by any court of a dealer for violation of any provision of this article, the chief of police may revoke his permit to engage in business as a dealer under this article for a period of one full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory upon a second conviction. 
(Code 1973, § 18-59; Code 1988, § 28-57) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4110(B).  
Chapter 29 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 22; tampering with locomotive or other railroad rolling stock, § 24-321. 
State Law reference— Railroad corporations, Code of Virginia, § 56-345.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 29-1) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 29-2. - When locomotive bell to be rung. 
While any locomotive is passing along or across any street, the bell of such locomotive shall be kept constantly ringing. Any person who shall violate this section or cause such violation, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $10.00. In case such fine is not paid by the person incurring the same, the company by which he is employed shall be liable for such fine. 
(Code 1973, § 30-2; Code 1988, § 29-7) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 56-414; similar penalty for failure to ring bell as required by state law, Code of Virginia, § 56-415.  
Sec. 29-3. - Restrictions on blowing of locomotive whistles. 
Locomotive steam whistles shall be used to give signals within the city limits only where other means of signaling are impracticable. In such case, no locomotive steam whistle shall be blown for a longer period than five seconds at a time, except to give an alarm of fire. 
(Code 1973, § 30-3; Code 1988, § 29-8)  
Sec. 29-4. - Railroad cars obstructing street; standing vehicle on track. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or any receiver or trustee operating a railroad, to obstruct for a longer period than five minutes, the free passage on any street or road, by standing cars or trains across the same, except a passenger train while receiving or discharging passengers, but a passway shall be kept open to allow normal flow of traffic; nor shall it be lawful to stand any wagon or other vehicle on the track of any railroad which will hinder or endanger a moving train; provided, that when a train has been uncoupled, so as to make a passway, the time necessary required, not exceeding three minutes, to pump up the air after the train has been recoupled shall not be included in considering the time such cars or trains were standing across such street or road. 
(b)  Any such railroad company, receiver or trustee violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00; provided that the fine may be $100.00 for each minute beyond the permitted time but the total fine shall not exceed $500.00. 
(c)  This section shall not apply when a train is stopped due to breakdown, mechanical failure or emergency. 
(Code 1973, § 30-4; Code 1988, § 29-9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1.  
Sec. 29-5. - Trespassing on track. 
(a)  Any person who goes upon the track of a railroad other than to pass over such track at a public or private crossing or who willfully rides, drives or leads any animal, or contrives for any animal to go on such track except to cross as aforesaid, without the consent of the railroad company or other person operating such road, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  A second violation of the provisions of this section occurring within two years of the first violation shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. A third or subsequent violation of the provisions of this section occurring within two years of a second or subsequent violation shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any section of track which has been legally abandoned pursuant to an order of a federal or state agency having jurisdiction over the track and is not being used for railroad service. For purposes of this section, "track" shall mean the rail, ties and ballast of the railroad. 
(Code 1973, § 30-10; Code 1988, § 29-10; Ord. No. 1993-52, § 1, 6-22-1993) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1, 3 and 4 misdemeanors, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-159.  
Chapter 30 - RETIREMENT SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Pensions and retirement for city officers and employees generally, Code of Virginia, § 51.1-800 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PORTSMOUTH SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Virginia Retirement Act, Code of Virginia, § 51.1-124.2 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-26. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless otherwise required by the context, the following words and terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Accumulated contributions means the sum of all amounts deducted from the compensation of a member as contributions to the system, together with interest thereon at the rate of two percent per annum from the end of the fiscal year in which each such contribution was made. 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit of equal value when computed upon the basis of such actuarial tables as are adopted by the board. Such benefits shall not be subject to employer discretion. The actuarial tables adopted by the board for this purpose are incorporated into this article as part of the system's plan document. 
Average final compensation means the average annual creditable compensation of a member during his 36 highest consecutive months of creditable service or during the entire period of his creditable service if less than 36 months. 
Beneficiary means any person entitled to receive benefits of any kind under this article because of the death of a member. 
Board means the board of trustees of the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System established by section 30-51. 
Creditable compensation means the full compensation payable to an employee working the full working time for his position; provided, however, that if an employee receives increases in compensation in the last four years of creditable service, not related to promotion, which exceed the average compensation increase in the same period received by other employees holding comparable positions, or which, in case there are not comparable positions, exceed the average percentage compensation increase in the same period received by all other employees, such excess shall be deducted in computing creditable compensation if the board finds after consideration of all circumstances that the primary purpose of such compensation increase was to increase the retirement benefit of such employee. 
Creditable service means for any member, the most recent period of continuous service as an employee rendered by the member plus membership service for which credit is allowed under this chapter; provided, however, that periods before and after periods of unpaid authorized leave shall be included as creditable service but the period of leave itself shall not be credited as creditable service. In addition, under regular service retirement and excluding deferred or vested retirement, one-half of unused sick leave as of the effective date of retirement shall be added to creditable service. 
Employee means any person regularly employed in the service of the city on a full-time basis and whose compensation is wholly paid by the city, and persons holding offices in the city required by the constitution of this state and their deputies, assistants and employees employed on a full-time basis and whose compensation is paid partly by the city and partly by the state, and members of the city council; but shall not include any person who is eligible for membership in the Virginia Retirement System, the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System or who enters into an agreement with the city for inclusion in a deferred compensation retirement plan which agreement specifically prohibits inclusion in other retirement systems established by the city. An employee shall also be taken to mean any person employed under a grant program who has been regularly employed in the service of the city on a full-time basis for a period such that the person will have become vested under the conditions as stated in section 30-116, and whereby such grant program has participated in making the necessary contributions to the system for the full period of the employee's service to be credited. Effective July 1, 2011, a person shall be deemed to be regularly employed on a full-time basis if classified as such in the employer's payroll system. In case of doubt, the board shall decide who is an employee within the meaning of this definition. 
Employer means the city or the authority of the city having the power to appoint an employee to office or employment. 
Examiner means the medical examiners provided for in section 30-61. 
Member means any employee who has been included in the membership of the system as provided in section 30-76, and whose membership has not terminated under the provisions of section 30-77. 
Normal retirement date means the first of the month next following or coinciding with the 65th birthday of a member. 
Retirement allowance means the retirement payments to which a member is entitled as provided in this article. 
Service means service as an employee for which compensation is paid by the employer. 
System means the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System provided for in this article. The provisions of this article are intended to meet the requirements of Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code (as such section may be amended or renumbered, or any successor provision thereto) and the regulations thereunder applicable to governmental plans. 
(Code 1973, § 31-201; Code 1988, § 30-26; Ord. No. 1988-21, § 3, 2-23-1988; Ord. No. 1991-46, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 1, 11-22-2016; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-27. - Short title of article. 
The short title of this article is "Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System." 
(Code 1973, § 31-202; Code 1988, § 30-27)  
Sec. 30-28. - Established; name. 
There is hereby established a retirement system for city employees to be known as the "Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System" by which and in which name it shall, pursuant to the provisions of this article, transact all of its business. 
(Code 1973, § 31-203; Code 1988, § 30-28)  
Sec. 30-29. - Duties of appointing authorities. 
The authority having the power to hire the services of a member shall keep such records from time to time shall furnish such information as the board may require in the discharge of its duties. Upon employment of a member, the authority shall inform the member of his duties and obligations in connection with the system as a condition of employment. 
(Code 1973, § 31-204; Code 1988, § 30-29)  
Sec. 30-30. - Acceptance of employment as consent to provisions of article. 
Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree to all the provisions of this article and any amendments thereto, and payment of salary or compensation shall be a full and complete discharge of all claims for services rendered by such person during the period covered by such payment, except as to any benefits provided by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 31-205; Code 1988, § 30-30)  
Sec. 30-31. - Contributions—By members. 
No contributions shall be made by or required of members of the system. Contributions by a member made prior to July 1, 1967, shall be retained in the assets of the system until the member ceases to be an employee. 
(Code 1973, § 31-248; Code 1988, § 30-31)  
Sec. 30-32. - Same—By employer. 
(a)  The employer shall contribute annually an amount equal to the sum of the normal contribution and the accrued liability contribution if any. The normal contribution for any year shall be determined as percentage of the creditable compensation of the members for such year, such percentage being referred to as the normal contribution rate. The accrued liability contribution shall be the dollar amount determined in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  The normal contribution rate shall be defined as the percentage of the total annual creditable compensation of the members that is represented by the annual normal cost required to provide the benefits of the system, other than any future adjustments as provided for in section 30-122, computed in accordance with the recognized actuarial principles on the basis of methods and assumptions approved by the board. 
(c)  The accrued liability contribution shall be defined as the level annual contribution necessary to amortize the then remaining unfunded accrued liability over an amortization period as follows: 
Actuarial Valuation Date 	Amortization Period 
July 1, 2004 	35 years 
July 1, 2005 	34 years 
July 1, 2006 	30 years 
July 1, 2007 	30 years 
July 1, 2008 and later 	to June 30, 2037 
 
The unfunded accrued liability at any particular time shall be determined, in accordance with recognized actuarial principles on the basis of methods and assumptions approved by the board, as the excess, if any, of the then present value of benefits, including any adjustments as provided for in section 30-122, expected to be paid in the future to retired and not-yet-retired members or their beneficiaries over the sum of the value of the assets then held in the retirement account plus the then present value of the normal contributions expected to be made in the future by the employer. 
(d)  The normal contribution rate and the accrued liability contribution shall be determined from the results of each valuation of the system using the actuarial basis adopted by the board and shall continue in force until a new valuation is made. The accrued liability contribution shall be adjusted each year based on the amount of the adjustment approved by the city council for that year using the actuarial basis adopted by the board. 
(e)  The board shall certify to the city manager the normal contribution rate and the accrued liability contribution and every change made therein from time to time. 
(f)  The aggregate employer contribution for any year shall be at least sufficient, when combined with the amount then held in the retirement account, to provide the benefits payable from the account during the current year. 
(Code 1973, § 31-249; Code 1988, § 30-32; Ord. No. 1990-56, § 1, 6-12-1990; Ord. No. 2000-15, § 1, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1, 3-9-2004)  
Sec. 30-33. - Retirement account. 
All of the funds and assets of the system shall be held in a single retirement account, in which shall be accumulated all contributions by the members and by the employer, and to which all income from the invested funds and assets of the system shall be credited. From this account shall be paid the investment management fees, and the death benefits and retirement allowances provided for in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 31-255; Code 1988, § 30-33; Ord. No. 1990-47, § 1, 5-22-1990)  
Sec. 30-34. - Cash deposits to meet disbursements. 
For the purpose of meeting disbursements for retirement allowances and other payments, there may be kept available cash, on deposit in one or more banks or trust companies that are designated by the council as depositories for funds of the city. The board shall not be liable for any loss sustained as to such funds that are on deposit in such banks or trust companies. 
(Code 1973, § 31-256; Code 1988, § 30-34; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 2, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-35. - Protection against fraud. 
Any person who shall knowingly make any false statement or shall falsify or permit to be falsified any records of the system in any attempt to defraud the system shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 31-206; Code 1988, § 30-35) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 30-36. - Alteration, amendment or repeal of provisions of article. 
(a)  The council reserves the right to alter, amend or repeal any provision of this article, or any application thereof to any person; provided, however, that the amount of benefit which at the time of any such alteration, amendment or repeal shall have accrued to the extent provided under subsection (c) of this section for the members or beneficiaries shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)  If the council repeals the provisions of this article, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this article for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then entitled to receive benefits hereunder, and any future beneficiaries who become entitled to receive benefits under the joint and last survivor option provided for in this article. 
(c)  In the event of repeal as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the assets of the system shall be allocated by the board in an equitable manner to provide benefits for the persons designated in subsection (b) of this section in accordance with the provisions of this article, in the following order: 
(1)  For the benefit of the then members not yet retired to the extent of their accumulated contributions, if any. If any funds remain, then 
(2)  For the benefit of the retired members and the then beneficiaries entitled to receive benefits hereunder and beneficiaries already designated under the joint and last surviving option provided for in this article by the then retired members to the extent of the then actuarial value of their retirement allowances. If any funds remain, then 
(3)  For the benefit of members not then retired and beneficiaries, if any, designated by the members under the joint and last survivor option provided for in this article, to the extent, not provided under subsection (c)(1) of this section, of the then actuarial value of accrued retirement allowances, based on years of creditable service and average final compensation as of the date of repeal. The allocation under this subsection shall be on the basis of the oldest-ages-first method. In the event the assets at such date of repeal are insufficient to provide all of the benefits of subsection (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section or both, then the employer will contribute to the assets from time to time, as and when required, the amount necessary to make up such insufficiency. 
(d)  The allocation of assets of the system provided for in subsection (c) of this section shall be carried out through the payment by the board of the benefits provided for in this section as they become due, or by the transfer of such assets to any retirement system replacing this system; provided that such vesting of benefits as provided by this section shall be fully maintained under such new retirement system. Any funds remaining in the assets of this system after all of the vested benefits provided by this section have been paid shall revert to the general fund. 
(e)  Any allocation of assets made in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be final and binding on all persons entitled to benefits under such provisions. 
(f)  Upon the termination or partial termination of the system, each member shall become fully vested, as of the termination date or partial termination date, in his service retirement allowance to the extent funded, regardless of length of service or amount of creditable service. 
(Code 1973, § 31-207; Code 1988, § 30-36; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 3, 11-22-2016  
Secs. 30-37—30-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— General procedural rules for boards appointed by council, § 2-28. 
 
Sec. 30-51. - Established; name; administration of system. 
The system shall be administered by a board of trustees to be known as the "Board of Trustees of the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System," which board is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 31-213; Code 1988, § 30-51)  
Sec. 30-52. - Composition; appointment, term, suspension or removal and compensation of members; vacancies. 
The board shall consist of seven voting members to be appointed by the city council and two non-voting ex officio members. One ex officio member shall be the chief financial officer or designee and the other ex officio member shall be the director of human resource management or designee. Of the voting members, appointed by city council, one shall be a retired employee and six shall be other than employees or otherwise in the employ of the city. Each appointment shall be made for a term of four years, except an appointment to fill a vacancy which shall be for the unexpired term. Board members appointed by city council shall serve for no longer than a maximum of two terms. Members who are employees of a department from which an appointment shall be made may propose names of employees for consideration by city council. To be considered for appointment to the board by city council, an applicant must demonstrate an understanding of investments and financial markets. Board members shall attend annual training programs and shall comply with all applicable city policies. The council may suspend or remove any member of the board at its pleasure. A member of the board who is not an employee or otherwise in the employ of the city shall receive as his compensation $10.00 per day for each day or part thereof actually spent in the discharge of his duties. A member who is in the employ of the city shall receive as his compensation $10.00 for each day or part thereof actually spent in the discharge of his duties if such day or part thereof is not otherwise a part of the regular working hours of the employee. No member shall receive as compensation in the aggregate more than $120.00 in any one year. Members shall be reimbursed for the expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1973, § 31-214; Code 1988, § 30-52; Ord. No. 1994-95, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 4, 11-22-2016  
Sec. 30-53. - Quorum. 
A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
(Code 1973, § 31-215; Code 1988, § 30-53)  
Sec. 30-54. - Chairman; vice-chairman; secretary. 
The board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from among its members. It shall also appoint a secretary who may or may not be a member of the board. 
(Code 1973, § 31-216; Code 1988, § 30-54; Ord. No. 1994-103, § 1, 11-8-1994)  
Sec. 30-55. - Employment of actuary; necessary expenditures. 
The board may employ an actuary as its technical advisor and incur such expenditures as it deems necessary for the efficient administration of the system, as specified by this article, within the limitations of funds provided by the city council for this purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 31-217; Code 1988, § 30-55; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 5, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-56. - Actuarial investigations and valuations. 
(a)  At least once in each five-year period, the board shall cause an actuarial investigation to be made of all of the experience under the retirement system. Pursuant to such investigations, the board shall, from time to time, revise the actuarial bases of the rates of employer contributions prescribed under this article. 
(b)  The board shall cause an annual valuation to be made of the assets and liabilities of the system and shall prepare an annual statement of the amounts to be contributed by the employer under this article. 
(c)  The board shall publish annually such valuation of the assets and liabilities and a statement of receipts and disbursements of the system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-218; Code 1988, § 30-56)  
Sec. 30-57. - Record of proceedings. 
The board shall keep a record of all its proceedings and such record shall be open to inspection by the members. 
(Code 1973, § 31-219; Code 1988, § 30-57)  
Sec. 30-58. - Trustee of funds and investments. 
The board shall be the trustee of the funds created by this article and shall have the full power to invest and reinvest such funds, subject to the limitation that an investment shall be authorized and made, except upon the exercise of bona fide discretion, in securities which, at the time of making the investment, are, by law, permitted for the investment of funds by fiduciaries in this state. Subject to such limitation, the board shall have full power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer or dispose of, any of the securities or other investments in which any of the funds created herein have been invested, as well as the proceeds of all such investments and any monies or deposits belonging to such funds of the system. 
Pursuant to the standards set forth in Section 803 of Title 51.1 of the Virginia Code, the board shall discharge its duties with respect to the system solely in the interest of the members and beneficiaries thereof and shall invest the assets of the system with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of like character and like aims. The board shall also diversify such investments so as to minimize large losses unless under the circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so. 
Upon no circumstances at any time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to members and their beneficiaries under the trust shall any part of the trust corpus or income of the system be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for the exclusive benefits of the members and their beneficiaries and for the reasonable administrative expenses of the system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-220; Code 1988, § 30-58; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 6, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-59. - Conflicts of interest and prohibited interests of board members. 
The State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100, et seq., as the same may be amended, restated or moved from time to time, governs defining and prohibiting inappropriate conflicts and required disclosures of economic interests as they relate to the system and the board. In addition, to the extent not less stringent than the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, the restrictions in this section apply. No member of the board shall have any direct or indirect interest in the gains or profits of any investment authorized and made by the board, except insofar as any such member may be a member or beneficiary of the system. No member of the board shall, directly or indirectly, for himself or as an agent, in any manner use the funds, monies or deposits of the system, except to make such current and necessary payments therefrom as are authorized by the board; nor shall any member of the board become an endorser or surety or in any manner an obligor for monies loaned by or borrowed from the system. Without limitation, all board members and contractors of the board shall avoid actual or potential conflicts of interest and the appearance of actual or potential conflicts of interest. 
(Code 1973, § 31-221; Code 1988, § 30-59; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 7, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-60. - Fiscal officer; funds generally; combination of funds with funds of fire and police retirement system. 
The chief financial officer or such other institutional custodian as may be appointed by the board shall be the custodian of all of the funds created by this article. For investment purposes only, the funds created by this article may be combined with the funds of the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System; all registered securities in such combined funds shall be registered in the name "City of Portsmouth, Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System" and every change in registration, by reason of sale, assignment, transfer or disposal of such securities shall be accomplished by the signature of the chief financial officer and securities shall be delivered by him when directed so to do by resolution of the board. The custodian of the combined funds shall keep such records as may be necessary accurately to determine at any time the proportions of the total funds representing the funds of the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System and the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System respectively. Allocation of investment income, capital gains and losses, and expenses of administration of the combined funds among the two systems shall be made by the custodian in the ratio of the amounts of the funds in each of the respective systems to the combined total amount of funds in both systems. All payments from such funds shall be made by checks issued upon orders signed by such person as is designated for the purpose of the board. No order shall be signed unless it has previously been authorized by the board, which authorization shall be recorded on the records of the board. 
(Code 1973, § 31-222; Code 1988, § 30-60; Ord. No. 1995-81, §§ 1, 2, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 8, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-61. - Medical examiners. 
The board shall, from time to time, employ one or more physicians, practicing in the city, upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe, who shall be known as the "medical examiner" and whose duty it shall be to pass upon all medical examinations required under this article or by the board, and to investigate all health or medical statements and certificates made by or in behalf of any person in connection with the payment of money to such person under this article, and shall report in writing to the board his or their conclusions and recommendations upon all matters referred to him or them. 
(Code 1973, § 31-223; Code 1988, § 30-61)  
Secs. 30-62—30-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MEMBERSHIP 
 
Sec. 30-76. - Composition. 
Membership in this system as of any date after June 30, 1967, shall consist of all the employees except those who had attained their normal retirement date at the date of employment, and all former employees who were at any time members of the system and whose membership in the system had not been terminated under the provisions of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no employee shall be a member of the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System except by making a valid election for transfer from the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System prior to December 1, 1984; nor shall any employee hired or (rehired) on or after December 1, 1984 be included as a member. In addition, any retiree of the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System who as of November 30, 1984, is employed by an employer who participates in the Virginia Retirement System (VRS) shall be transferred to that retirement system for the purpose of payments of pensions. No city council member whose first term of office commences after December 1, 2016 shall qualify for membership in the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System by virtue of his or her service on city council. 
(Code 1973, § 31-229; Code 1988, § 30-76; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 9, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-77. - Period of membership; cessation of membership. 
(a)  Each employee who becomes a member of the system shall continue to be a member so long as he remains an employee and so long thereafter as he is entitled to future benefits under any provision of the system. Not in limitation but in amplification of the foregoing, the membership of any person in the system shall cease: 
(1)  Upon his termination of service as an employee, other than by retirement, before he has become vested under the conditions as stated in section 30-116; provided however, that for the purposes of this section the entrance of a member into authorized leave of absence shall not constitute termination of service as an employee; provided the member reenters service as an employee at the expiration of the period of authorized leave, and the entrance of a member into the armed forces of the United States shall not constitute termination of service as an employee; provided the member's service in such armed forces qualifies as creditable service under section 30-99; 
(2)  Upon the cessation of his retirement allowance, unless in such event he immediately again becomes an employee; or 
(3)  Upon his death. 
(b)  Should any person terminate service as an employee other than by retirement under the provisions of this article, after he has completed the number of years of creditable service required for entitlement to benefits under section 30-116; and should such person at any time again become an employee, any benefits becoming payable under the provisions of this article shall be determined on the basis of the total creditable years of service combined for all such periods of employment. 
(c)  Anything to the contrary herein notwithstanding, the membership of any person shall not cease by virtue of the fact that he became eligible for membership in the state supplemental retirement system upon employment by or transfer to the offices of the commissioner of the revenue or the city treasurer upon or within 60 days of July 1, 1959. The membership of any such person shall cease if his employment in the offices of the commissioner of the revenue or the city treasurer thereafter terminates for any reason other than death. 
(d)  Anything to the contrary herein notwithstanding, the membership of any person shall not cease by virtue of the fact that he became eligible for membership in the state supplemental retirement system upon transfer of the department of public health of the city to the state health department effective July 1, 1960. The membership of any such person shall cease if his employment in the state health department thereafter terminates for any reason other than death, retirement or resignation to accept immediate employment with the city in a position covered by the provisions of this article. Service with the state health department by any such person shall be considered as creditable service under this article when determining eligibility for ordinary disability retirement, service connected disability retirement, and additional death benefits under sections 30-124 and 30-125, but such service shall not be considered as creditable service when computing allowances under this article. 
(e)  The retirement allowance payable to any member who retires pursuant to the provisions of subsection 30-116(a) and who returns to employment with the city shall not terminate upon re-employment. At the time of re-employment, the member shall become a member of the Virginia Retirement System, subject to the vesting and other requirements of that System. 
(Code 1973, § 31-230; Code 1988, § 30-77; Ord. No. 2015-09, § 1, 3-3-2015 )  
Sec. 30-78. - Statement of facts as to status as member. 
Under such rules and regulations as are adopted by the board, each member, or someone in his behalf, shall file with the board, in such form as the board may prescribe, a statement of facts pertaining to his status as a member, which shall include a detailed description of all service rendered as an employee, and such other information as the board may require. Until such statement is filed, no member or his beneficiary shall be eligible to receive any benefits under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 31-236; Code 1988, § 30-78)  
Secs. 30-79—30-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CREDITABLE SERVICE 
 
Sec. 30-96. - Determination. 
The board shall determine by appropriate rules and regulations how much service in any year is the equivalent of a year of service, but in no case shall it allow credit for more than one year of service for all service rendered in any period of 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 1973, § 31-237; Code 1988, § 30-96)  
Sec. 30-97. - Effective of cessation of membership. 
When membership ceases, an employee shall thereafter lose all right to any retirement allowance or benefits under this article arising from service prior to the date of cessation of membership; except as hereinafter provided. Forfeitures shall not be applied to increase the benefits of any member. Funds freed through forfeitures that arise for any reason shall only be used to reduce employer contribution and to pay reasonable administrative expenses of the system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-238; Code 1988, § 30-97; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 10, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-98. - Inclusion of former service. 
(a)  Any person who was formerly a member of the system and who ceased to be a member upon becoming a member of the Virginia Retirement System may, upon again becoming an employee, be restored to membership in the system and have his previous time as a member counted as creditable service provided: 
(1)  He has remained in continuous service with the city and combined city-state office, and 
(2)  Verification of previous time as a member can be shown subject to the approval of the board. 
(b)  Creditable service for a period of membership in the Virginia Retirement System is subject to the provisions of section 30-100. 
(Code 1973, § 31-239; Code 1988, § 30-98)  
Sec. 30-99. - Inclusion of service in armed forces. 
Any service of a member of the armed forces of the United States commencing in a period of war or national emergency, or as a result of or to anticipate conscription in other periods, shall be included as creditable service; provided, that the member was in service as an employee, immediately prior to entry into such armed forces; and further provided, that he resumed service as an employee within 90 days of the date on which he had the right of release from such armed forces, or within such longer period, if any as provided by the laws of the United States applicable thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 31-240; Code 1988, § 30-99)  
Sec. 30-100. - Inclusion of service under the Virginia Retirement System. 
With respect to any member who is employed full-time by the city at the time of making application hereunder for service credits and who was a member of the former Virginia Retirement System, currently the Virginia Retirement System, immediately prior to becoming a member of this system, and whose membership in the Virginia Retirement System has ceased through withdrawal of the individual's contributions thereunder, the period of time during which the individual was a member of the Virginia Retirement System shall be included as creditable service hereunder, provided the individual terminates membership in said system and pays into the retirement system an actuarially determined amount deemed to be correct and neutral by the retirement board with regard to funding the projected additional retirement allowance to be received by the member through the purchase of such additional service credit. Such amount paid into the retirement system by the member under the provisions of this section shall remain as assets of the retirement system and shall not be considered as employee contributions, any other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding. Effective July 1, 2011, a member shall be deemed to be employed on a full-time basis if classified as such according to the employer's payroll system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-241; Code 1988, § 30-100; Ord. No. 2005-93, § 1, 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2017)  
Sec. 30-101. - Inclusion of service under the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System. 
Any person who was formerly a member of the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System shall be granted creditable service for the period he was a member of such system provided he has remained in continuous service with the city and does not withdraw his contributions, if any, to such system or if he has made such a withdrawal pays into this system the amount of contributions he previously withdrew from such system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-242; Code 1988, § 30-101)  
Secs. 30-102—30-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 30-116. - Service retirement. 
(a)  Any member in service who has attained the age of 50 and who has attained the number of years of creditable service required for entitlement to benefits under the vesting provisions of this section may retire at any time then or thereafter upon written notification to the board, made by the member or his employer, setting forth at what time the retirement is to become effective; provided that such effective date shall be after his last day of service, but shall not be more than 90 days prior to or subsequent to the filing of such notice. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, any member who, for the two-year period immediately before retirement, was employed in a bona fide executive or a high policy-making position, as that term is defined in the Age Discrimination Employment Act (29 USCS 621 et seq.), attaining age 70 shall be retired forthwith. 
(c)  Any member who terminates service as an employee prior to retirement and who complies with one of the requirements set forth in subsections (c)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section, and who has attained the age of 60, may retire at any time then or thereafter under the provision of subsection (a) of this section. If such member shall have terminated service prior to July 1, 1994, he shall receive a retirement allowance calculated on the basis of the benefits in effect on the date of his termination of service. 
(1)  The member terminated prior to July 1, 1973, but after the attainment of age 50 and the completion of 20 years of creditable service; 
(2)  The member terminated after June 30, 1973, and after the completion of ten years of creditable service; 
(3)  Membership began before July 1, 1977 and the member terminated after June 30, 1974 and after the completion of five years of creditable service; 
(4)  Membership began after June 30, 1977, and termination occurred after the completion of ten years creditable service; 
(5)  Membership began after June 30, 1991, and termination occurred after the completion of five years of creditable service. 
Provided, however, that no such member shall be entitled to the benefits of this subsection if his supervisor certifies that his service was terminated because of dishonesty, malfeasance, or misfeasance in office. Such certification may be appealed to the board, and its decision shall be final. 
(d)  Any member in service who has attained the age of 50, and who has attained not less than 30 years of creditable service, may retire at any time then or thereafter upon written notification to the board, made by the member or his employer, setting forth the time the retirement is to become effective; provided that such effective date shall be after his last day of service, but shall not be more than 90 days prior to or subsequent to the filing of such notice. 
(e)  Any member in service who has attained the age of 50, and who has at least ten years of creditable service, may retire with a reduction in benefits at any time upon written notification to the board, made by the member or his employer, setting forth the time the retirement is to become effective; provided that such effective date shall be after his last day of service, but shall not be more than 90 days prior to or subsequent to the filing of such notice. 
(f)  Upon a showing of good cause, the board may waive the 90-day notification requirement of subsections (a), (d) and (e) of this section relating to the period after termination of service. For purposes of this subsection, good cause shall be deemed to exist if a member who is otherwise eligible to apply for service retirement has first applied for disability retirement, and the application has been denied. 
(Code 1973, § 31-262; Code 1988, § 30-116; Ord. No. 1988-20, § 1, 2-23-1988; Ord. No. 1988-21, § 4, 2-23-1988; Ord. No. 1991-46, § 2, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1994-97, § 1, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 1995-60, § 1, 5-9-1995; Ord. No. 1998-42, § 1, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 2000-2, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 30-117. - Service retirement allowance. 
(a)  Upon the retirement, as provided in subsections 30-116(a) and (b), on or after July 1, 1977, of a member who either has attained his normal retirement date or has attained age 50 and who has completed the number of years of creditable service required for entitlement to benefits under the vesting provisions of subsection 30-116(c), the member shall receive an annual retirement allowance, payable at least monthly to him during his lifetime, the amount of which shall be two percent of his average final compensation multiplied by the number of years of creditable service. 
(b)  Upon his retirement as provided in section 30-116(c) on or after July 1, 1973, a member shall receive an annual retirement allowance payable at least monthly to him during his lifetime the amount of which, before and after his normal retirement date, shall be determined in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, except that if the member terminated service as an employee prior to July 1, 1974, and has completed less than 20 years of creditable service, the allowance as computed shall be reduced to a percentage of itself in accordance with the following table: 
Completed Years of 
Creditable Service 	Applicable 
Percentage 
Ten but less than 11 	50 
Eleven but less than 12 	55 
Twelve but less than 13 	60 
Thirteen but less than 14 	65 
Fourteen but less than 15 	70 
Fifteen but less than 16 	75 
Sixteen but less than 17 	80 
Seventeen but less than 18 	85 
Eighteen but less than 19 	90 
Nineteen but less than 20 	95 
 
(c)  If after termination of service and prior to retirement, as provided in section 30-116(c), subsection (a) of this section is amended, the member's allowance calculation shall be based on the amended subsections in effect as of the date of retirement. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, if a member's retirement allowance is payable under one of the options of section 30-128 the amount and duration thereof shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the applicable option. 
(e)  The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, any person whose membership began on or after his 50th birthday and after July 1, 1977, shall not be eligible for or receive a retirement allowance as provided for herein unless the member be in service at his normal retirement date. 
(f)  Upon retirement as provided in section 30-116(d), the member shall receive an annual retirement allowance, payable at least monthly during his lifetime, the amount of which shall be determined in the same manner as for retirement at his normal retirement date with the years of creditable service and average final compensation being determined as of the date of his actual retirement. 
(g)  In addition to the allowance payable under subsections (a) through (d) of this section, a member retiring on or after July 1, 1992, but before July 1, 1993, shall receive an additional allowance equal to monthly payments of $100.00 from date of retirement until his 62nd birthday. A member retiring on or after July 1, 1993, shall receive an allowance equal to monthly payments of $200.00 from the date of retirement until his 62nd birthday. A member retiring on or after July 1, 1994, shall receive an allowance equal to monthly payments of $200.00 from the date of retirement until his 65th birthday. This subsection shall not apply to sections 30-119, 30-121, 30-122, 30-124, 30-125 and 30-127 of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 31-263; Code 1988, § 30-117; Ord. No. 1988-20, § 2, 2-23-1988; Ord. No. 1992-34, § 1, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1993-40, § 1, 5-25-1993; Ord. No. 1994-39, § 1, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 1994-40(1), § 1, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 2000-2, § 2, 1-11-2000 ; Ord. No. 2013-31, § 1, 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-118. - Ordinary disability retirement. 
(a)  Any member, in service or within 90 days after termination of service, who has five or more years of creditable service may, at any time on or after July 1, 1973, and before his normal retirement date, retire on account of disability not compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act upon written notification to the board made by the member or his employer, setting forth at which time the retirement is to become effective; provided, that such effective date shall be after the last day of service but shall not be more than 90 days prior to the date of such notification; and provided further, the examiner, after a medical examination of such member, shall certify: 
(1)  That such member is, and has been continuously since such effective date, if prior to the filing of such notice, mentally or physically incapacitated for the further performance of duty. 
(2)  That such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(3)  That such member should be retired. 
(4)  That such member, at the time of his employment by the city, was not eligible for or receiving retirement allowance or pension by reason of disability from any other employer. 
(b)  For good cause shown, the board may waive the 90-day period set forth in subsection (a) of this section relating to the period following the termination of service. For purposes of this section, good cause shall exist and the board shall waive such notification period if: (i) the member would otherwise qualify for disability retirement but for failing to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and (ii) the medical examiner, acting solely in his own discretion after reviewing objective medical evidence of the disability and its cause, certifies that: (a) the disability and its cause existed on the date the member's employment was terminated, (b) the member had no knowledge of the existence of the disability and its cause at any time within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated, and (c) the member could not, with reasonable inquiry, have ascertained the existence of the disability within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated. 
(Code 1973, § 31-264; Code 1988, § 30-118; Ord. No. 1998-42, § 2, 9-8-1998)  
Sec. 30-119. - Ordinary disability retirement allowance. 
(a)  Upon retirement, as provided in section 30-118, on or after July 1, 1977, a member shall receive an annual retirement allowance, payable at least monthly to him during his lifetime and continued disability in an amount equal to two percent of his average final compensation multiplied by the number of years of his "disability credited service" as herein defined. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "disability credited service" for any member shall be taken to mean the smallest of: 
(1)  Twice the member's actual period of creditable service; 
(2)  The member's period of creditable service plus ten years; 
(3)  The number of years of creditable service the member would have completed at age 50 if he had remained in service as an employee until then; if the member is over age 50 "disability credited service" shall be equal to the member's actual creditable service; 
(4)  Twenty-five years; if the member's actual creditable service is greater than 25 years, "disability credited service" shall be equal to the member's actual creditable service. 
(c)  The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, if a member's retirement allowance is payable under one of the options of section 30-128, the amount and duration thereof shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the applicable option. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, any person whose membership began on or after his 60th birthday, shall not be eligible for or receive a disability retirement allowance as provided for herein. 
(Code 1973, § 31-265; Code 1988, § 30-119; Ord. No. 2000-2, § 3, 1-11-2000; Ord. No. 2013-31, § 1, 5-28-2013)  
Sec. 30-120. - Service-connected disability retirement. 
(a)  Any member, in service or within 90 days after termination of service, may, at any time before his normal retirement date, retire on account of disability compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act upon written notification to the board, made by the member or his employer, setting forth at what time the retirement is to become effective; provided, that such effective date shall be after the last day of service and after the date the award of compensation under that act becomes final, but shall not be more than 90 days prior to the date of such notification; and provided further, the examiner, after a medical examination of such member, shall certify: 
(1)  That such member is, and has been continuously since such effective date, if prior to the filing of such notice, mentally or physically incapacitated for the further performance of duty. 
(2)  That such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(3)  That such member should be retired. 
(4)  That such member, at the time of his employment by the city, was not eligible for or receiving retirement allowance or pension by reason of disability from any other employer. 
(b)  For good cause shown, the board may waive the 90-day period set forth in subsection (a) of this section relating to the period following the termination of service. For purposes of this section, good cause shall exist and the board shall waive such notification period if: (i) the member would otherwise qualify for disability retirement but for failing to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and (ii) the medical examiner, acting solely in his own discretion after reviewing objective medical evidence of the disability and its cause, certifies that: (a) the disability and its cause existed on the date the member's employment was terminated, (b) the member had no knowledge of the existence of the disability and its cause at any time within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated, and (c) the member could not, with reasonable inquiry, have ascertained the existence of the disability within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated. 
(Code 1973, § 31-266; Code 1988, § 30-120; Ord. No. 1998-42, § 2, 9-8-1998) 
State Law reference— Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, Code of Virginia, § 65.2-100 et seq.  
Sec. 30-121. - Service-connected disability retirement allowance. 
(a)  Upon his retirement as provided in section 30-120 on or after July 1, 1977, a member shall receive an annual retirement allowance, payable at least monthly to him during his lifetime and continued disability, in an amount determined as follows: 
(1)  With respect to any allowance falling due in a month before the member's normal retirement date, or in a month before the member's normal retirement date and before any social security allowance payment falling due that is based on the member's primary social security benefit, or before entitlement to total and permanent disability benefits under the social security act, two-thirds of the member's average final compensation; provided that the benefit payable under this subsection shall not be less than the amount that would have been payable under the provisions of section 30-119, as determined at the time of disability retirement. 
(2)  With respect to any allowance payment falling due after the member's normal retirement date, or in a month before the member's normal retirement date and after any social security allowance payment falling due is based on the member's primary social security benefit or after entitlement to total and permanent disability benefits under the social security act, an amount which when added to one-half of the initial annual amount of the primary social security benefit at his normal retirement date, or to one-half of the initial amount of any social security payment that is based on the member's primary social security benefit and falling due before the member's normal retirement, or to one-half of the amount of the primary total and permanent disability benefit under the social security act to which the member first became entitled, would equal two-thirds of the member's average final compensation; provided that the benefit payable under this subsection should not be less than the amount that would have been payable under the provisions of section 30-119. 
(b)  The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, if a member's retirement allowance is payable under one of the options of section 30-128 the amount and duration thereof shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the applicable option. 
(c)  The compensation finally awarded to the member under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act or which is adjusted pursuant to that act shall be deducted from any allowance becoming payable under the provisions of this section, and the excess of the allowance, if any, shall be paid to the member. When the time for payment of compensation under such act has elapsed, the member shall thereafter receive the full amount of such allowance payable at least monthly during his lifetime and continued disability. 
(d)  Beginning July 1, 2006, and thereafter, in order to receive a service-connected disability retirement allowance, a member retiring on account of disability compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act shall participate in vocational rehabilitation following his or her release for light-duty occupations. This requirement shall not apply or will cease to apply if the member has attained or subsequently attains full service retirement eligibility as defined in sections 30-116, et seq. 
(Code 1973, § 31-267; Code 1988, § 30-121; Ord. No. 1992-34, § 2, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 2006-38, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 30-121.1. - Reduction of health insurance rates for certain members after service-connected disability retirement. 
The annual health insurance rates of any member receiving a service-connected disability retirement allowance may be reduced to the rate paid by active employees, provided that: 
(1)  The member's service-connected disability retirement allowance is less than $20,000.00; and 
(2)  The member is enrolled in a city-provided health insurance plan. 
(Code 1988, § 30-121.1; Ord. No. 2005-97, § 1, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 30-122. - Adjustments of retirement allowance. 
Any person receiving a retirement allowance under sections 30-117, 30-119, 30-121, 30-124(b), or section 30-128, shall, upon the annual prior approval of city council, receive an adjustment of retirement allowance as of July 1, each year, in an amount to be approved by the city council. The amount of the adjustment shall be determined as a percentage of the retirement allowance being received, including in percentage of the retirement allowance being received, including in percentage adjustments approved in prior years. Such adjustments shall be subject to the same conditions of payment as are applicable to the retirement allowance. In no case shall the operation of this section result in a reduction in the amount of any person's total amount below the amount of the retirement allowance that would have been payable in the absence of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall city council approve or authorize adjustments to retirement allowances unless the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System is funded at no less than 80 percent of the actuarial accrued liability. 
(Code 1973, § 31-268; Code 1988, § 30-122; Ord. No. 1988-21, § 5, 2-23-1988; Ord. No. 2019-74 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 30-123. - Refund of accumulated contributions. 
(a)  Upon the retirement of a member or upon his termination of service as an employee, other than by death, he shall be paid, on demand, but not later than 90 days thereafter, the amount of his accumulated contributions, if any, in a lump sum; provided that if the amount of such accumulated contributions is less than $10.00, no such payment shall be made. 
(b)  Should a member die at any time while in service, the amount of his accumulated contributions shall be paid in a lump sum in accordance with section 30-129, provided that if the amount of such accumulated contributions is less than $10.00, no such payment shall be made. 
(c)  Notwithstanding provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the board may elect to refund all such accumulated contributions at any time if it finds that such action is in the best interests of the retirement system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-269; Code 1988, § 30-123)  
Sec. 30-124. - Ordinary death benefits. 
(a)  Should a member, who had one or more years of creditable service, die in service at any time before retirement from a cause not compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, an additional benefit equal to $5,000.00 shall then be payable in a lump sum in accordance with section 30-129. 
(b)  Should a member die in service on or after July 1, 1977, who at any time has obtained a number of years of creditable service required for entitlement to benefits under the vesting provisions of section 30-116, from a cause not compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, there shall be paid a retirement allowance to the first of the following listed persons who shall survive the member and in the priority listed herein: 
(1)  Widow or widower, pension payable during widowhood. 
(2)  Child or children under the age of 18 years, pension payable to age 18 for each child. 
(3)  Dependent mother or father. 
(4)  Dependent sister or brother. 
If there is more than one child, or more than one dependent parent or more than one dependent sister or brother, the pension shall be divided in a manner as the board may determine. Parents, brothers or sisters must receive more than 50-percent support from the member in order to be considered dependent for the purposes of this pension. Payments to a child or children under the age of 18 years shall be made only to a court-appointed guardian or administrator of the estate of the member. Such retirement allowance shall be payable to the first eligible person as stipulated and shall be an allowance, unless subsection (c) of this section is applicable, equal to one-half of the retirement allowance that would have been payable to the member had the member retired under the provisions of section 30-119 on the date of his death after having elected to have his allowance payable under the joint and last survivor option described in section 30-128(a)(1). If the member is under the age of 55 at the date of death, it shall be assumed for the purpose of the one-half joint and last survivor option calculation that the member be age 55 at the date of his death. Such allowance shall be in addition to any benefits provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Should a member become eligible for service retirement in accordance with section 30-116 but continue as an employee, the member may, on a form prescribed by the board, and in advance of retirement, make an election of a joint and last survivor option as described in section 30-128(a)(1). The designated fraction of the option shall be any amount greater than one-half or 50 percent and equal to or less than 100 percent. If a member having made such a designation shall die in service before retirement from a cause not compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act there shall be paid a retirement allowance to the widow or widower equal to the designated option percent of the allowance that would have been payable to the member had the member retired under the provisions of section 30-116 on the date of his death with the option so designated; or the amount as accorded in subsection (b) of this section, whichever is greater. Upon retirement of the member, the member's retirement allowance shall be calculated to include the election previously designated, unless such retirement is for disability. The retirement allowance to be continued after the member's death to the widow or widower shall be limited to a maximum of one-half of the deceased allowance received by the member during the member's lifetime. In making an election of an option as provided under this subsection, a member may also elect a modification of the joint and last survivor option whereby a provision is made for no decrease in allowance should the member's spouse die before the retirement of the member, or a return to an undecreased allowance should the member's spouse die before the member died during retirement. Such modification shall be determined by an actuarial report as of the retirement of the member. 
(Code 1973, § 31-270; Code 1988, § 30-124)  
Sec. 30-125. - Additional benefits before retirement for service-connected cause. 
(a)  Should a member die in service at any time before retirement from a cause compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, there shall be paid, in addition to any other benefits under this article, an annual allowance payable monthly to the widow of such member during her widowhood, if he leaves a widow, equal to one-half of the member's average final compensation. If he leaves no widow or the widow dies or remarries before the youngest child, if any, of the deceased member, has attained the age of 18 years, then such child or children, if any, under the age of 18 years, shall be paid such allowance until such child or children die or attain the age of 18 years, whichever shall first occur. If more than one child survives the deceased member, the allowance shall be divided among them in such manner as the board may determine. If the deceased member leaves neither widow nor child or children under the age of 18 years, then such allowance shall be paid to his parent wholly dependent upon him for support, divided in such manner as the board may determine, during the life of such parents; provided, however, that the amount of any allowance payable under his subsection shall be reduced by the amount of any social security benefits arising from coverage of the member under the Federal Social Security Act to which any such widow, child or parent may become entitled under the Federal Social Security Act, in effect at the member's death; and provided further, that if the total of the allowances payable under this subsection is less than the amount provided by section 30-124, the difference between such amount and such total shall be paid together with the last payment due under this subsection to the person entitled to receive the last payment. 
(b)  If neither widow, child or children nor wholly dependent parents survive such member, the benefits payable under this section shall be in the same amount and payable in the same manner as the benefits payable under section 30-124. 
(c)  The compensation awarded under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act for the death of such member shall be deducted from the benefit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, and the excess of the benefit, if any, shall be paid to the person specified in that subsection when the time for which payments of the compensation finally awarded under that act has elapsed, such person shall thereafter receive the full amount of the benefit payable as provided in that subsection. 
(Code 1973, § 31-271; Code 1988, § 30-125)  
Sec. 30-126. - Additional retirement benefits for judges of district courts. 
Every judge of the general district court or of the juvenile and domestic relations district court of this city who has attained the age of 70 years and has served for not less than ten years as a judge of any one or more of such courts and who retires or is retired from active service pursuant to the provisions of this article, upon such retirement, shall be paid in addition to any other benefits payable under this article a supplemental retirement allowance of $1,200.00 per year. The supplemental retirement allowance provided for in this section shall be paid in equal monthly installments. The payments provided herein shall be paid out of the general fund of the city and not out of the fund established by this article. The monies paid to such retired judges hereunder shall be deemed to be a gratuity and such payments shall cease at such time as the state shall provide a retirement system of such judges. 
(Code 1973, § 31-272; Code 1988, § 30-126)  
Sec. 30-127. - Death benefits after retirement or disability. 
(a)  Should a member who retired prior to July 1, 1967, die at any time after retirement but before receiving total retirement allowances provided in this article at least equal to his accumulated contributions as of his date of retirement, the difference between such accumulated contributions and such total allowances shall then be payable in a lump sum in accordance with section 30-129, unless the retirement allowance is then being paid in accordance with any of the option contained in section 30-128, as in effect at his date of retirement. 
(b)  Should a member who had at least one year of creditable service die after termination of service and before his normal retirement date, after having been continuously disabled from date of termination of service to date of death to such an extent that he would have qualified for disability retirement in accordance with section 30-118 or section 30-120 without regard to any creditable service requirements or actual retirement thereunder, provided that written notification of such disability is given to the board by the member, his employer or his beneficiary designated as provided in section 30-129 within one year after the member's termination of service, an additional benefit equal to $1,000.00 shall be payable in a lump sum in accordance with section 30-129. 
(Code 1973, § 31-273; Code 1988, § 30-127)  
Sec. 30-128. - Optional benefits. 
(a)  Each member who retires under any of the provisions of this article shall have the right at any time, not subsequent to the later of the effective date of the member's retirement or the date of the written notification to the board of the retirement of the member, to elect to have his retirement allowance payable under any one of the applicable options set forth in this section in lieu of the retirement allowance that would otherwise be payable to him. The member shall make any such election by written request to the board and such election shall be subject to the approval of the board. 
(1)  Joint and last survivor option. The member shall be provided a 50 percent spousal option at no cost to the member calculated on a spousal age difference of no younger than five years of the member. If the spouse is more than five years younger than the member, the member may elect to receive a decreased retirement allowance during his lifetime which represents the additional cost for a member's spouse who is younger than five years of the member. The member may also elect to receive a decreased allowance during his lifetime based on the additional cost of 75 percent or 100 percent spousal option. If the member's retirement is for disability, the retirement allowance to be continued after the member's death shall be limited to a maximum of one-half of the retirement allowance received by the member during his lifetime. 
A member retired prior to July 1, 1992, who at date of retirement elected a spousal option, shall receive an increase in pension equal to the cost of a 50 percent spousal option calculated on a spousal age difference of no younger than five years of the member. 
An unmarried member shall upon marriage, be provided a 50 percent spousal option, calculated on a spousal age difference of no younger than five years of the member provided that the member submit written notification to the board within 90 days after the marriage, and provided that evidence satisfactory to the board of the good health of the retired member is submitted with the notification. 
(2)  Social security option. If a member retires prior to his normal retirement date, he may elect to receive an increased retirement allowance up to his normal retirement date and a decreased retirement allowance thereafter, thereby providing a more nearly level retirement income when such decreased retirement allowance is added to his anticipated primary benefits under the social security act. 
(3)  Other options. The member may elect some other combination of benefits to the member and/or to such other beneficiary as the member shall designate, provided, however, that if the member's retirement is for disability, the election of the requirement allowance to be continued after the member's death should be limited to a maximum of one-half of the decreased retirement allowance received by the member during his lifetime. 
(b)  The election of a member of any one of the options stated in this section shall be null and void if the member dies prior to retirement, and the election by a member of the joint and last survivor option shall be null and void if the designated beneficiary dies before the member has retired. 
(c)  A member who has elected any one of the options stated in this section may, at any time prior to the later of the effective date of the member's retirement or the date of written notification to the board of retirement of the member, revoke such an election by written notification to the board. 
(d)  A retired member who has elected or has been provided a joint and last survivor option, may by written notification to the board, elect a different spousal recipient if the following occurs: (1) the original spousal recipient has died; or (2) a final decree of divorce of the retired member from the original spousal recipient has been entered permitting the revocation of the joint and last survivor option; (3) evidence satisfactory to the board of the good health of the retired member is submitted with the notification; and (4) the notification to the board of the change in election occurs within 90 days of the occurrence of one or two or within 90 days after remarriage. Except as provided above, if the provisions of this subsection are invoked by a retired member on the basis of the member having been divorced from his former spousal recipient and the marriage had been of a duration of 20 years or more, the provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable until the death or remarriage of the former spouse unless such spouse consents in writing to the revocation. If such an election is made as a result of the death or divorce of the spousal recipient, the benefit payable to the retired member may be adjusted retroactively for a period of not more than 30 days from the date the board first receives notification of the member's election to make such a change. 
(Code 1973, § 31-274; Code 1988, § 30-128; Ord. No. 1992-34, § 3, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1999-20, § 1, 7-27-1999)  
Sec. 30-129. - Payment of death benefits. 
All lump sum payments falling due under this article upon the death of a member or former member shall be paid to such person, if any, as the member shall have designated to be the beneficiary thereof, otherwise to the executors or administrators of the member. Any such beneficiary designation shall be made in writing and filed with the board in such manner as may be required by the board. Any such designation may be changed from time to time by the member by his filing with the board a new written designation. 
(Code 1973, § 31-275; Code 1988, § 30-129)  
Sec. 30-130. - Medical examinations of beneficiary of disability retirement allowance. 
Once each year during the first five years following the retirement of a member on a disability retirement allowance and at least once in every three-year period thereafter, the board may require any such member prior to his normal retirement date to undergo a medical examination by the examiner. Should such a member refuse to submit to undergo a medical examination by the examiner, his retirement allowance shall be discontinued until his withdrawal of such refusal, and should such refusal continue for one year, all his rights to any further disability allowance shall cease. 
(Code 1973, § 31-276; Code 1988, § 30-130)  
Sec. 30-131. - Reduction of disability retirement allowance. 
(a)  Whenever a member receiving a disability retirement allowance subsequently becomes engaged in gainful occupation, the disability allowance shall be reduced by the amount of income received which exceeds the difference between the disability retirement allowance and the amount of wages or salary the member would have been entitled to had his employment progressed in the same range and grade with credit for the level of seniority he would have attained had he not been disabled. Such reduction in disability retirement allowance shall continue until his retirement date. 
(b)  Should the examiner report and certify to the board at any time that any member receiving a disability retirement allowance is able to engage in gainful occupation paying an amount equal to or more than his average final compensation as described in subsection (a) of this section and should the board find that such member shall have refused any employment considered by the board suitable to his capacity, he shall not be entitled to any such allowance during the continuance of such refusal, unless in the option of the board, such refusal was justified. 
(c)  At least once each year during the first five years following retirement of a member on a disability retirement allowance, and at least once in every two-year period thereafter, the board shall require any such member, prior to his normal retirement date, to submit to the secretary of the board such information as the board may deem appropriate concerning any gainful employment, and the compensation therefor, in which the member may be participating or in which the member may have participated subsequent to his retirement from service. In addition to the foregoing requirement, any member on a disability retirement allowance shall, within 30 days of obtaining employment report to the secretary of the board the date and place of such employment and the amount of earnings. Should such member 
refuse to submit the information as directed by this section, his retirement allowance shall be discontinued until his withdrawal of such refusal, and should such refusal continue for a period of one year, all his rights to any further disability allowance shall cease. Should the board determine that an overpayment of a disability allowance has been made, such overpayment shall be corrected by a suspension of all or a part of the disability allowance for such period of time as may be necessary to complete such repayment. 
(Code 1973, § 31-277; Code 1988, § 30-131; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 11, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-132. - Cessation of disability retirement allowance. 
Should any member receiving a disability retirement allowance be at any time prior to his normal retirement date in service, his disability retirement allowance shall cease and he shall thereafter resume his active membership in the system. Any service on the basis of which his disability retirement allowance was computed shall thereafter be counted as creditable service and in addition, the period of disability retirement shall be counted as creditable service. 
(Code 1973, § 31-278; Code 1988, § 30-132)  
Sec. 30-133. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-31, § 2, adopted May 28, 2013, repealed § 30-133, which pertained to Social Security benefits and derived from Code 1973, § 31-379; Code 1988, § 30-133.  
Sec. 30-134. - Changes or errors in records resulting in erroneous payments. 
Should any change or error in records result in any member or beneficiary receiving from the system more or less than he would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, then on discovery of any such error the board shall correct the same, and as far as practicable shall adjust the payments in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which such member or beneficiary was correctly entitled shall be paid. 
(Code 1973, § 31-280; Code 1988, § 30-134)  
DIVISION 6. - MAXIMUM BENEFITS AND OTHER LIMITATIONS AND SPECIAL RULES 
 
Sec. 30-135. - Limitation on creditable compensation taken into account. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, except in the case of an employee who first became a member before July 1, 1996, creditable compensation taken into account for purposes of determining benefits under the system shall be limited by the compensation limit pursuant to Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. For purposes of applying the limitation applicable to each year, the limit for a plan year shall be the limitation in effect for the calendar year in which the plan year begins determined without increases in the limitation for subsequent years. An employee who first became a member before July 1, 1996 shall be considered a grandfathered employee for purposes of Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 12, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-136. - Limitation on annual benefit and special vesting rules. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the annual benefit under the system of any member and any related death or other benefit shall, if necessary, be reduced to the extent required by Section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, as adjusted by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, all as applicable to governmental plans. Notwithstanding the foregoing, adjustments in the dollar limitation under Section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall only be applicable to benefits provided by this system with respect to a member who is an eligible employee at the time the adjustment is effective. In comparing the system benefit to the dollar limitation, system benefits must be converted to an annual benefit (as defined in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) by, except as provided below, converting a benefit payable in a form other than a straight life annuity to an actuarially equivalent straight life annuity before applying the limitations of this section. The annual benefit does not include any benefits attributable to employee contributions or the assets transferred from a qualified plan that was not maintained by a participating employer. No actuarial adjustment to the benefit is required for (i) the value of a joint and survivor annuity, (ii) the value of benefits that are not directly related to retirement benefits (such as the qualified disability benefit, pre-retirement death benefits, and post-retirement medical benefits), and (iii) the value of post-retirement cost-of-living increases made in accordance with Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and Inc. Tax Regs. Section 1.415-3(c)(2)(iii). Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and the regulations thereunder are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, for purposes of adjusting any benefit or limitation under Section 415(b)(2)(B), (C), or (D) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the applicable actuarial adjustment factors shall be based on the following assumptions: 
(1)  Mortality according to the table prescribed in Rev. Rul. 2001-62, the 1994 Group Annuity Reserving Table (94 GAR). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the mortality table used for this purpose shall automatically be the table specified in any future revenue rulings or federal regulations that amend or supersede Revenue Ruling 2001-62 by specifying a new mortality table for this purpose; and 
(2)  Interest at the rate prescribed in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and the regulations and other guidance published thereunder. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a member shall be fully vested in his retirement allowance upon the attainment of his normal retirement date. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 12, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-137. - Required minimum distributions. 
On and after January 1, 1989, the retirement allowance of a member who has terminated employment shall begin no later than the later of (i) April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year that the member attains seventy and one-half years of age or (ii) April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the member terminates employment. If the member fails, following reasonable notification, to elect a form of payment by such required beginning date, the retirement allowance shall be paid as a single life annuity. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, including as such section is amended or renumbered, or any successor provision thereto, and the regulations thereunder applicable to governmental plans are incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 12, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-138. - Rollover rules. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. The terms "eligible rollover distribution", "eligible retirement plan" and "distributee" have the meanings prescribed by Section 401(a)(31) of the Internal Revenue Code (including as such section is amended or renumbered, or any successor provision thereto) and the regulations thereunder, as may be amended. Such terms shall include non-spouse designated beneficiaries and inherited individual retirement accounts in accordance with Section 402(c)(11) of the Internal Revenue Code (as such section may be amended or renumbered, or any successor provision thereto) and the regulations thereunder applicable to governmental plans. In the event of a mandatory cash-out, as that term is defined under the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder applicable to governmental plans, greater than $1,000, if the member does not elect to have such distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the member in a direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly in accordance with this section, then the board shall pay the distribution in a direct rollover to an individual retirement plan designated by the board that satisfies the safe harbor provision of Code of Virginia, § 51.1-124.30.F, and such provisions shall be interpreted and administered in accordance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 12, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-139. - Military service. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA). 
(b)  To the extent not inconsistent with the foregoing, the following special rules shall apply in case of reemployed veterans notwithstanding the provisions of the system: 
(1)  A reemployed veteran shall not be considered to have incurred a break in service by reason of his qualified military service. 
(2)  Qualified military service of a reemployed veteran shall be counted as service for vesting under the plan. 
(c)  To the extent required by USERRA or Section 401(a)(37) of the Internal Revenue Code for purposes of determining vesting in accrued benefits and entitlement to death benefits under the system, in the event a member ceases to be an employee in order to perform qualified military service and dies on or after January 1, 2007 while performing qualified military service, the member's death shall be considered to have occurred while he was an employee and, if he ceased to be an eligible employee in order to perform qualified military service, while he was an eligible employee so that his beneficiaries are entitled to any additional benefits provided under the system (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service unless otherwise expressly provided), including without limitation any additional or enhanced vesting or death benefits, had the member resumed employment with the participating employer and then terminated employment on account of death. 
(d)  For purposes of this paragraph, the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  Qualified military service means any service in the uniformed services (as defined in Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the United States Code) by any individual if such individual is entitled to reemployment rights under such chapter with respect to such service and to the employer. 
(2)  Reemployed veteran means a person who is or, but for his qualified military service, would have been a member at some time during his qualified military service and who is entitled to the restoration benefits and protections of the USERRA with respect to his qualified military service and the system. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 12, 11-22-2016)  
Secs. 30-140—30-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PORTSMOUTH FIRE AND POLICE RETIREMENT SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-151. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless otherwise required by the context, the following words and terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Accumulated contributions means the sum of all amounts deducted from the compensation of a member as contributions to the system, together with interest thereon at the rate of two percent per annum from the end of the fiscal year in which each such contribution was made. 
Actuarial equivalent means a benefit of equal value when computed upon the basis of such actuarial tables as are adopted by the board. Such benefits shall not be subject to employer discretion. The actuarial tables adopted by the board for this purpose are incorporated into this article as part of the system's plan document. 
Average final compensation means the average annual creditable compensation of a member during his 36 highest consecutive months of creditable service or during his entire period of his creditable service if less than 36 months. 
Beneficiary means any person entitled to receive benefits of any kind under this article because of the death of a member. 
Board means the board of trustees of the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System as provided for in sections 30-176 to 30-184. 
Creditable compensation means the full compensation payable to an employee working the full working time for his position; provided, however, that if an employee receives increases in compensation in the last four years of creditable service, not related to promotion, which exceed the average compensation increase in the same period received by other employees holding comparable positions, or which, in case there are not comparable positions, exceed the average percentage compensation increase in the same period received by all other employees, such excess shall be deducted in computing creditable compensation if the board finds after consideration of all circumstances that the primary purpose of such compensation increase was to increase the retirement benefit of such employee. 
Creditable service means for any member the most recent period of continuous service as an employee rendered by the member plus membership service for which credit is allowed under this article; provided, however, that periods before and after periods of unpaid authorized leave shall be included as creditable service but the period of leave itself shall not be credited as creditable service. In addition, under regular service retirement and excluding deferred or vested retirement, one-half unused sick leave as of the effective date of retirement shall be added to creditable service. 
Employee means every firefighter or police officer regularly employed in the police and fire departments of the city on a full-time basis. The city manager, having the authority to appoint, discipline and remove firefighters and police officers pursuant to the city charter, and who was appointed prior to July 26, 1994, shall be deemed to be an employee as defined herein. A member of a local retirement system who, through election to a position as a constitutional officer, is no longer eligible for membership in the local system, and who, prior to such election has accumulated within that system more than half the total service credits necessary to become eligible for full normal retirement benefits, with the concurrence of the city council, may also be deemed an employee as defined herein, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 51.1-132. The word "employee" shall not include any person who is eligible for membership in the Virginia Retirement System, except as permitted by Code of Virginia, § 51.1-132, or the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System or who enters into an agreement with the city for inclusion in a deferred compensation retirement plan, which agreement specifically prohibits inclusion in other retirement systems established by the city. Effective July 1, 2011, a firefighter or police officer shall be deemed to be regularly employed on a full-time basis if classified as such according to the employer's payroll system. 
Employer means the city or the authority of the city having the power to appoint an employee to office or employment. 
Examiner means the medical examiners provided for in sections 30-176 to 30-184. 
Member means any employee who has been included in the membership of the system as provided in section 30-201, and whose membership has not terminated under the provisions of section 30-202. 
Normal retirement date means the first of the month next following or coinciding with the 55th birthday of a member. 
Retirement allowance means the retirement payments to which a member is entitled as provided in this article. 
Service means service as an employee for which compensation is paid by the employer. 
System means the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System provided for in this article. The provisions of this article are intended to meet the requirements of Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code (as such section may be amended or renumbered, or any successor provision thereto) and the regulations thererunder applicable to governmental plans. 
(Code 1973, § 31-91; Code 1988, § 30-151; Ord. No. 1990-58, § 1, 6-12-1990; Ord. No. 1991-46, § 3, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1994-40(1), § 1, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1994-76, § 1, 7-26-1994; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 13, 11-22-2016; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-25-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-152. - Short title of article. 
The short title of this article is "Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System." 
(Code 1973, § 31-92; Code 1988, § 30-152)  
Sec. 30-153. - Established; name. 
There is hereby established a retirement system for employees to be known as the "Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System" by and in which name it shall, pursuant to the provisions of this article, transact all of its business. 
(Code 1973, § 31-93; Code 1988, § 30-153)  
Sec. 30-154. - Duties of appointing authorities. 
The authority having the power to hire the services of a member shall keep such records and from time to time shall furnish such information as the board may require in the discharge of its duties. Upon employment of a member, the authority shall inform the member of his duties and obligations in connection with the system as a condition of employment. 
(Code 1973, § 31-94; Code 1988, § 30-154)  
Sec. 30-155. - Acceptance of employment as consent to provisions of article. 
Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree to all the provisions of this article and any amendments thereto, and payment of salary or compensation shall be a full and complete discharge of all claims for services rendered by such person during the period covered by such payment, except as to any benefits provided by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 31-95; Code 1988, § 30-155)  
Sec. 30-156. - Contributions—By members. 
No contributions shall be made by or required of members of the system. Contributions by a member made prior to July 1, 1967, shall be retained in the assets of the system until the member ceases to be an employee. 
(Code 1973, § 31-134; Code 1988, § 30-156)  
Sec. 30-157. - Same—By employer. 
(a)  The employer shall contribute annually an amount equal to the sum of the normal contribution and the accrued liability contribution if any. The normal contribution for any year shall be determined as percentage of the creditable compensation of the members for such year, such percentage being referred to as the normal contribution rate. The accrued liability contribution shall be the dollar amount determined in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  The normal contribution rate shall be defined as the percentage of the total annual creditable compensation of the members that is represented by the annual normal cost required to provide the benefits of the system, other than any future adjustments as provided for in section 30-122, computed in accordance with the recognized actuarial principles on the basis of methods and assumptions approved by the board. 
(c)  The accrued liability contribution shall be defined as the level annual contribution necessary to amortize the then remaining unfunded accrued liability over a period as follows: 
Actuarial Valuation Date 	Amortization Period 
July 1, 2004 	35 years 
July 1, 2005 	34 years 
July 1, 2006 	30 years 
July 1, 2007 	30 years 
July 1, 2008 and later 	to June 30, 2037 
 
The unfunded accrued liability at any particular time shall be determined, in accordance with recognized actuarial principles on the basis of methods and assumptions approved by the board, as the excess, if any, of the then present value of benefits, including any adjustments as provided for in section 30-122, expected to be paid in the future to retired and not-yet-retired members or their beneficiaries over the sum of the value of the assets then held in the retirement account plus the then present value of the normal contributions expected to be made in the future by the employer. 
(d)  The normal contribution rate and the accrued liability contribution shall be determined from the results of each valuation of the system using the actuarial basis adopted by the board and shall continue in force until a new valuation is made. The accrued liability contribution shall be adjusted each year based on the amount of the adjustment approved by the city council for that year using the actuarial basis adopted by the board. 
(e)  The board shall certify to the city manager the normal contribution rate and the accrued liability contribution and every change made therein from time to time. 
(f)  The aggregate employer contribution for any year shall be at least sufficient, when combined with the amount then held in the retirement account, to provide the benefits payable from the account during the current year. 
(Code 1973, § 31-135; Code 1988, § 30-157; Ord. No. 1990-56, § 1, 6-12-1990; Ord. No. 2000-15, § 1, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 2004-16, § 2, 3-9-2004)  
Sec. 30-158. - Retirement account. 
All of the funds and assets of the system shall be held in single retirement account, in which shall be accumulated all contributions by the members and by the employer, and to which all income from the invested funds and assets of the system shall be credited. From this account shall be paid the investment management fees, and the death benefits and retirement allowances provided for in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 31-141; Code 1988, § 30-158; Ord. No. 1990-47, § 1, 5-22-1990)  
Sec. 30-159. - Cash deposits to meet disbursements. 
For the purpose of meeting disbursements for retirement allowances and other payments, there may be kept available cash on deposit in one or more banks or trust companies that are designated by the council as depositories for funds of the city. The board shall not be liable for any loss sustained as to such funds that are on deposit in such banks or trust companies. 
(Code 1973, § 31-142; Code 1988, § 30-159; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 14, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-160. - Protection against fraud. 
Any person who shall knowingly make any false statement or shall falsify or permit to be falsified any record of the system in any attempt to defraud the system shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 31-96; Code 1988, § 30-160) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 30-161. - Alteration, amendment or repeal of provisions of article. 
(a)  The council reserves the right to alter, amend or repeal any provision of this article or any application thereof to any person; provided, however, that the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment or repeal shall have accrued to the extent provided under subsection (c) of this section for the members or beneficiaries shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)  If the council repeals the provisions of this article, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with provisions of this article for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then entitled to receive benefits hereunder, and any future beneficiaries who become entitled to receive benefits under the joint and last survivor option provided for in this article. 
(c)  In the event of repeal as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the assets of the system shall be allocated by the board in an equitable manner to provide benefits for the persons designated in subsection (b) of this section in accordance with the provisions of this article but based on years of creditable service and average final compensation as of the date of repeal and in the following order: 
(1)  For the benefit of the then members not yet retired to the extent of their accumulated contributions, if any. If any funds remain, then 
(2)  For the benefit of the retired members and the then beneficiaries entitled to receive benefits hereunder and beneficiaries already designated under the joint and last survivor option provided for in this article by the then retired members, to the extent of the then actuarial value of their allowances. If any funds remain, then 
(3)  For the benefit of members not then retired and beneficiaries, if any, designated by the members under the joint and last survivor option provided for in this article, to the extent, not provided under subsection (c)(1) of this section, of the then actuarial value of their accrued retirement allowances, based on years of creditable service and average final compensation as of the date of repeal. The allocation under this subsection shall be on the basis of the oldest-ages-first method. 
In the event the assets at such date of repeal are insufficient to provide all of the benefits of subsection (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section or both, then the employer will contribute to the assets from time to time, as and when required, the amount necessary to make up such insufficiency. 
(d)  The allocation of assets of the system provided for in subsection (c) of this section shall be carried out through the payment by the board of the benefits provided for in this section as they become due, or by the transfer of such assets to any retirement system replacing this system; provided, that such vesting of benefits as provided by this section shall be fully maintained under such new retirement system. Any funds remaining in the assets of this system after all of the vested benefits provided by this section have been paid shall revert to the general fund. 
(e)  Any allocation of assets made in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be final and binding on all persons entitled to benefits under such provisions. 
(f)  Upon the termination or partial termination of the system, each member shall become fully vested, as of the termination date or partial termination date, in his service retirement allowance to the extent funded, regardless of length of service or amount of creditable service. 
(Code 1973, § 31-97; Code 1988, § 30-161; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 15, 11-22-2016)  
Secs. 30-162—30-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
 
Sec. 30-176. - To administer system. 
The system shall be administered by the board of trustees of the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System, as established by section 30-51. 
(Code 1973, § 31-103; Code 1988, § 30-176)  
Sec. 30-177. - Compensation of members. 
Each member of the board shall receive the same compensation as provided in section 30-52. 
(Code 1973, § 31-104; Code 1988, § 30-177)  
Sec. 30-178. - Employment of actuary; necessary expenditures. 
The board may employ an actuary as its technical advisor and incur such expenditures as it deems necessary for the efficient administration of the system, as specified by this article, within the limitations of funds provided by the council for this purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 31-105; Code 1988, § 30-178; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 16, 11-22-2016  
Sec. 30-179. - Actuarial investigations and valuations. 
(a)  At least once in each five-year period, the board shall cause an actuarial investigation to be made of all of the experience under the retirement system. Pursuant to such investigations, the board shall, from time to time, revise the actuarial bases of the rates of employer contributions prescribed under this article. 
(b)  The board shall cause an annual valuation to be made of the assets and liabilities of the system and shall prepare an annual statement of the amounts to be contributed by the employer under this article. 
(c)  The board shall publish annually such valuation of the assets and liabilities and a statement of receipts and disbursements of the system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-106; Code 1988, § 30-179)  
Sec. 30-180. - Record of proceedings. 
The board shall keep a record of all its proceedings and such record shall be open to inspection by the members. 
(Code 1973, § 31-107; Code 1988, § 30-180)  
Sec. 30-181. - Trustee of funds and investments. 
The board shall be the trustee of the several funds created by this article and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such funds, subject to the limitation that no investment shall be authorized and made, except upon the exercise of bona fide discretion, in securities which, at the time of making the investment, are, by law, permitted for the investment of funds by fiduciaries in this state. Subject to such limitation, the board shall have full power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer or dispose of, any of the securities or other investments in which any of the funds created herein have been invested, as well as the proceeds of all such investments and any monies or deposits belonging to such funds of the system. 
Pursuant to the standards set forth in Section 803 of Title 51.1 of the Virginia Code, the board shall discharge its duties with respect to the system solely in the interest of the members and beneficiaries thereof and shall invest the assets of the system with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of like character and like aims. The board shall also diversify such investments so as to minimize large losses unless under the circumstances it is clearly prudent not to do so. 
Upon no circumstances at any time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to members and their beneficiaries under the trust shall any part of the trust corpus or income of the system be used for or diverted to any purpose other than for the exclusive benefits of the members and their beneficiaries and for the reasonable administrative expenses of the system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-108; Code 1988, § 30-181; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 17, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-182. - Conflicts of interest and prohibited interests of board members. 
The State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100, et seq., as the same may be amended, restated or moved from time to time, governs defining and prohibiting inappropriate conflicts and required disclosures of economic interests as they relate to the system and the board. In addition, to the extent not less stringent than the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, the restrictions in this section apply. No member of the board shall have any direct or indirect interest in the gains or profits of any investment authorized and made by the board, except insofar as any such member may be a member or beneficiary of the system. No member of the board shall, directly or indirectly, for himself or as an agent, in any manner use the funds, monies or deposits of the system, except to make such current and necessary payments therefrom as are authorized by the board; nor shall any member of the board become an endorser or surety or in any manner an obligor for monies loaned by or borrowed from the system. Without limitation, all board members and contractors of the board shall avoid actual or potential conflicts of interest and the appearance of actual or potential conflicts of interest. 
(Code 1973, § 31-109; Code 1988, § 30-182; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 18, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-183. - Fiscal officer; funds generally, combination of funds with funds of Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System; how payments made. 
The chief financial officer or such other institutional custodian as may be appointed by the board shall be the custodian of all of the funds created by this article. For investment purposes only, the funds created by this article may be combined with the funds of the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System. All registered securities in such combined funds shall be registered in the name "City of Portsmouth, Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System" and every change in registration by reason of sale, assignment, transfer or disposal of such securities, shall be accomplished by the signature of the chief financial officer and securities shall be delivered by him when directed so to do by resolution of the board. The custodian of the combined funds shall keep such records as may be necessary to accurately determine at any time the proportions of the total funds representing the funds of the Portsmouth Fire and Police Department System and the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System, respectively. Allocation of investment income, capital gains and losses, and expenses of administration of the combined funds between the two systems shall be made by the custodian in the ratio of the amounts of the funds in each of the respective systems to the combined total amount of funds in both systems. All payments from such funds shall be made by checks issued upon orders signed by such person as is designated for the purpose by the board. No order shall be signed unless it has previously been authorized by the board, which authorization shall be recorded on the records of the board. 
(Code 1973, § 31-110; Code 1988, § 30-183; Ord. No. 1995-81, §§ 1, 2, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 19, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-184. - Medical examiners. 
The board shall, from time to time, employ one or more physicians, practicing in the city, upon such terms and conditions as it may prescribe, who shall be known as the "medical examiner" and whose duty it shall be to pass upon all medical examinations required under this article or by the board, and to investigate all health or medical statements and certificates made by or in behalf of any person in connection with the payment of money to such person under this article, and shall report in writing to the board his or their conclusions and recommendations upon all matters referred to him or them. 
(Code 1973, § 31-111; Code 1988, § 30-184)  
Secs. 30-185—30-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MEMBERSHIP 
 
Sec. 30-201. - Composition. 
Membership in the system as of the date after June 30, 1967, shall consist of all the employees except those who had attained their normal retirement date at date of employment, and all former employees who were at any time members of the system and whose membership in the system had not been terminated under the provisions hereof. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, no employee who is hired or re-hired on or after July 1, 1995, shall become a member of the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System. 
(Code 1973, § 31-117; Code 1988, § 30-201; Ord. No. 1995-58, § 1, 4-25-1995)  
Sec. 30-202. - Period of membership; cessation of membership. 
(a)  Each employee who becomes a member of the system shall continue to be a member so long as he remains an employee and so long thereafter as he is entitled to future benefits under any provision of the system. Not in limitation but in amplification of the foregoing, the membership of any person in the system shall cease: 
(1)  Upon his termination of service as an employee, other than by retirement, before he has become vested under the conditions as stated in section 30-236; provided, however, that for the purposes of this section, the entrance of a member into authorized leave of absence shall not constitute termination of service as an employee; provided the member reenters service as an employee at the expiration of the period of authorized leave, and the entrance of a member into the armed forces of the United States shall not constitute termination of service as an employee; provided the member's service in such armed forces qualifies as creditable service under section 30-218; 
(2)  Upon the cessation of his retirement allowance, unless in such event he immediately again becomes an employee; or 
(3)  Upon his death. 
(b)  Should any person terminate service as an employee other than by retirement under the provisions of this article, after he has completed the number of years of creditable service required for entitlement to benefits under section 30-236; and should such person at any time again become an employee, any benefits becoming payable under the provisions of this article shall be determined on the basis of the total creditable years of service combined for all such periods of employment. 
(c)  The retirement allowance payable to any member who retires pursuant to the provisions of subsection 30-236(a) and who returns to police or fire employment after approval of the Civil Service Commission shall not terminate upon re-employment. At the time of re-employment, the member shall become a member of the Virginia Retirement System, subject to the vesting and other requirements of that system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-118; Code 1988, § 30-202; Ord. No. 2014-66, § 1, 8-12-2014 )  
Sec. 30-203. - Statement of facts as to status as member. 
Under such rules and regulations as are adopted by the board, each member, or someone on his behalf, shall file with the board, in such form as the board may prescribe, a statement of the facts pertaining to his status as a member, which shall include a detailed description of all service rendered as an employee and such other information as the board may require. Until such statement is filed, no member or his beneficiary shall be eligible to receive any benefits under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 31-123; Code 1988, § 30-203)  
Secs. 30-204—30-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CREDITABLE SERVICE 
 
Sec. 30-216. - Determination. 
The board shall determine by appropriate rules and regulations how much service in any year is the equivalent of a year of service, but in no case shall it allow credit for more than one year of service for all service rendered in any period of 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 1973, § 31-124; Code 1988, § 30-216)  
Sec. 30-217. - Effect of cessation of membership. 
When membership ceases, an employee shall thereafter lose all right to any retirement allowance or benefits under this article arising from service prior to the date of such cessation of membership. Forfeitures shall not be applied to increase the benefits of any member. Funds freed through forfeitures that arise for any reason shall only be used to reduce employer contribution and to pay reasonable administrative expenses of the system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-125; Code 1988, § 30-217; Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 20, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-218. - Inclusion of service in armed forces. 
Any service in the armed forces of the United States commencing in a period of war or national emergency or as a result of or to anticipate conscription in other periods, shall be included as creditable service; provided, that the employee was in service as an employee, immediately prior to entry into such armed forces; and further provided, that he resumed service as an employee within 90 days of the date on which he had the right of release from such armed forces, or within such longer period, if any, as provided by the laws of the United States applicable thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 31-126; Code 1988, § 30-218)  
Sec. 30-219. - Inclusion of service in the police or fire department of an annexed area. 
Any continuous period of service with the police or fire department of a county or city from which the city-annexed territory shall be included as creditable service; provided such employee was: 
(1)  A paid full-time employee of such county or city police or fire department, 
(2)  A resident of the annexed territory, and 
(3)  Transferred directly from such county or city department between the time the final annexation decree was entered and 60 days after the date the annexation became effective; and, provided, further, that such employee contributes to the retirement allowance account a sum equal to the amount the individual would have contributed had the individual been a member of the system during the period for which coverage is desired, anything in section 30-156 to the contrary notwithstanding. Such contributions shall be refundable in accordance with section 30-242. 
Effective July 1, 2011, an employee is deemed to be a paid full-time employee of a county or city-annexed territory if classified as such according to the payroll system of such county or city police or fire department. 
(Code 1973, § 31-127; Code 1988, § 30-219; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-25-2017)  
Sec. 30-220. - Inclusion of service under the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System. 
Any person who was formerly a member of the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System shall be granted creditable service for the period he was a member of such system provided he has remained in continuous service with the city and does not withdraw his contributions, if any, to such system or if he has made such a withdrawal pays into this system the amount of contributions he previously withdrew from such system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-128; Code 1988, § 30-220)  
Sec. 30-221. - Inclusion of service under the Virginia Retirement System. 
With respect to any member who is employed full-time by the city at the time of making application hereunder for service credits and who was a member of the former Virginia Retirement System, currently the Virginia Retirement System, immediately prior to becoming a member of this system, and whose membership in the Virginia Retirement System has ceased through withdrawal of the individual's contributions thereunder, the period of time during which the individual was a member of the Virginia Retirement System shall be included as creditable service hereunder, provided the individual terminates membership in said system and pays into the retirement system an actuarially determined amount deemed to be correct and neutral by the retirement board with regard to funding the projected additional retirement allowance to be received by the member through the purchase of such additional service credit. Such amount paid into the retirement system by the member under the provisions of this section shall remain as assets of the retirement system and shall not be considered as employee contributions, any other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding. Effective July 1, 2011, a member shall be deemed to be employed on a full-time basis if classified as such according to the employer's payroll system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-129; Code 1988, § 30-221; Ord. No. 2005-93, § 1, 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 2017-23 , § 2(Exh. A), 4-25-2017)  
Secs. 30-222—30-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 30-236. - Service retirement. 
(a)  Any member, in service or within 90 days after termination of service, who has attained the age of 50 and who has attained the number of years of creditable service required for entitlement to benefits under the vesting provisions of this section or has completed 20 years of creditable service may retire at any time then or thereafter, upon written notification to the board, made by the member or his employer, setting forth at what time the retirement is to become effective; provided, that such effective date shall be after his last day of service, but shall not be more than 90 days prior to or subsequent to the filing of such notice. 
(b)  The provisions of paragraph (a) of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, any member remaining in service after his normal retirement date who attains 70 years of age shall be retired forthwith by the Portsmouth Retirement Board. The secretary to the board shall, at least six months prior to the date of any member's seventieth birthday, provide notice to the board and to the member of this mandatory retirement requirement. Retirement or other appropriate employment action may be mandated for any member, regardless of age, who does not meet applicable medical standards. 
(c)  Any member who terminates service as an employee prior to retirement and who complies with one of the requirements set forth in subsections (c)(1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section, and who has attained the age of 60, may retire at any time then or thereafter under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. If such member shall have terminated service prior to July 1, 1994, he shall receive a retirement allowance calculated on the basis of the benefits in effect on the date of his termination of service. 
(1)  The member terminated prior to July 1, 1973, but after the attainment of age 50 and the completion of 20 years of creditable service; 
(2)  The member terminated after June 30, 1973, and after the completion of ten years of creditable service; 
(3)  Membership began before July 1, 1977, and the member terminated after June 30, 1975, and after the completion of five years of creditable service; 
(4)  Membership began after June 30, 1977, and termination occurred after the completion of ten years of creditable service; or 
(5)  Membership began after June 30, 1991, and termination occurred after the completion of five years of creditable service. 
Provided, however, that no such member shall be entitled to the benefits of this subsection (c) of this section if his supervisor certifies that his service was terminated because of dishonesty, malfeasance or misfeasance in office. Such certification may be appealed to the board, and its decision shall be final. 
(d)  For good cause shown, the board may waive the 90-day period set forth in subsection (a) of this section relating to the period following the termination of service. For purposes of this section, good cause shall exist and the board shall waive such notification period if: (i) the member would otherwise qualify for disability retirement but for failing to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and (ii) the medical examiner, acting solely in his own discretion after reviewing objective medical evidence of the disability and its cause, certifies that: (a) the disability and its cause existed on the date the member's employment was terminated, (b) the member had no knowledge of the existence of the disability and its cause at any time within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated, and (c) the member could not, with reasonable inquiry, have ascertained the existence of the disability within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated. 
(Code 1973, § 31-148; Code 1988, § 30-236; Ord. No. 1988-21, § 1, 2-23-1988; Ord. No. 1991-46, § 4, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1994-97, § 1, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 1998-42, § 2, 9-8-1998; Ord. No. 2006-63, § 1, 7-25-2006)  
Sec. 30-237. - Service retirement allowance. 
(a)  Upon retirement as provided in section 30-236(a) or 30-236(b), a member shall receive an annual retirement allowance, payable at least monthly to him during his lifetime, in an amount equal to three percent of his average final compensation multiplied by the first 20 years of his creditable service, two percent of his average final compensation multiplied by the next five years of creditable service and one percent of his average final compensation multiplied by each additional year of creditable service thereafter. 
(b)  In addition to the allowance payable under subsections (a) through (d) of this section, a member retiring on or after July 1, 1992, but before July 1, 1993, shall receive an additional allowance equal to monthly payments of $100.00 from date of retirement until his 62nd birthday. A member retiring on or after July 1, 1993, shall receive an allowance equal to monthly payments of $200.00 from the date of retirement until his 62nd birthday. A member retiring on or after July 1, 1994, shall receive an allowance equal to monthly payments of $200.00 from the date of retirement until his 65th birthday. This subsection shall not apply to sections 30-239, 30-241, 30-243, 30-244, 30-245, and 30-246 of this Code and shall apply only to members receiving service retirement under section 30-236 of this Code. 
(c)  Upon retirement as provided in section 30-236(c), a member shall receive an annual retirement allowance, payable at least monthly to him during his lifetime, in an amount computed as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, except that if the member terminated service as an employee prior to July 1, 1975, and has completed less than 20 years of creditable service, the allowance as computed shall be reduced to a percentage of itself in accordance with the following table: 
Completed Years of 
Creditable Service 	Applicable 
Percentage 
Ten but less than 11 	50 
Eleven but less than 12 	55 
Twelve but less than 13 	60 
Thirteen but less than 14 	65 
Fourteen but less than 15 	70 
Fifteen but less than 16 	75 
Sixteen but less than 17 	80 
Seventeen but less than 18 	85 
Eighteen but less than 19 	90 
Nineteen but less than 20 	95 
 
(d)  If after termination of service and prior to retirement as provided in section 30-236(c), subsection (a) of this section is amended, the member's allowance calculation shall be based on the amended subsection in effect as of the date of retirement. 
(e)  The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, if a member's retirement allowance is payable under one of the options of section 30-247, the amounts and duration thereof shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the applicable option. 
(f)  Any member retiring under the provisions of this section on or after July 1, 1992, and whose creditable service exceeds 40 years as of July 1, 1992, shall receive a benefit calculated on two percent for each year of creditable service multiplied by the member's average final compensation. 
(Code 1973, § 31-149; Code 1988, § 30-237; Ord. No. 1991-46, § 5, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1992-34, § 4, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1993-40, § 2, 5-25-1993; Ord. No. 1994-39, § 2, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 1994-106, § 1, 11-22-1994; Ord. No. 1994-40(1), § 2, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 2008-42, § 1, 5-27-2008) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that §§ 2, 3 of Ord. No. 2008-42 provide, 
"2. That the purpose of this ordinance is to correct a clerical error in Ordinance 1994-40, adopted on May 10, 1994, amending Section 30-237. That ordinance incorrectly referred to Code sections 30-119, 30-121, 30-122, 30-124, 30-125 and 30-127 that govern the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System when it authorized a service retirement allowance for members of the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System. The purpose of this ordinance is also to confirm that, for the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System, a service retirement allowance was always intended to be paid only to service retirees, and not to any other class of retirees. City Council hereby finds that the uniform practice of the Board of Trustees administering the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System both before and after enactment of said ordinance has been to pay a service retirement allowance only to service retirees in the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System and not to any other retirees in said system. Said practice is hereby affirmed and ratified as being consistent with the correct legislative intent of Ordinance 1994-40, and any possible contrary interpretation of said ordinance is specifically found to be inconsistent with the legislative intent of Portsmouth City Council. The purpose of this ordinance is conform the text of Section 20-237 to what has always been the legislative intent, and to conform it to what has been the uniform practice of the Board of Trustees in interpreting and applying said code section." 
"3. That, because this ordinance is adopted to correct a clerical error, the provisions adopted herein are deemed to have taken effect on May 10, 1994, the date of adoption of Ordinance 1994-40."  
Sec. 30-238. - Ordinary disability retirement. 
(a)  Any member, in service or within 90 days after termination of service, who has five or more years of creditable service may, at any time before his normal retirement date, retire on account of disability not compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act upon written notification to the board made by the member or his appointing authority, setting forth at which time the retirement is to become effective; provided, that such effective date shall be after the last day of service but shall not be more than 90 days prior to the date of such notification; and provided further, the examiner, after a medical examination of such member, shall certify: 
(1)  That such member is or has been continuously since such effective date, if prior to the filing of such notice, mentally or physically incapacitated for the further performance of duty. 
(2)  That such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(3)  That such member should be retired. 
(b)  For good cause shown, the board may waive the 90-day period set forth in subsection (a) of this section relating to the period following the termination of service. For purposes of this section, good cause shall exist and the board shall waive such notification period if: (i) the member would otherwise qualify for disability retirement but for failing to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and (ii) the medical examiner, acting solely in his own discretion after reviewing objective medical evidence of the disability and its cause, certifies that: (a) the disability and its cause existed on the date the member's employment was terminated, (b) the member had no knowledge of the existence of the disability and its cause at any time within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated, and (c) the member could not, with reasonable inquiry, have ascertained the existence of the disability within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated. 
(Code 1973, § 31-150; Code 1988, § 30-238; Ord. No. 1998-42, § 2, 9-8-1998)  
Sec. 30-239. - Ordinary disability retirement allowance. 
(a)  Upon retirement as provided in section 30-238, a member shall receive an annual retirement allowance, payable at least monthly to him during his lifetime and continued disability, in an amount equal to three percent of his average final compensation multiplied by the number of years of his "disability credited service," as hereinafter defined. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "disability credited service" for any member shall be taken to mean the smallest of: 
(1)  Twice the member's actual period of creditable service; 
(2)  The member's period of creditable service plus ten years; 
(3)  The number of years of creditable service the member would have completed at his normal retirement date if he had remained in service as an employee until then; if the member is past his normal retirement date disability credited service shall be equal to the member's actual creditable service; 
(4)  Twenty years; if the member's actual creditable service is greater than 20 years, "disability credited service" shall be equal to the member's actual creditable service. An allowance shall be payable to the member according to subsection (a) of this section and an additional two percent for each year of creditable service for the next five years and an additional one percent for each year thereafter. 
(c)  The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, if a member's retirement allowance is payable under one of the options of section 30-247, the amount and duration thereof shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the applicable option. 
(Code 1973, § 31-151; Code 1988, § 30-239; Ord. No. 1992-34, § 5, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1994-39, § 3, 5-24-1994; Ord. No. 1994-40(1), § 3, 5-10-1994)  
Sec. 30-240. - Service-connected disability retirement. 
(a)  Any member, in service or within 90 days after termination of service, may retire on account of disability compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act upon written notification to the board, made by the member or his employer, setting forth at what time the retirement is to become effective; provided, that such effective date shall be after the last day of service and after the date the award of compensation under that act becomes final, but shall not be more than 90 days prior to the date of such notification; and provided further, the examiner, after a medical examination of such member, shall certify: 
(1)  That such member is, and has been continuously since such effective date, if prior to the filing of such notice, mentally or physically incapacitated for the further performance of duty. 
(2)  That such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(3)  That such member should be retired. 
(b)  For good cause shown, the board may waive the 90-day period set forth in subsection (a) of this section relating to the period following the termination of service. For purposes of this section, good cause shall exist and the board shall waive such notification period if: (i) the member would otherwise qualify for disability retirement but for failing to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, and (ii) the medical examiner, acting solely in his own discretion after reviewing objective medical evidence of the disability and its cause, certifies that: (a) the disability and its cause existed on the date the member's employment was terminated, (b) the member had no knowledge of the existence of the disability and its cause at any time within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated, and (c) the member could not, with reasonable inquiry, have ascertained the existence of the disability within 90 days after the date the member's employment was terminated. 
(Code 1973, § 31-152; Code 1988, § 30-240; Ord. No. 1998-42, § 2, 9-8-1998)  
Sec. 30-241. - Service-connected disability retirement allowance. 
(a)  Upon retirement as provided in section 30-240, a member shall receive an annual retirement allowance, payable at least monthly to him during his lifetime and continued disability, in an amount equal to the larger of: 
(1)  Two-thirds of the member's average final compensation; or 
(2)  The allowance to which the member would be entitled under the provisions of section 30-239 if his disability were not compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act. 
(b)  The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, if a member's retirement allowance is payable under one of the options of section 30-247, the amount and duration thereof shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of the applicable option. 
(c)  The compensation finally awarded to the member under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act or adjusted pursuant to that act shall be deducted from any allowance becoming payable under the provisions of this section, and the excess of the allowance, if any, shall be paid to the member. When the time for payments of compensation under such act has elapsed, the member shall thereafter receive the full amount of such allowance payable at least monthly during his lifetime and continued disability. 
(d)  Beginning July 1, 2006, and thereafter, in order to receive a service-connected disability retirement allowance, a member retiring on account of disability compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act shall participate in vocational rehabilitation following his or her release for light-duty occupations. This requirement shall not apply or will cease to apply if the member has attained or subsequently attains full service retirement eligibility as defined in sections 30-236, et seq. 
(Code 1973, § 31-153; Code 1988, § 30-241; Ord. No. 1992-34, § 6, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 2006-38, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 30-241.1. - Reduction of health insurance rates for certain members after service-connected disability retirement. 
The annual health insurance rates of any member receiving a service-connected disability retirement allowance may be reduced to the rate paid by active employees, provided that: 
(1)  The member's service-connected disability retirement allowance is less than $20,000.00; and 
(2)  The member is enrolled in a city-provided health insurance plan. 
(Code 1988, § 30-241.1; Ord. No. 2005-97, § 1, 11-22-2005)  
Sec. 30-242. - Refund of accumulated contributions. 
(a)  Upon the retirement of a member or upon his termination of service as an employee, other than by death, he shall be paid, on demand, but not later than 90 days thereafter, the amount of his accumulated contributions, if any, in a lump sum; provided that if the amount of such accumulated contributions is less than $10.00, no such payment shall be made. 
(b)  Should a member die at any time while in service, the amount of his accumulated conditions shall be paid in a lump sum in accordance with section 30-248; provided that if the amount of such accumulated contributions is less than $10.00, no such payment shall be made. 
(c)  Notwithstanding provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the retirement board may elect to refund all such accumulated contributions at any time if it finds that such action is in the best interests of the retirement system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-154; Code 1988, § 30-242)  
Sec. 30-243. - Adjustments of retirement allowance. 
Any person receiving a retirement allowance under sections 30-237, 30-239, 30-241, 30-244(c), or section 30-247 shall, upon the annual prior approval of city council, receive an adjustment of retirement allowance as of July 1, each year, in an amount to be approved by the city council. The amount of the adjustment shall be determined as a percentage of the retirement allowance being received, including any percentage adjustments approved in prior years. Such adjustments shall be subject to the same conditions of payment as are applicable to the retirement allowance. In no case, shall the operation of this section result in a reduction in the amount of any person's total benefit below the amount of the retirement allowance that would have been payable in the absence of this section. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no event shall city council approve or authorize adjustments to retirement allowances unless the Portsmouth Fire and Police Retirement System is funded at no less than 80 percent of the actuarial accrued liability. 
(Code 1973, § 31-155; Code 1988, § 30-243; Ord. No. 1988-21, § 2, 2-23-1988; Ord. No. 2019-74 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 30-244. - Ordinary death benefits. 
(a)  Should a member, who had one or more years of creditable service, die in service at any time before retirement from a cause not comprehensible under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, an additional benefit equal to $5,000.00 shall then be payable in a lump sum in accordance with section 30-248. 
(b)  If the member at the date of death had more than five years of creditable service, there shall be paid a retirement allowance to the first of the following-listed persons who shall survive the member and in the priority listed herein: 
(1)  Widow or widower, pension payable during widowhood. 
(2)  Child or children under the age of 18 years, pension payable to age 18 for each child. 
(3)  Dependent mother or father. 
(4)  Dependent sister or brother. 
If there is more than one child, or more than one dependent parent, or more than one dependent sister or brother, the pension shall be divided in a manner as the board may determine. Parents, brothers or sisters must receive more than 50-percent support from the member in order to be considered dependent for the purposes of this pension. Payments to a child or children under the age of 18 years shall be made only to a court-appointed guardian or administrator of the estate of the member. 
Such retirement allowance shall be payable to the first eligible person as stipulated and be an allowance, unless subsection (c) of this section is applicable, payable at least monthly, equal to the larger of $1,200.00 a year, or equal to one-half the retirement allowance that would have been payable to the member had the member retired under the provisions of section 30-239 on the date of his death after having elected to have his allowance payable under the joint and last survivor option described in section 30-247(a)(1). If the member is under the age of 55 at the date of death, it shall be assumed for the purpose of the one-half joint and last survivor option calculation that the member be age 55 at the date of his death. 
Such allowance shall be in addition to any benefits provided for in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Should a member become eligible for service retirement in accordance with section 30-236 but continue as an employee, the member may, on a form proscribed by the board, and in advance of retirement, make an election of a joint and last survivor option as described in section 30-247(a)(1). The designated fraction of the option shall be any amount greater than one-half or 50 percent and equal to or less than 100 percent. If a member having made such a designation shall die in service before retirement from a cause not compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act there shall be paid a retirement allowance to the widow or widower equal to the designated option percent of the allowance that would have been payable to the member had the member retired under the provisions of section 30-236 on the date of his death with the option so designated; or the amount as accorded in subsection (b) of this section, whichever is greater. Upon retirement of the member, the member's retirement allowance shall be calculated to include the election previously designated, unless such retirement is for disability. The retirement allowance to be continued after the member's death to the widow or widower shall be limited to a maximum of one-half of the deceased allowance received by the member during the member's lifetime. In making an election of an option as provided under this subsection, a member may also elect a modification of the joint and last survivor option whereby a provision is made for no decrease in allowance should the member's spouse die before the retirement of the member, or a return to an undecreased allowance should the member's spouse die before the member died during retirement. Such modification shall be determined by an actuarial report as of the retirement of the member. 
(Code 1973, § 31-156; Code 1988, § 30-244)  
Sec. 30-245. - Additional death benefits before retirement for service-connected cause. 
(a)  Should a member die in service at any time before retirement from a cause compensable under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act, there shall be paid, in addition to any other benefits under this article, an annual allowance payable monthly to the widow of such member during her widowhood if he leaves a widow, equal to one-half of the member's average final compensation. If he leaves no widow or the widow dies or remarries before the youngest child, if any, of the deceased member has attained the age of 18 years, such child, or children, if any, under the age of 18 years, shall be paid such allowance until such child or children die or attain the age of 18 years, whichever shall first occur. If more than one child survives the deceased member, the allowance shall be divided among them in such manner as the board may determine. If the deceased member leaves neither widow nor child or children under the age of 18 years, then such allowance shall be paid to his parents wholly dependent upon him for support, divided in such manner as the board may determine, during the life or lives of such parents; provided, however, if the total of the allowance payable under this subsection is less than the amount provided by section 30-244, the difference between such amount and such total shall be paid together with the last payment due under this subsection to the person entitled to receive such last payment. 
(b)  If neither widow, child, children nor wholly dependent parent survive such member, the benefits payable under this section shall be in the same amount and payable in the same manner as the benefits payable under section 30-244. 
(c)  The compensation finally awarded under the Virginia Workers' Compensation Act for the death of such member shall be deducted from the benefit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, and the excess of the benefit, if any, shall be paid to the person specified in that subsection. When the time for which payments of the compensation finally awarded under that act has elapsed, such person shall thereafter receive the full amount of the benefit payable as provided in this subsection. 
(Code 1973, § 31-157; Code 1988, § 30-245)  
Sec. 30-246. - Death benefits after retirement or disability. 
(a)  Should a member who retired prior to July 1, 1967, die at any time after retirement but before receiving total retirement allowances provided for in this chapter at least equal to his accumulated contributions as of his date of retirement, the difference between such accumulated contributions and such total allowances shall then be payable in a lump sum in accordance with section 30-248 unless the retirement allowance is then being paid in accordance with any of the options contained in section 30-247, as in effect at his date of retirement. 
(b)  Should a member who had at least one year of creditable service die after termination of service and before his normal retirement date, after having been continuously disabled from date of termination of service to date of death to such an extent that he would have qualified for disability retirement in accordance with section 30-238 or section 30-240, without regard to any creditable service requirements or actual retirement thereunder, provided that written notification of such disability is given to the board by the member, his employer or his beneficiary designated as provided in section 30-248 within one year after the member's termination of service, an additional benefit equal to $1,000.00 shall be payable in a lump sum in accordance with section 30-248. 
(Code 1973, § 31-158; Code 1988, § 30-246)  
Sec. 30-247. - Optional benefits. 
(a)  Each member who retires under any of the provisions of this article shall have the right at any time, not subsequent to the later of the effective date of the member's retirement or the date of the written notification to the board of the retirement of the member, to elect to have his retirement allowance payable under any one of the options set forth in this section in lieu of the retirement allowance that would otherwise be payable to him. The amount of such optional retirement allowance shall be the actuarial equivalent of the amount of the retirement allowance that would otherwise be payable to him. The member shall make any such election by written request to the board and such election shall be subject to the approval of the board. 
(1)  Joint and last survivor option. The member shall be provided a 50 percent spousal option at no cost to the member calculated on a spousal age difference of no younger than five years of the member. If the spouse is more than five years younger than the member, the member may elect to receive a decreased retirement allowance during his lifetime which represents the additional cost for a member's spouse who is younger than five years of the member. The member may also elect to receive a decreased allowance during his lifetime based on the additional cost of 75 percent or 100 percent spousal option. If the member's retirement is for disability, the retirement allowance to be continued after the member's death shall be limited to a maximum of one-half of the retirement allowance received by the member during his lifetime. 
A member retired prior to July 1, 1992, who at date of retirement elected a spousal option, shall receive an increase in pension equal to the cost of a 50 percent spousal option calculated on a spousal age difference of no younger than five years of the member. 
An unmarried member shall upon marriage, be provided a 50 percent spousal option, calculated on a spousal age difference of no younger than five years of the member provided that the member submit written notification to the board within 90 days after the marriage, and provided that evidence satisfactory to the board of the good health of the retired member is submitted with the notification. 
(2)  Other options. The member may elect some other combination of benefits to the member and/or to such other beneficiary as the member shall designate, provided, however, that if the member's retirement is for disability, the election of the retirement allowance to be continued after the member's death should be limited to a maximum of one-half of the decreased retirement allowance received by the member during his lifetime. 
(b)  The election by a member of any one of the options stated in this section shall be null and void if the member dies prior to retirement, and the election by a member of the joint and last survivor option shall be null and void if the designated beneficiary dies before the member has retired. 
(c)  A member who has elected any one of the options stated in this section may, at any time prior to the later of the effective date of the member's retirement or the date of written notification to the board of retirement of the member, revoke such an election by written notification to the board. 
(d)  A retired member who has elected or has been provided a joint and last survivor option, may by written notification to the board, elect a different spousal recipient if the following occurs: (1) the original spousal recipient has died; or (2) a final decree of divorce of the retired member from the original spousal recipient has been entered permitting the revocation of the joint and last survivor option; (3) evidence satisfactory to the board of the good health of the retired member is submitted with the notification; and (4) the notification to the board of the change in election occurs within 90 days of the occurrence of one or two or within 90 days after remarriage. Except as provided above, if the provisions of this subsection are invoked by a retired member on the basis of the member having been divorced from his former spousal recipient and the marriage had been of a duration of 20 years or more, the provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable until the death or remarriage of the former spouse unless such spouse consents in writing to the revocation. If such an election is made as a result of the death or divorce of the spousal recipient, the benefit payable to the retired member may be adjusted retroactively for a period of not more than 30 days from the date the board first receives notification of the member's election to make such a change. 
(Code 1973, § 31-159; Code 1988, § 30-247; Ord. No. 1992-34, § 7, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1999-20, § 1, 7-27-1999)  
Sec. 30-248. - Payment of death benefits. 
All lump sum payments falling due under this article upon the death of a member or former member shall be paid to such person, if any, as the member shall have designated to the beneficiary thereof, otherwise to the executors or administrators of the member. Any such beneficiary designation shall be made in writing and filed with the board in such manner as may be required by the board. Any such designation may be changed from time to time by the member by his filing with the board a new written designation. 
(Code 1973, § 31-160; Code 1988, § 30-248)  
Sec. 30-249. - Medical examinations of beneficiary of disability retirement allowance. 
Once each year during the first five years following the retirement of a member on a disability retirement allowance, and at least once in every three-year period thereafter, the board may require any such member prior to his normal retirement date to undergo a medical examination by the examiner. Should such a member refuse to submit to any such medical examination, his retirement allowance shall be discontinued until his withdrawal of such refusal and should such refusal continue for one year, all his rights to any further disability allowance shall cease. 
(Code 1973, § 31-161; Code 1988, § 30-249)  
Sec. 30-250. - Reduction of disability retirement allowance. 
(a)  Whenever a member receiving a disability retirement allowance subsequently becomes engaged in gainful occupation, the disability allowance shall be reduced by the amount of income received which exceeds the difference between the disability retirement allowance and the amount of wages or salary the member would have been entitled to had his employment progressed in the same range and grade with credit for the level of seniority he would have attained had he not been disabled. Such reduction in disability retirement allowance shall continue until his normal retirement date. For the purposes of this section "income" means gross income received less deductions for social security taxes only. 
(b)  Should the examiner report and certify to the board at any time that any member receiving a disability retirement allowance is able to engage in gainful occupation paying an amount equal to or more than his average final compensation as described in subsection (a) of this section and should the board find that such member shall have refused any employment considered by the board suitable to his capacity, he shall not be entitled to any such allowance during the continuance of such refusal, unless in the option of the board, such refusal was justified. 
(c)  At least once each year during the first five years following retirement of a member on a disability retirement allowance, and at least once in every two-year period thereafter, the board shall require any such member, prior to his normal retirement date, to submit to the secretary of the board such information as the board may deem appropriate concerning any gainful employment, and the compensation therefor, in which the member may be participating or in which the member may have participated subsequent to his retirement from service. In addition to the foregoing requirement, any member on a disability retirement allowance shall within 30 days of obtaining employment, report to the secretary of the board the date and place of such employment and the amount of earnings. Should such member refuse to submit the information as directed by this section, his retirement allowance shall be discontinued until his withdrawal of such refusal, and should such refusal continue for a period of one year, all his rights to any further disability allowance shall cease. Should the board determine that an overpayment of a disability allowance has been made, such overpayment shall be corrected by a suspension of all or a part of the disability allowance for such period of time as may be necessary to complete such repayment. 
(Code 1973, § 31-162; Code 1988, § 30-250)  
Sec. 30-251. - Cessation of disability retirement allowance. 
Should any member receiving a disability retirement allowance be at any time prior to his normal retirement date, in service, his disability retirement allowance shall cease and he shall thereafter resume his active membership in the system. Any service on the basis of which his disability retirement allowance was computed shall thereafter be counted as creditable service, and, in addition, the period of disability retirement shall be counted as creditable service. 
(Code 1973, § 31-163; Code 1988, § 30-251)  
Sec. 30-252. - Changes or errors resulting in erroneous payments. 
Should any change or error in records result in any member or beneficiary receiving from the system more or less than he would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, then on discovery of any such error the board shall correct the same, and as far as practicable shall adjust the payments in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which such member or beneficiary was correctly entitled, shall be paid. 
(Code 1973, § 31-164; Code 1988, § 30-252)  
DIVISION 6. - MAXIMUM BENEFITS AND OTHER LIMITATIONS AND SPECIAL RULES 
 
Sec. 30-253. - Limitation on creditable compensation taken into account. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, except in the case of an employee who first became a member before July 1, 1996, creditable compensation taken into account for purposes of determining benefits under the system shall be limited by the compensation limit pursuant to Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. For purposes of applying the limitation applicable to each year, the limit for a plan year shall be the limitation in effect for the calendar year in which the plan year begins determined without increases in the limitation for subsequent years. An employee who first became a member before July 1, 1996 shall be considered a grandfathered employee for purposes of Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 21, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-254. - Limitation on annual benefit and special vesting rules. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the annual benefit under the system of any member and any related death or other benefit shall, if necessary, be reduced to the extent required by Section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, as adjusted by the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, all as applicable to governmental plans. Notwithstanding the foregoing, adjustments in the dollar limitation under Section 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall only be applicable to benefits provided by this system with respect to a member who is an eligible employee at the time the adjustment is effective. In comparing the system benefit to the dollar limitation, system benefits must be converted to an annual benefit (as defined in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) by, except as provided below, converting a benefit payable in a form other than a straight life annuity to an actuarially equivalent straight life annuity before applying the limitations of this section. The annual benefit does not include any benefits attributable to employee contributions or the assets transferred from a qualified plan that was not maintained by a participating employer. No actuarial adjustment to the benefit is required for (i) the value of a joint and survivor annuity, (ii) the value of benefits that are not directly related to retirement benefits (such as the qualified disability benefit, pre-retirement death benefits, and post-retirement medical benefits), and (iii) the value of post-retirement cost-of-living increases made in accordance with Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and Inc. Tax Regs. Section 1.415-3(c)(2)(iii). Section 415(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and the regulations thereunder are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, for purposes of adjusting any benefit or limitation under Section 415(b)(2)(B), (C), or (D) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the applicable actuarial adjustment factors shall be based on the following assumptions: 
(1)  Mortality according to the table prescribed in Rev. Rul. 2001-62, the 1994 Group Annuity Reserving Table (94 GAR). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the mortality table used for this purpose shall automatically be the table specified in any future revenue rulings or federal regulations that amend or supercede Revenue Ruling 2001-62 by specifying a new mortality table for this purpose; and 
(2)  Interest at the rate prescribed in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and the regulations and other guidance published thereunder. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a member shall be fully vested in his retirement allowance upon the attainment of his normal retirement date. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 21, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-255. - Required minimum distributions. 
On and after January 1, 1989, the retirement allowance of a member who has terminated employment shall begin no later than the later of (i) April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year that the member attains seventy and one-half years of age or (ii) April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the member terminates employment. If the member fails, following reasonable notification, to elect a form of payment by such required beginning date, the retirement allowance shall be paid as a single life annuity. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code, including as such section is amended or renumbered, or any successor provision thereto, and the regulations thereunder applicable to governmental plans are incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 21, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-256. - Rollover rules. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. The terms "eligible rollover distribution", "eligible retirement plan" and "distributee" have the meanings prescribed by Section 401(a)(31) of the Internal Revenue Code (including as such section is amended or renumbered, or any successor provision thereto) and the regulations thereunder, as may be amended. Such terms shall include non-spouse designated beneficiaries and inherited individual retirement accounts in accordance with Section 402(c)(11) of the Internal Revenue Code (as such section may be amended or renumbered, or any successor provision thereto) and the regulations thereunder applicable to governmental plans. In the event of a mandatory cash-out, as that term is defined under the Internal Revenue Code and the regulations thereunder applicable to governmental plans, greater than $1,000, if the member does not elect to have such distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the member in a direct rollover or to receive the distribution directly in accordance with this section, then the board shall pay the distribution in a direct rollover to an individual retirement plan designated by the board that satisfies the safe harbor provision of Code of Virginia, § 51.1-124.30.F, and such provisions shall be interpreted and administered in accordance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 21, 11-22-2016)  
Sec. 30-257. - Military service. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service will be provided in accordance with Section 414(u) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA). 
(b)  To the extent not inconsistent with the foregoing, the following special rules shall apply in case of reemployed veterans notwithstanding the provisions of the system: 
(1)  A reemployed veteran shall not be considered to have incurred a break in service by reason of his qualified military service. 
(2)  Qualified military service of a reemployed veteran shall be counted as service for vesting under the plan. 
(c)  To the extent required by USERRA or Section 401(a)(37) of the Internal Revenue Code for purposes of determining vesting in accrued benefits and entitlement to death benefits under the system, in the event a member ceases to be an employee in order to perform qualified military service and dies on or after January 1, 2007 while performing qualified military service, the member's death shall be considered to have occurred while he was an employee and, if he ceased to be an eligible employee in order to perform qualified military service, while he was an eligible employee so that his beneficiaries are entitled to any additional benefits provided under the system (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service unless otherwise expressly provided), including without limitation any additional or enhanced vesting or death benefits, had the member resumed employment with the participating employer and then terminated employment on account of death. 
(d)  For purposes of this paragraph, the following terms have the following meanings: 
(1)  Qualified military service means any service in the uniformed services (as defined in Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the United States Code) by any individual if such individual is entitled to reemployment rights under such chapter with respect to such service and to the employer. 
(2)  Reemployed veteran means a person who is or, but for his qualified military service, would have been a member at some time during his qualified military service and who is entitled to the restoration benefits and protections of the USERRA with respect to his qualified military service and the system. 
(Ord. No. 2016-89 , § 21, 11-22-2016)  
Secs. 30-258—30-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN FOR EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 30-271. - Adopted and established; purpose; contents, etc. 
(a)  Pursuant to the Government Employees' Deferred Compensation Plan Act, Code of Virginia, § 51.1-600 et seq., the city hereby adopts and establishes a plan of deferred compensation for its employees dated August 25, 1981. The purpose of the plan shall be to provide for the deferral of compensation to participating employees of the city. The plan shall exist in addition to all other retirement, pension or other benefit systems available to the participating employees, and shall not supersede, make inoperative or reduce any benefits provided by any other retirement, pension or benefit program established by law. 
(b)  On behalf of the employer, the city, the city manager is hereby authorized and directed to execute and deliver the plan to the plan administrator. The plan shall contain such terms and amendments as the plan administrator may from time to time approve. 
(Code 1973, § 31-175; Code 1988, § 30-271)  
Sec. 30-272. - Designation of administrator. 
The plan administrator shall be the city manager or his designee or a deferred compensation committee consisting of city employees to be appointed by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 31-176; Code 1988, § 30-272)  
Sec. 30-273. - Powers of administrator. 
The plan administrator is granted the power to do all things by way of supervision, administration and implementation of the plan of deferred compensation, including but not limited to, the power to contract with private corporations or institutions for service in connection therewith; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize the plan administrator to act beyond the limits of the plan. 
(Code 1973, § 31-177; Code 1988, § 30-273)  
Secs. 30-274—30-289. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OTHER POST-EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS TRUST 
 
Sec. 30-290. - Trustee. 
The Board of Trustees of the Portsmouth Supplemental Retirement System shall serve as the Trustee of any Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust, or the city's interest or investment in any Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust, whether individual or pooled, now or hereafter established or joined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-2018)  
Chapter 31 - SECURITY ALARMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— False alarms of criminal activities, § 27-6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 31-1—31-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE SECURITY ALARMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Security alarms, Code of Virginia, § 9.1-138 et seq. 
 
Sec. 31-26. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, an "automatic telephone security alarm" is any device that when activated is programmed to automatically dial the police department or fire department via commercial telephone lines. 
(Code 1973, § 2-188; Code 1988, § 31-26) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 31-27. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 31-27) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 31-28. - Communications department to be furnished information. 
Any person selling, installing and operating an automatic telephone security alarm programmed to automatically dial the police department or fire department, or both departments, shall furnish in advance of the installation of such system to the director of the communications department a memorandum in writing detailing the location of any such device so used, and shall furnish such other information as may be required by the director of the communications department. 
(Code 1973, § 2-189; Code 1988, § 31-28)  
Sec. 31-29. - Installation and equipment. 
Each automatic telephone security alarm shall: 
(1)  Be installed on commercial telephone lines to be designated by the director of communications at the expense of the person selling, installing and operating such service and in such manner as not to place in use or interfere with the regular emergency telephone lines of the police department or fire department. 
(2)  Have the seal of approval of Underwriters' Laboratories Incorporated, or Factory Mutual Laboratories. 
(3)  Be installed in such a manner that it will be protected from accidental triggering by power failure. 
(4)  Have sensing devices and electrical wiring installed in accordance with existing city codes and regulations, if applicable. 
(5)  If programmed for fire and for smoke protection, be inspected and approved by the fire department. 
(6)  Broadcast and repeat once a message containing as a minimum the following information: 
a.  An announcement that the emergency recorded message will follow. 
b.  The specific type of emergency condition. 
c.  Street address. 
d.  Type of premises. 
e.  No message shall exceed 30 seconds in duration. 
f.  The content of the message shall be approved by the director of communications prior to installation of the alarm. 
(Code 1973, § 2-190; Code 1988, § 31-29)  
Sec. 31-30. - Other automatic telephone security alarms prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, sell, lease, or use or cause or allow to be installed, sold, leased or used any automatic telephone security alarm except as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 2-191; Code 1988, § 31-30)  
Chapter 31.2 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power of city to levy and collect taxes from purchases of public utility services, § 2.02. 
Cross reference— Erosion and sediment control, ch. 11; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Erosion and sediment control programs, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-562; Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2100 et seq.; local stormwater management programs, Code of Virginia, § 10.2-603.3; authority to acquire and maintain a stormwater management system, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109; regulation of stormwater, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2114; authority to create a stormwater control authority, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-5102. 
 
Sec. 31.2-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  In addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein by reference, the following words and terms used in this article have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. Where definitions differ, those incorporated herein shall have precedence. 
Administrator means the city engineer, or his designee(s). 
Agreement in lieu of stormwater management plan means a contract between the VSMP authority and the owner or permittee specifying methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the VMSP authority in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this article. 
Best management practice or BMP means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land disturbing activities. 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land disturbing activity means a land disturbing activity including clearing, grading, or excavation that results in a land disturbance equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than one acre in all areas of jurisdictions designated as subject to the regulations adopted pursuant to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:67, et seq. 
Common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules. 
Control measure means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
Clean Water Act or CWA means the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
Department means the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction or demolition of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
Developed property means any parcel which contains impervious surface area equal to or greater than 300 square feet or semi-pervious surface area equal to or greater than 600 square feet, or any combination equal to or greater than 300 square feet. 
Exempt property means any parcel which is owned by any federal, state or local agencies on which the agency provides for maintenance of the storm drainage and stormwater facilities, provided the proper permits for such facilities have been obtained from the Department of Environmental Quality. 
General permit means the state permit titled GENERAL PERMIT FOR DISCHARGES OF STORMWATER FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES found in Part XIV (9VAC25-880-1 et seq.) of the regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
Impervious surface area means surfaces, such as parking lots, sidewalks, driveways and roofs, on or in a lot or parcel of property which prevent the infiltration of water into the earth. 
Land disturbance or land disturbing activity means a manmade change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in subsection 31.2-3(c) of this article. 
Layout means a conceptual plan showing the nature of the land disturbing activity proposed for the site and the type and location of any associated stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
Minor modification means an amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increased monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
Nonresidential property means all developed properties not meeting the residential property definition herein including but not limited to, commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, offices, churches and multifamily facilities of five units or more. 
Operator means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this article. 
Permit or VSMP permit means an approval to conduct a land disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land disturbing activity, in accordance with this article, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided to the department. 
Permittee means the person to whom the VSMP permit is issued. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Process water means water used in a commercial, industrial, manufacturing, or processing operation and which comes in contact with materials used in that operation or with the end product of the operation. 
Regulations means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations, 9VAC-25-870, as amended. 
Residential property means developed property containing at least one but no more than four residences or dwelling units, and accessory uses related to but subordinate to the purpose of providing a permanent dwelling facility. Such property shall include but not be limited to houses, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes, townhouses, condominiums and mobile homes. 
Semi-pervious surface area means surfaces such as gravel lots or compacted soil, on or in a lot or parcel of property which substantially reduce the rate of infiltration of stormwater into the earth. For purposes of the utility, semi-pervious areas will be counted at one-half the measured area. 
Site means the land or water area where any facility or land disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land disturbing activity. Areas channelward of mean low water shall not be considered part of the site. 
State means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
State board means the Virginia State Water Control Board. 
State permit means an approval to conduct a land disturbing activity issued by the state board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the state board for stormwater discharges from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). Under these state permits, the commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, and the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and attendant regulations. 
State Water Control Law means Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
State waters means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
Stormwater means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater appeals board is the appeal authority designated by city council to hear appeals from any person aggrieved by a decision of the city in regard to stormwater without a formal hearing or by inaction of the city in regard to stormwater. The board shall be appointed by the city manager and shall consist of three members: the city engineer, the assistant administrator of public utilities and the administrator of public works. The city attorney or his designee shall serve a legal counsel to the board. 
Stormwater management plan means a document(s) containing material describing methods for complying with the requirements of section 31.2-6 of this article. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWPP means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this article. In addition, the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan and a pollution prevention plan. 
Storm sewer or drain means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface runoff, street washwater and drainage, but which excludes sanitary sewage. 
Stormwater runoff means that part of precipitation that travels over natural altered or impervious surfaces to the nearest stream, channel, conduit or impoundment and appears in surface waters. 
Stormwater system means all manmade facilities, structures and natural watercourses used for collecting and conveying stormwater to, through and from drainage areas to the points of final outlet, including but not limited to, the following: streets, curbs and gutters, inlets, conduits and appurtenant features, canals, creeks, channels, catchbasins, ditches, drains, sewers, streams, gulches, gullies, flumes, culverts, siphons, retention or retention basins, dams, floodwalls, levees, pumping stations and wetlands. 
Subdivision means the same as defined in section 33.1-22 of the City of Portsmouth's Subdivision Ordinance. 
Total maximum daily load or TMDL means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading, and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point source versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
Undeveloped property means any parcel which has not been altered from its natural state to disturb or alter the topography or soils on the property in a manner which substantially reduces the rate of infiltration of stormwater into the earth. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Act or Act means Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP means a program approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies, and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
Virginia Stormwater Management Program authority or VSMP authority means authority [such as the City of Portsmouth] approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-2. - Purpose and authorities. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Portsmouth and to protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from any land disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resources, and to establish procedures whereby stormwater requirements related to water quality and quantity should be administered and enforced. 
(b)  This article is adopted pursuant to Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia and in compliance with 9VAC-25-870-20 and 9VAC.25-870-40 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations. 
(c)  The Federal Clean Water Act requires the city to implement a stormwater management program based on the regulations and requirements published by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(d)  The city is authorized by the Code of Virginia to construct, reconstruct, improve and extend a stormwater utility system and to issue revenue bonds, if needed, to finance in whole or in part the cost of such system and to establish just and equitable rates, fees and charges for the services and facilities provided by the system. 
(e)  It is necessary and essential that the city provide for effective management and financing of a stormwater system within the city to provide a mechanism for mitigating the damaging effects of stormwater runoff on the environment and to improve the public health, safety and welfare by providing for the safe and efficient capture and conveyance of stormwater runoff, the improvement of water quality, and the correction of stormwater problems. 
(f)  Stormwater runoff is associated with all developed properties in the city, whether residential or nonresidential, and the volume of each individual property's stormwater runoff is related to the amount of impervious and semi-pervious surface on the property. 
(g)  The administrator shall be responsible for the use, management, operation and maintenance of the stormwater system as prescribed by this chapter. The administrator shall have authority to establish procedures and to enforce regulations pertaining to the stormwater system. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-3. - Stormwater permit requirement; exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, a person shall not conduct any land disturbing activity until they have submitted a permit application to the VSMP authority that includes a state VSMP permit registration statement, if such statement is required, and, after July 1, 2014, a stormwater management plan or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan, and has obtained VSMP authority approval to begin land disturbance. 
(b)  A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land disturbing activity shall be subject to an erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the requirements of chapter 11, a stormwater management plan as outlined under section 31.2-6, the technical criteria and administrative requirements for land disturbing activities outlined in section 31.2-9, and the requirements for the long-term maintenance of control measures, as outlined under section 31.2-12. 
(c)  All single-family detached residential land disturbing activities within or outside a common plan of development or sale, do not submit a registration statement. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the following activities are exempt, unless otherwise required by federal law: 
(1)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(2)  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling or planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the state board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Subsection B of § 10.1-1163 of Article 9 of Chapter 11 of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(3)  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures, unless the land disturbance is located in the city's Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. In the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas, single family residences separately built and disturbing less than 2,500 square feet are exempt; 
(4)  Land disturbing activities that disturb less than one acre of land area and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, except in the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas where land disturbing activities less than 2,500 square feet are exempt; 
(5)  Discharge to a sanitary sewer system; 
(6)  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use; 
(7)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection; and 
(8)  Conducting land disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land disturbing activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of subsection (a) is required within 30 days of commencing the land disturbing activity. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-4. - Stormwater management program established; submission and approval of plans; prohibitions. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:27, a Virginia Stormwater Management Program is hereby established for land disturbing activities in the city, subject to the applicable regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the state board for the purposes set out in section 31.2-2. The city engineer or his designee shall serve as the administrator of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(b)  No VSMP permit shall be issued by the administrator, until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein: 
(1)  A VSMP permit application that includes a general permit registration statement. 
(2)  An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with chapter 11 of this Code. 
(3)  A stormwater management plan that meets the minimum requirement of section 31.2-6. 
(4)  A stormwater pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements of section 31.2-7. 
(5)  Evidence that general permit coverage has been obtained. 
(6)  The required fees have been paid, pursuant to section 31.2-17, and a reasonable performance bond required, pursuant to section 31.2-18, has been submitted. 
(7)  The permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land development, and drainage will be done according to the approved permit. 
(c)  No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a VSMP permit has been issued by the administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-5. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan; contents of plan. 
(a)  The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) must comply with the requirements and general information set forth in Section 9VAC-25-880-70, of Section II [stormwater pollution prevention plan] of the general permit. The SWPPP shall also include the content specified by Section 9VAC-25-870-54, as follows: 
(1)  An approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, a pollution prevention plan for regulated land disturbing activities, and a description of any additional control measure necessary to address a TMDL pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
a.  An erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the requirements of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and regulations must be designed prior to and implemented during construction activities. Prior to land disturbance, this plan must be approved by either the city or the department in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and attendant regulations. 
b.  A stormwater management plan consistent with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and regulations must be designed prior to and implemented during construction activities. Prior to land disturbance, this plan must be approved by the VSMP authority. 
c.  A pollution prevention plan that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site and describe control measures that will be used to minimize pollutants in stormwater discharges from the construction site must be developed before land disturbance commences. 
(2)  In addition to the requirement of subsection (a)(1) of this section, if a specific waste load allocation for a pollutant has been established in a TMDL and is assigned to stormwater discharges from a construction activity, additional control measures must be identified and implemented by the operator so that discharges are consistent with the assumptions and requirements of the waste load allocation in a state water control board-approved TMDL. 
(3)  The SWPPP must address the following requirements, to the extent otherwise required by state law or regulations and any applicable requirements of a state permit: 
a.  Control stormwater volume and velocity within the site to minimize soil erosion; 
b.  Control stormwater discharges, including both peak flow rates and total stormwater volume, to minimize erosion at outlets and to minimize downstream channel and stream bank erosion; 
c.  Minimize the amount of soil exposed during construction activities; 
d.  Minimize the disturbance of steep slopes; 
e.  Minimize the sediment discharges from the site. The design, installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment controls must address factors such as the amount, frequency, intensity and duration of precipitation, the nature of resulting stormwater runoff, and soil characteristics, including the range of soil particle sizes expected to be present on the site. 
f.  Provide and maintain natural buffers around surface waters, direct stormwater to vegetated areas to increase sediment removal and maximize stormwater infiltration, unless in feasible; 
g.  Minimize soil compaction and, unless infeasible, preserve topsoil; 
h.  Stabilization of disturbed areas must, at a minimum, be initiated immediately whenever any clearing, grading, excavating, or other earth disturbing activities have permanently ceased on any portion of the site, or temporarily ceased on any portion of the site and will not resume for a period exceeding 14 calendar days. Stabilization must be completed within a period of time determined by the VSMP authority. In arid, semiarid, and drought-stricken areas where initiating vegetative stabilization measures immediately is infeasible, alternative stabilization measures must be employed as specified by the VSMP authority; and 
i.  Utilize outlet structures that withdraw water from the surface, unless infeasible, when discharging from basins and impoundments. 
(b)  The SWPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
(c)  The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-6. - Stormwater management plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan, required in section 31.2-4, must apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in section 31.2-9 to the entire land disturbing activity. Individual lots [in] new residential, commercial, or industrial developments shall not be considered separate land disturbing activities. A stormwater management plan that is approved for residential, commercial, or industrial subdivision shall govern the development of the individual parcels, including those parcels developed under subsequent owners. The stormwater management plan shall consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to subsurface runoff, and include the following information: 
(1)  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges, information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters, and the pre-development and post-development drainage areas; 
(2)  Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of the owner and the tax reference map number and parcel number of the property or properties affected; 
(3)  A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site conditions; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete; 
(5)  Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities, including: 
a.  The type and size of the facilities; 
b.  Location, including geographic coordinates; 
c.  Acre treated; and 
d.  The surface waters into which the facility will discharge. 
(6)  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics; 
(7)  Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of section 31.2-9. 
(8)  A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes: 
a.  All contributing drainage areas; 
b.  Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies, and floodplains; 
c.  Soil types, forest cover, and other vegetative areas; 
d.  Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements; 
e.  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
f.  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
g.  Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; and 
h.  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to, planned locations of utilities, roads and easements. 
i.  All Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area designations of resource protection areas and resource management areas. 
j.  Any other information reasonably necessary for an evaluation of the development activity. 
(b)  If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements set forth in section 31-9 through the use of off-site compliance options, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site stormwater options must comply with 9VAC25-870-69 and must be designed to achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant's land disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:35. 
(c)  Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(d)  A construction record drawing for all permanent stormwater management facilities and any drainage infrastructure that will become public property shall be submitted to the administrator. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities and related drainage infrastructure have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 ; Ord. No. 2014-81, § 1, 9-9-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-7. - Pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  Pollution prevention plan, required by 9VAC-25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented and maintained to: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel washwater and other washwaters. Washwaters must be filtered or pass through an approved sediment trapping device prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste - including from portable toilets, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(b)  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(c)  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate sediment filtering controls. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-8. - Review of stormwater management plan. 
(a)  The administrator shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan according to the following: 
(1)  The administrator shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with section 31.2-6, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
(2)  The administrator shall have an additional 60 calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subdivision (1), then the plan shall be deemed complete and the administrator shall have 60 calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
(3)  The administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved, within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
(4)  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land disturbing activity or his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reasons for not approving the plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  If a plan meeting all of the requirements of this chapter is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subdivision (2) for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(b)  Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
(2)  The administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
(c)  The administrator shall require the submission of a construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities. The administrator may elect not to require construction record drawings for stormwater management facilities for which recorded maintenance agreements are not required pursuant to subsection 31.2-12(b). 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-9. - Technical criteria for regulated land disturbing activities. 
All technical criteria for regulated land disturbing activities are contained in 9VAC-25-870-62 through 9VAC-25-870-99 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program Permit regulations are hereby adopted and incorporated in this article by reference and made applicable within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein. 
(a)  To protect the quality and quantity of [state] water from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land disturbing activities, the City of Portsmouth hereby adopts the technical criteria for regulated land disturbing activities set forth in Part II B of the regulations, as amended, expressly to include 9VAC-25-870-63 [water quality design criteria requirements]; 9VAC-25-870-65 [water quality compliance]; 9VAC-25-870-66 [water quantity]; 9VAC-25-870-69 [offsite compliance options]; 9VAC-25-870-72 [design storms and hydrologic methods]; 9VAC-25-870-74 [stormwater harvesting]; 9VAC-25-870-76 [linear development project]; and, 9VAC-25-870-85 [stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities], which shall apply to all land disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this chapter, except as expressly set forth in section 31.2-10. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-10. - Grandfathering. 
(a)  Any land disturbing activity shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP regulation provided: 
(1)  A proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with a plan of development, preliminary or final subdivision plan, preliminary or final site plan, or any document determined by the locality to be the equivalent thereto (i) was approved by the locality prior to July 1, 2012, (ii) provided a layout as defined in 9VAC-25- 870-10, (iii) will comply with the Part II technical criteria of the VSMP regulation, and (iv) has not been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no increase in the volume or rate of runoff; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(b)  Locality, state and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP authority and shall be subject to the Part IIC technical criteria of the VSMP regulation provided: 
(1)  There has been an obligation of locality, state or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; and 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(c)  Land disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall remain subject to the Part IIC technical criteria of the VSMP regulation for one additional state permit cycle. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the board. 
(d)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his discretion. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-11. - Variances. 
(a)  The administrator may grant variances to the technical requirements of Part II B or Part C of the regulations, provided that (i) the variance is the minimum necessary to afford relief, (ii) reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the Act, the regulations, and this chapter are preserved, (iii) granting the variance will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and (iv) exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created, (v) the variance will not substantially increase the flow rate of stormwater runoff, (vi) the variance will not have an adverse impact on a wetland, channel, water body or upstream and/or downstream of a receiving body of water, (vii) the variance will not contribute to the degradation of water quality, and (viii) the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property or adversely affect the character of adjoining neighborhoods. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant a variance. 
(1)  No variance to the requirement that the land disturbing activity obtain the required VSMP permit shall be given by the administrator, nor shall the administrator approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website, or any other control measure not duly approved by the administrator. 
(2)  No variance to requirements for phosphorous reductions shall be allowed unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9VAC-25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at their discretion. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-12 - Long-term maintenance of permanent stormwater facilities. 
(a)  The administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in an instrument recorded in the local land records prior to general permit termination or earlier as required by the administrator and shall at a minimum: 
(1)  Be submitted to the administrator for review and approval prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Be stated to run with the land; 
(3)  Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections; 
(4)  Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and maintenance reports to the administrator; and 
(5)  Be enforceable by all appropriate government parties. 
(b)  At the discretion of the administrator, such recorded instruments need not be required for stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located, provided it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the administrator that future maintenance of such facilities will be addressed through an enforceable mechanism. 
(c)  If a recorded instrument is not required pursuant to subsection 31.2-12(b), the administrator shall develop a strategy for addressing maintenance of stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located. Such a strategy may include periodic inspections, homeowner outreach and education, or other method targeted at promoting the long-term maintenance of such facilities. Such facilities shall not be subject to the requirement for an inspection to be conducted by the administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-13. - Monitoring and inspections. 
(a)  The administrator shall inspect the land disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(b)  The administrator may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(d)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 62.1-44.15:40, the administrator may require every VSMP permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP permit requirements under this chapter, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
(e)  Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted by the administrator pursuant to the city's adopted and state board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five (5) years except as may otherwise be provided for in section 31.2-12. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-14. - Hearings. 
(a)  Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to the requirements of this chapter, aggrieved by any action of the city taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the city, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the stormwater appeals board, which is designated by the city council as its appeals body, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the administrator within 30 days after notice of such action is given by the administrator. 
(b)  The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by the stormwater appeals board at a time and place authorized by the stormwater appeals board. 
(c)  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be taken and filed with the stormwater appeals board. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law. 
(d)  The stormwater appeals board or its designated member, as the case may be, shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or to produce documents shall be acted upon by the stormwater appeals board, whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursement for mileage as in civil actions. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-15. - Appeals. 
Within 30 days of the decision of the stormwater appeals board, a decision entered pursuant to section 31.2-14 may be appealed to the Circuit Court of the City of Portsmouth. The petition for appeal shall be filed in writing within 30 days of the date of the decision, determination or action, shall state clearly the grounds on which the appeal is based. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-16. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the VSMP permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions by any of the following: verbal warnings and inspection reports, notices of corrective action, consent special orders, and notices to comply, Written notices shall be served by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
(1)  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection (a)(2) below or the permit may be revoked by the administrator. 
(2)  If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this section within the time specified, the administrator may issue a stop work order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land records of the locality, or by personal delivery by an agent of the administrator. However, if the administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, he may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the administrator may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with subsection 31.2-16(c). 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy provided by this chapter, whenever the permittee has failed to comply with a notice to comply issued under this section, the administrator may direct the appropriate city official to suspend or revoke other city-issued licenses and permits that may be reasonably associated with the proper execution of the approved plan. Such suspension or revocation shall remain in effect until the permittee becomes compliant with the approved plan and has satisfactorily addressed the issues identified in the written notice, as determined by the administrator. Such other permits or licenses shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, building permits, zoning permits and clearances, health permits, land disturbing permits, right- of-way permits, et al. 
In the event of a revocation of a land disturbing permit or the issuance of a stop work order, the owner or applicant shall be required to re-apply for the land disturbance permit and submit the required land disturbance permit fees based on the fee schedule that was in place at the time of the revocation or issuance, respectively. In addition, the site must be in compliance and pass a site inspection conducted by the city's VSMP inspectors before the new land disturbance permit will be issued. 
(c)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth by the city to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with any order of the administrator, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $32,500.00 for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include but not be limited: 
a.  No state permit registration; 
b.  No SWPPP; 
c.  Incomplete SWPPP; 
d.  SWPPP not available for review; 
e.  No approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
f.  Failure to install stormwater BMP's or erosion and sediment controls; 
g.  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
h.  Operational deficiencies; 
i.  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
j.  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and 
k.  Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section 9VAC-25-880-70 of the general permit. 
(2)  The administrator may institute proceedings for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. 
(3)  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
(4)  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of proceedings initiated by the city shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Portsmouth to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the locality and abating environmental pollution therein. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, any order of the administrator, any condition of a permit, or any order of a court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months or a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $32,500.00, or both. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-17. - Fees. 
(a)  Applicant shall be required to pay the City of Portsmouth's applicable land disturbance permit fees, site plan review fees, and site inspection fees. 
(b)  All fees, including fees for permit issuance, modification or transfer or registration statements, and permit maintenance fees, are provided in the City of Portsmouth Engineering Department's Schedule of Fees. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-18. - Performance bonds. 
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant may be required to submit a reasonable performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the city attorney, to ensure that measures could be taken by the City of Portsmouth at the applicant's expense should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of him by the permit conditions as a result of his land disturbing activity. If the city takes such action upon such failure by the applicant, the city may collect from the applicant for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held, if any. Within 60 days of the completion of the requirements of the permit conditions, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-19. - Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and BMP clearinghouse. 
The Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and the BMP Clearinghouse, including all future amendments thereto are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. Whenever the handbook and the BMP Clearinghouse conflict, the more stringent shall control. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-20. - Severability. 
Each separate provision of this chapter is deemed independent of all other provisions herein so that if any provision or provisions of this chapter be declared invalid, all other provisions shall remain valid and enforceable. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-21. - Enforcement. 
This chapter shall become effective on July 1, 2014. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-22. - Classification of properties. 
(a)  For the purpose of determining the stormwater management fee, all properties in the city shall be classified by the administrator into one of the following categories: 
(1)  Residential. 
(2)  Nonresidential. 
(3)  Undeveloped. 
(4)  Exempt. 
(b)  The administrator shall determine impervious and semi-pervious area for nonresidential property accounts utilizing aerial planimetric data, city real estate assessment data, and other data acquired by office staff. The administrator may require additional information from the owner as necessary to make such a determination. 
(c)  The stormwater management fee for vacant developed property, both residential and nonresidential, shall be the same as that for occupied property of the same class. 
(d)  Undeveloped property shall be exempt from the stormwater management fee. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-23. - Pollution of the stormwater system. 
(a)  Prohibited acts: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put, or allow to be put, any process water, wastewater, filth, animal or vegetable matter, chips, shavings or any other substance in the stormwater system, or do any injury thereto, or in any manner pollute the stormwater system. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pour or discharge, or to permit to be poured or discharged, or to deposit, so that the same may be discharged, any gasoline, oil waste, antifreeze, or other fluids from vehicles or motor vehicles or equipment into any stormwater system. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial, industrial or manufacturing entity to discharge process water or unpermitted discharge into any stormwater system. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit, or cause to be thrown, placed or deposited, in any gutter, ditch, storm drain or other drainage area in the city anything that impedes or interferes with the free flow of stormwater therein. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. Unless otherwise specified, any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or any regulation promulgated pursuant to authority granted by this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or up to 30 days imprisonment for each violation or by both fine and imprisonment. Any such person shall furthermore be liable for all damage, loss and/or expense suffered or incurred by the city as a result of such violation, and the city may elect to pursue either or both civil and criminal remedies. 
(c)  Remediation and removal. In addition to any penalty imposed for a violation of subsections (a)(1) through (4) of this section, the court hearing the case may direct the person responsible for the discharge or deposit, and each day's default in such remediation or removal shall constitute a violation of and a separate offense under this section. 
(d)  Enforcement. The administrator and/or his designee, police officers, and fire marshals are hereby designated and authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-24. - Notice to correct drainage. 
(a)  Whenever the administrator shall find that a tract of land is inadequately drained, or that there is an obstruction to a culvert, drain or other natural or manmade watercourse that interferes with stormwater naturally flowing therein or that such culvert, drain or watercourse is of insufficient capacity to reasonably accommodate the flow of stormwater, the administrator or a person designated by the administrator shall notify the owner or person having possession, charge or management of such land to remove the obstruction or provide the necessary drainage. 
(b)  The owner or person having possession, charge or management of the land in question must comply with the administrator's order within the time specified in the notice. Failure to comply with such order shall constitute a violation of this chapter. In addition to any penalty imposed for each violation, the court hearing the case may direct the person responsible for the obstruction to remediate or correct the obstruction, and each day's default in such remediation or correction shall constitute a violation of and a separate offense under this section. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-25. - Authority. 
The city is authorized by the provisions of Code of Virginia § 15.2-100 et seq. and the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Virginia to construct, reconstruct, improve and extend the stormwater system; establish utility charges; and to issue bonds and other debts as needed to finance in whole or in part the costs of the system and to establish rents, fees and charges for the services and facilities provided by the system. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-26. - Stormwater utility fees. 
(a)  The stormwater utility fees set out in Appendix A to this Code are hereby authorized for all utility customers in the city. Rates will be based upon equivalent residential units (ERU). An ERU will be the equivalent of 1,877 square feet of impervious area which will include all buildings, structures and other impervious and semi-pervious surfaces which contribute to stormwater runoff. The minimum monthly charge shall be equal to one ERU. The number of ERU's will be determined by the administrator of public works or his designee. 
(b)  All payments for this service shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(c)  When new properties are brought into the utility system, fees will accrue commencing with either completion of a frame or slab inspection or upon completion of any construction which contributes impervious surface area where no certificate is issued or required for such construction. 
(d)  In the event of alteration or addition to a nonresidential property which alters the amount of impervious surface area, the stormwater management fees will be adjusted upon either the completion of a frame or slab inspection or upon completion of the construction, whichever occurs first, and the adjustment will be reflected in the next billing cycle. 
(e)  Nonresidential parcels having a total impervious surface area greater than 250,000 square feet shall be assessed on the same basis as parcels of 250,000 square feet, for an interim period which is authorized for up to five years, which period shall expire no later than June 30, 2000, for the purpose of investigating and evaluating the drainage runoff patterns and possible use of regional best management practices (BMPs). 
(f)  Petitions for adjustments to the stormwater fees for residential and nonresidential properties shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee, who shall be given the authority to administer the procedures and standards and review criteria for the adjustment of fees as established herein. Any petition submitted for adjustment to the stormwater fees for a residential or nonresidential property shall be accompanied with a site plan or other such similar scaled drawing. A petition shall also include calculations of the property's impervious and semi-pervious area. The site plan and the calculations shall both be prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed in the commonwealth and acceptable in format and content to the administrator of public works or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-27. - Late charges. 
In the event charges are not paid when due, interest thereon shall at that time accrue, at the annual rate of ten percent, until such time as the overdue payment and interest is paid. Charges and interests may be recovered by action at law or suit in equity and shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Sec. 31.2-28. - Stormwater fund. 
There shall be established a stormwater fund for the deposit of all fees collected pursuant to this article. Income derived from these charges shall be dedicated special revenue and may be used only for the following: 
(1)  The acquisition by gift, purchase or condemnation of real and personal property, and interest therein, necessary to construct, operate and maintain stormwater control facilities; 
(2)  The cost of administration of such programs; 
(3)  Engineering and design, debt retirement, construction costs for new facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities; 
(4)  Facility maintenance; 
(5)  Monitoring of stormwater control devices; and 
(6)  Pollution control and abatement, consistent with state and federal regulation for water pollution control and abatement. 
( Ord. No. 2014-38, § 2, 5-13-2014 )  
Chapter 32 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Riding bicycles on sidewalks, § 5-66; buildings and building regulations, ch. 7; erosion and sediment control, ch. 11; flood protection, ch. 14; littering streets, § 16-4; litter receptacles required for sidewalks in business districts, § 16-7(b)(1); housing and community development, ch. 17; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 22; notice to owner or occupant of abutting property to remove weeds or debris from street or sidewalk, §§ 23-27, 23-28; discharging firearm near street, § 24-67; parks and recreation, ch. 25; railroads, ch. 29; subdivisions, ch. 33.1; trimming of trees or other plants overhanging right-of-way, § 36-2; sale of flowers, plants, etc., on streets, § 36-3; trees and shrubs on city property, § 36-26 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 37; water, sewers and sewage disposal, ch. 38; zoning, ch. 40.1. 
State Law reference— Authority relative to streets and sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2001 et seq.; authority regarding streets, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-224 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 32-1) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 2 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 32-2. - Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to the opening, relocation, improvement, closing or naming of any street or alley and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 32-2)  
Sec. 32-3. - Determination of street lines in accordance with Sykes map. 
The lines made in accordance with the city map prepared by Bascom Sykes, city engineer, and adopted by the council on August 13, 1901, shall be used as the proper lines in defining the centers and widths of all streets shown on such map. 
(Code 1973, § 32-1; Code 1988, § 32-3) 
State Law reference— Survey and plan of cities required, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2333 et seq.  
Sec. 32-4. - Establishment, verification of street lines upon erection of structure. 
(a)  Prior to erecting a fence or building or other like structure in the city on property bounded by a street, the property owner shall verify the street lines between the city and the lot on which the building, fence or other structure is about to be erected. In the event of hardship, the city engineer may be requested to establish the street lines. For the lines thus established and verified by the city engineer, the party for whose benefit the lines are established shall pay to the city, in advance, an amount as determined by the city engineer based upon the estimated costs that will be incurred, including staff time. 
(b)  No person shall erect or attempt to erect any such fence, building or other structure without first complying with this section. 
(Code 1973, § 32-2; Code 1988, § 32-4) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 7.  
Sec. 32-5. - Application for vacation of street, alley, easement, right-of-way, or other public way; appointment of viewers. 
(a)  A fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be paid to the city for processing of an application for the vacation of any street, alley, easement, right-of-way or other public way pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2006—15.2-2007.1. All closure proceedings shall be commenced by filing an application for closure with the city planner. All applications shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the city planner. The city planner shall not receive any application unless the fee is paid at the time the application is filed. 
(b)  On application, the city council may appoint not less than three nor more than five viewers to view any street, alley, easement, right-of-way or other public way and report in writing whether, in their opinion, any and if any what inconvenience would result from discontinuing the same. Such viewers shall be paid a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code each for their services and same shall be paid by the person making the application to alter or vacate the street or alley. 
(c)  As a condition to vacation or abandonment of any street, alley, easement, right-of-way or other public way, the person making the application for closure may, at council's option, be required to purchase from the city the street, alley, easement or other public way for which the vacation or abandonment is requested. The price shall be no greater than its fair market value or its contributory value to the abutting property, whichever is greater, or the amount agreed to by the parties. No such vacation or abandonment shall be concluded until the agreed price has been paid. If any abutting property owner does not make such payment for such owner's fractional portion within one year, or other time period made a condition of the vacation or abandonment, of the government action to vacate or abandon, the vacation or abandonment shall be null and void as to any such property owner. The city and its affiliated political subdivisions, such as the Industrial Development Authority and Portsmouth Redevelopment and Housing Authority, shall be exempt from paying the purchase price in those cases where the affiliated political subdivision becomes the owner of the land in question and is not just acting on behalf of the adjoining property owners. 
(Code 1973, § 32-25; Code 1988, § 32-5; Ord. No. 1990-112, § 1, 10-23-1990; Ord. No. 1992-54, § 1, 6-23-1992; Ord. No. 1993-53, § 1, 6-22-1993) 
Cross reference— Land book entry when street or alley closed to public use, § 35-69.  
Sec. 32-6. - Lowering curbs; laying private driveways or ramps. 
(a)  No person shall lower or cut the curb on any street, or lay any private driveway or ramp crossing any sidewalk of the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city engineer. All such driveways or ramps shall be constructed and installed to the standards and specifications of the city engineer. 
(b)  The city engineer, or designee, shall inspect all such work, which shall be subject to such conditions as he may prescribe as to materials used and manner of construction. If a reinspection is required due to a condition caused by the permittee, a reinspection fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code must be paid prior to the reinspection being performed. 
(c)  All such driveways or ramps shall be fully paved over their entire width between the edge of the pavement of the street and the property line of the property to be served by such driveway or ramp. All paving and repaving, where necessary, shall be done at the expense of the person receiving such permit. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owner of such driveway to keep such driveway or ramp in good repair at all times at his own expense. 
(e)  Permit fees for driveways shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code per driveway apron for single-family property, per apron for duplexes, and per driveway apron for all other property. If construction is started prior to obtaining the permit, an administrative fee equal to the permit fee shall also be charged. 
(f)  Unless otherwise exempted by the city Code, all new construction shall have at least one driveway apron, and all driveway aprons installed shall meet city Code requirements. 
(Code 1973, § 32-3; Code 1988, § 32-6; Ord. No. 2002-43, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Sec. 32-7. - Street encroachments generally. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words when used in this section shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
City manager means the city manager or his designee. 
Encroachment means a foundation, awning, fire escape, shutter, sign, cornice, gutter, downspout, bay window, fence or other appurtenance to a building existing or to be constructed in, upon or over the streets of the city. 
Owner means the person who holds legal title to a building or the land upon which it is situated, either or both. 
Street means every public way or place of whatever nature in the city including a street, alley, right-of-way, road or highway, whether or not actually or physically opened to public use and travel. 
(b)  Existing encroachments. Every encroachment existing prior to August 24, 1976, is presumed to have been constructed under authority of a revocable permit, which may be revoked at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(c)  Encroachment permits. An application for a permit either for construction of a new encroachment or for authorization of an existing encroachment (an "encroachment permit") shall be made as follows: 
(1)  The owner of the property requesting the encroachment permit shall submit a written application. The application shall explain the need for the encroachment, and set forth its design and materials. 
(2)  An application for an existing encroachment shall be accompanied by a physical survey of the property showing the location of the encroachment. 
An application for a new encroachment shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared by a professional engineer showing the proposed encroachment and all relevant physical features, boundaries, utilities, and distances. 
(3)  An application for a new encroachment shall not be approved until after review by the traffic engineer, the department of planning and community services, the law department, and the city engineer, plus any other review deemed appropriate by the city manager. 
An application to authorize an existing encroachment shall not be approved until after review by the traffic engineer and the city engineer, plus any other review deemed appropriate by the city manager. 
These reviewing departments may condition their approval on such requirements, conditions, or changes as they deem necessary to protect the public interest, whether for an existing encroachment or for a new encroachment. 
(4)  Each encroachment permit shall require that the owner, for himself, his heirs, devisees, successors and assigns shall agree to indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of or directly or indirectly resulting from such encroachment and the maintenance, operation and removal thereof; and in the event that any suit or proceeding shall be brought against the city, at law or equity either independently or jointly with such owner on account thereof, the owner will defend the city in any such suit or proceeding at the cost of the owner; and in the event of a final judgment or decree being obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with the owner, then the owner will pay such judgment or comply with such decree with all costs and expenses of whatsoever nature and hold the city harmless therefrom. 
(5)  The city manager may, in his discretion, issue an encroachment permit if it has been prepared and reviewed pursuant to this section. The city manager may issue an encroachment permit only if he finds that it is in the public interest, will not comprise a hazard, and will not interfere with the reasonable use of any street. All encroachment permits shall be revocable in the discretion of the city manager. 
(6)  An encroachment permit shall, if for new construction, authorize the construction of the encroachment consistent with the application, upon issuance of a building permit under the Uniform Statewide Building Code, where required. An encroachment permit shall authorize the continued location of the encroachment in the public street as per the application, unless and until revoked. 
(7)  The city manager may establish and modify from time to time a uniform schedule of fees for the filing of applications for encroachment permits. 
(8)  Any encroachment or sign located in the right-of-way and found by the city manager to create a hazardous condition shall be removed immediately by the owner of such object or may be removed and disposed of by the city. 
(d)  Exceptions. For purposes of this section, a sign placed on the sidewalk portion of the public right-of-way adjoining property in the T4, T5, and T6 subdistricts of the downtown D-1 zoning district shall not be deemed an encroachment, provided that: 
(1)  The sign is not permanently affixed to the sidewalk. 
(2)  No part of the sign exceeds 42 inches in height. 
(3)  No sign face exceeds eight square feet. 
(4)  The sign is not illuminated. 
(5)  The sign is of an "A" or "T" frame design. 
(6)  The sign is located immediately in front of the business or activity advertised. 
(7)  Only one sign per building street frontage is placed on the subject right-of-way. 
(e)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause an encroachment to exist in any street except as permitted pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1973, § 32-5; Code 1988, § 32-8; Ord. No. 1999-34, 10-26-1999; Ord. No. 2005-117, § 1, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2009-115, § 7, 11-24-2009)  
Sec. 32-8. - Outdoor dining areas in rights-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause an outdoor dining area to be established in any public right-of-way of the city except as permitted by this section. 
(b)  Upon determination that an outdoor dining area will not materially or unreasonably interfere with the use of any public right-of-way or constitute a hazard, the city council or its designee may issue an outdoor dining area permit subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  That application be made in writing to the city manager for such permit, in a form satisfactory to the city manager, to which shall be attached a plat of survey or an engineering drawing depicting the area to be occupied by the outdoor dining facility. 
(2)  That the outdoor dining area permit shall be revocable at the pleasure of city council or its designee. 
(3)  That the permit to be issued by the city manager shall provide that the permittee, for himself, his heirs, successors and assigns, shall agree to indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of or directly or indirectly resulting from such use and the maintenance, operation and removal thereof; and that in the event that any suit or proceeding shall be brought against the city, at law or in equity, either independently or jointly with such permittee on account thereof, the permittee will defend the city in any such suit or proceeding at the cost of the permittee; and in the event of a final judgment or decree being obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with the permittee, then the permittee will pay such judgment or comply with such decree and pay all costs and expenses of whatsoever nature and hold the city harmless therefrom. 
(4)  That the dining area shall be temporary in that installation shall be in such a manner that posts, chairs, tables, planters or other equipment can be removed during periods of nonuse. 
(5)  That the outdoor dining area may extend into the right-of-way to a maximum of five feet from the property line of the permittee; provided that the outside dining area shall not reduce the open sidewalk width to less than eight feet of pedestrian access at any point. 
(6)  That adequate off-street parking must be provided for any additional tables to meet the zoning ordinance requirements. 
(7)  That any signage pertaining to the outdoor dining area will be in compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
(8)  That the permittee agrees to maintain all equipment, tables, chairs or planters placed in the outdoor dining area. 
(9)  That the issuance of the permit shall not relieve the permittee of the obligation to obtain and maintain in full force and effect any permits required by the department of public health or other applicable state or local agencies or departments. 
(10)  That the permittee shall comply with all applicable codes, ordinances, policies and regulations of federal, state and local governments and shall obtain all necessary licenses and permits. 
(11)  That the permit shall be issued to the applicant and shall not be transferable or assignable without written approval of the city manager. 
(12)  That the city council or its designee may impose such other reasonable conditions, including but not limited to a reasonable rent, as may be deemed appropriate. 
(13)  That the permit shall be renewable annually. 
(14)  That the permit shall be subject to the provisions and conditions contained in section 2.09 of the Charter. 
(15)  That the application fee for each annual permit shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. Such application fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(Code 1988, § 32-9; Ord. No. 1988-70, 7-12-1988; Ord. No. 1989-44, § 1, 5-15-1989) 
Cross reference— Food and food establishment, ch. 15; zoning ordinance, ch. 40.  
Sec. 32-9. - Obstructing the street and rights-of-way. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Code or by other city regulation, it shall be unlawful for any person to leave, or cause to be left, any box, barrel, trash or storage container, or other obstruction in any portion of the street or right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 32-6; Code 1988, § 32-10)  
Sec. 32-10. - Lights on street obstructions. 
Any person who causes to be placed on any of the streets of the city any building material, house lumber or other obstruction shall place thereon a sufficient number of flashing yellow lighted barricades at night to warn the public of danger. 
(Code 1973, § 32-7; Code 1988, § 32-11)  
Sec. 32-11. - Removal of debris from streets after fire. 
The owner of any building which has been burned by fire shall remove from the streets of the city within five days after the occurrence of such fire, all timbers, bricks, and any debris or materials which have fallen upon or been placed upon the streets of the city from such building. 
(Code 1973, § 32-8; Code 1988, § 32-12) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 13.  
Sec. 32-12. - Stationary showcases and permanent stands prohibited on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to remain upon the streets of the city stationary showcases or permanent stands. 
(Code 1973, § 32-9; Code 1988, § 32-13)  
Sec. 32-13. - Placement of public telephone booths on streets. 
It shall by unlawful for any telephone company licensed to do business within the city to place public telephone booths upon the streets or other public places of the city without having first obtained a permit therefor from the city manager. Such permits shall be revocable on ten days' notice and the city manager shall designate the location of the booths and may impose such terms and conditions as he may deem proper. 
(Code 1973, § 32-10; Code 1988, § 32-14)  
Sec. 32-14. - Standing of pushcarts on streets. 
Except as permitted pursuant to article VI of this chapter, no pushcarts for the sale of fruits or other articles shall be allowed to stand on the streets, except where the same are incidentally stopped for the purpose of making sales therefrom. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 32-11; Code 1988, § 32-15; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 4, 7-26-1988) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 32-15. - Sidewalk barriers required when repairing roof, wall or chimney; throwing material into street or sidewalk. 
Any person engaged in building or repairing a roof, wall or chimney on a street shall place sufficient barriers across the sidewalk, to be approved by the city engineer so as to warn against passing under such roof, wall or chimney. No bricks, slate, shingles, or other material shall be thrown from any such roof, wall or chimney, or from any part of any house into the street or sidewalk, except within a space enclosed by such barriers. 
(Code 1973, § 32-14; Code 1988, § 32-17)  
Sec. 32-16. - Maintenance of cellar doors or vaults in sidewalks. 
(a)  Every owner of a building on a street, which has a cellar door or vault in a sidewalk shall keep the same in good repair and every such cellar door shall be on a level with the sidewalk. If such a cellar door or vault is found in a state of disrepair, the city engineer shall give notice to the owner to repair the same within 24 hours and it shall be unlawful for the owner to fail or refuse to comply with the notice and every day that elapses after such 24 hours without the repair being made shall constitute a distinct offense. If the owner so fails for 48 hours after the notice, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to cause the repairs to be made at the expense of the city, the expense to be repaid to the city, with 20 percent damages, by the owner. 
(b)  If there are several owners of a building referred to in this section, it shall be sufficient to give the notice to any one of them. If the owner resides out of the city, the notice may be given to his agent or to the occupant of the building. 
(Code 1973, § 32-15; Code 1988, § 32-18)  
Sec. 32-17. - Installation of rainwater drains under sidewalks. 
(a)  Any resident having property on the line of streets may, after obtaining a permit from the city engineer, run drains of good and sufficient pipe under the sidewalks for the purpose of emptying surplus rainwater into the gutters. Such work must be done at the expense of the owner or occupant and is subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility and expense of the property owner to maintain any such drainage pipes under sidewalks. The property owner shall also be responsible for the repair of any damages caused by a failure to maintain such drainage pipes. 
(Code 1973, § 32-23; Code 1988, § 32-19)  
Sec. 32-18. - Drainage of wastewater other than rainwater into streets or gutters. 
No wastewater, rainwater excepted, shall be placed or allowed to flow by means of pipes, vessels or otherwise on the streets of the city, or in the gutters thereof, from the lot abutting upon the same. 
(Code 1973, § 32-24; Code 1988, § 32-20)  
Sec. 32-19. - Permit for installation of drainage facilities in streets required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed in any street in the city any drainpipe, conduit or other means for the drainage of surface water or any bridge over any drain in any street in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 32-25; Code 1988, § 32-21)  
Sec. 32-20. - Removal of drainage facilities in streets when inadequate; replacement. 
All drainpipes, conduits or other means for the drainage of surface water and bridges over drains in the streets of the city deemed inadequate by the city engineer shall be removed upon his order and, if replaced for use of the abutting property, the owner of such property shall pay the costs of replacement. 
(Code 1973, § 32-28; Code 1988, § 32-24)  
Sec. 32-21. - Crossing sidewalks and street curbs with vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall cross a sidewalk or street curb with any vehicle, except over a properly constructed driveway. 
(b)  If a sidewalk or street curb must be crossed during a construction project, the sidewalk or street curb must be protected from damage by an appropriate method such as laying heavy boards thereon. 
(c)  If any damage is done to the sidewalk, curb, or any other portion of the right-of-way by reason of its illegal use, the offender shall pay for the cost of all repairs to the same in addition to any fine that may be imposed for the violation of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 32-16; Code 1988, § 32-25)  
Sec. 32-22. - Hanging of flags, banners or decorations across street or sidewalk. 
No flag, banner or decoration shall be hung across any street or sidewalk in the city unless permission is obtained therefor from the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 32-18; Code 1988, § 32-27)  
Sec. 32-23. - Sales, solicitations, etc., on streets and sidewalks in congested areas. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, books, magazines or any article of value, except newspapers, or take orders for or sell subscriptions to same for future delivery, or render or offer to render any services other than the shining of shoes, or distribute printed matter on any of the streets and sidewalks paralleling streets which are: 
(1)  Designated as parking meter zones in section 22-601 of this Code; or 
(2)  Within the fire limits set forth in section 7-106 of this Code; 
(3)  Designated in subsection (b) of this section by the city council; 
such streets and sidewalks being congested areas for pedestrian travel and use. 
(b)  The sidewalks and streets located within the following-described area are hereby designated as congested areas for pedestrian travel and use: 
Beginning at the centerlines of the intersection of Crawford Parkway and Effingham Street; thence easterly along the centerline of Crawford Parkway to the centerline of Washington Street; thence north 40 feet to the north right-of-way of Crawford Parkway; thence east along said right-of-way 1,300 feet to a point; thence east along a line projected to the pierhead line in the southern branch of the Elizabeth River established by the U.S. Army Engineers; thence southerly along said pierhead line as it meanders along the southern branch of the Elizabeth River to its intersection with the projected north right-of-way of the Crawford Connector; thence westerly along said right-of-way to its intersection with the north right-of-way of Interstate 264; thence southwesterly along said right-of-way to its point of intersection with the centerline of Effingham Street; thence north along said centerline 325 feet to a point; thence west 210 feet to a point; thence north 350 feet to the centerline of South Street; thence east along said centerline 35 feet to a point; thence north 320 feet ; thence northwest 60 feet ; thence north 190 feet to the centerline of County Street; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of Chestnut Street; thence north along said centerline to its intersection with the centerlines of London Boulevard and Fort Lane; thence north along the centerline of Fort Lane to its intersection with the centerline of North Street projected westerly; thence east along said line to its intersection with the centerline of Effingham Street; thence northerly along said centerline to its intersection with the centerline of Crawford Parkway, the point of origin. 
(c)  The prohibition against the sale or distribution of the articles mentioned in this section shall not be construed as prohibiting: 
(1)  The actual distribution or circulation, without any charge therefor, to the public, of publications, leaflets, pamphlets, or any printed or written matter that disseminates opinion or information or provokes thought or pertains to any religious information or belief; 
(2)  The city manager from authorizing, by issuing a permit therefor, sidewalk sales as part of a downtown festival event where it is determined that such event will not be detrimental or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, and will not adversely affect the health and safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood; 
(3)  The city manager from authorizing, by issuing a permit therefor, the sale of food, nonalcoholic beverages and flowers from a mobile vending unit in accordance with the provisions of article VI of this chapter, or the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages from a food truck or ice cream truck in accordance with the provisions of article X of this chapter. 
(d)  A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 32-19; Code 1988, § 32-28; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 3, 7-26-1988; Ord. No. 2016-08, § 1, 1-26-2016) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11; sale of flowers, plants, etc., on streets, § 36-3.  
Sec. 32-24. - Removal of snow from sidewalks by property owners or occupants. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person using or occupying in any manner, or for any purpose whatsoever, any house, store, shop, stable, building or tenement of any kind, and of persons having charge of churches and public buildings of any description, and of owners of unoccupied houses or unimproved lots, situated on any paved street, lane or alley in the city, within three hours after the fall of any snow shall have ceased (except when the snow has ceased to fall between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in which case it shall be removed before 11:00 a.m. the following morning) to remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, the same from the sidewalk fronting such property in such manner as not to obstruct the passage of the water in the gutters. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and in addition thereto, shall pay the expense of removing the snow from the sidewalks. 
(Code 1973, § 32-21; Code 1988, § 32-30) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 32-25. - Removal of snow and ice from street intersections and sidewalks by city. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works or his designee to cause snow and ice to be removed by persons employed for cleaning the streets, and by additional labor when an emergency requires it, from the footways across intersecting streets, and also to remove ice and other obstructions to the free passage of water at the intersections of streets of the city, and to cause snow to be removed from the sidewalks fronting the houses, stores, churches, lots or tenements of such persons as shall neglect or refuse to remove the same as provided in section 32-24, the expense thereof to be certified to the city treasurer for collection. 
(b)  It shall also be the duty of the director of public works or his designee, at the cost of the city, to clear away snow from the sidewalks and crossings in front of public buildings of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 32-22; Code 1988, § 32-31)  
Sec. 32-26. - Dumping bricks, stone or debris on paved streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump bricks, stone, iron, construction materials, soils, or other debris on any paved street unless as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 32-30; Code 1988, § 32-33)  
Sec. 32-27. - Defacing or injuring paved streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any manner, to deface or injure a paved street. 
(Code 1973, § 32-31; Code 1988, § 32-34)  
Sec. 32-28. - Deposit of oily substances on asphalt streets. 
No person shall pour or spill or allow to drip upon the asphalt streets in the city any kerosene, benzine or other similar oil or oily substance or liquid. 
(Code 1973, § 32-32; Code 1988, § 32-35)  
Sec. 32-29. - Live advertising prohibited in or near street right-of-way. 
(a)  No person shall stand within 15 feet of any right-of-way of any street, and by means of his dress, or by making sounds, motions or gestures invite or draw the attention or solicit the patronage or support of the public to any goods, merchandise, property, real or personal, business, services, entertainment or amusement manufactured, produced, bought, sold, conducted, furnished or dealt in by any person or for any political party or for the candidacy of any individual for any nomination or office. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of subsection (a) shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00. 
(Code 1973, § 32-33; Code 1988, § 32-36; Ord. No. 2010-62, § 2, 7-27-2010)  
Sec. 32-30. - Shared mobility devices for hire prohibited except in accordance with pilot program. 
(a)  Except as permitted by the City of Portsmouth Shared Mobility Device Pilot Program or such other related program as may be authorized by city council from time to time, the offering for use, or actual use, of shared mobility devices for hire such as motorized skateboards, e-scooters, motorized scooters, motorized bicycles, electric power-assisted bicycles or the like on city streets, sidewalks or other public ways is prohibited. 
(b)  The prohibition in subsection (a) applies only to shared mobility devices for hire and does not apply to the use of personally-owned mobility devices. 
(Ord. No. 2019-98 , § 1, 11-12-2019)  
Secs. 32-31—32-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT 
 
Sec. 32-56. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the word "permittee" means a person to whom a permit required by this article is issued. 
(Code 1988, § 32-56) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 32-57. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 32-59; Code 1988, § 32-57) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 32-58. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, obstruct or in any manner disturb the surface or subsurface of any street, lane, alley or public right-of-way in the city, or to perform work within or on the public right-of-way or on structures located within or on the public right-of-way which reasonably requires the implementation of traffic control or similar measures for the safety of workers and the general public, without first having obtained from the city engineer a permit to do so, except as otherwise provided for herein; nor shall such work be performed after such permit shall have been revoked or shall have become ineffective. All work shall be performed in accordance with the City of Portsmouth Standards and the City of Portsmouth "Engineering Standards for Work in the Right-of-Way." 
(b)  If any person is required to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine, obstruct or in any manner disturb the surface or subsurface of any street, lane, alley or public right-of-way, and if such actions are required by the city through its repair, alteration, or widening of any such street, lane, alley or public right-of-way or any sidewalk and if such actions are to be performed within the limits of the project, the contractor performing the work shall obtain a permit from the city engineer at no cost to the contractor. 
(c)  If right-of-way work is required in order to make emergency repairs and the emergency existing requires that operations commence prior to the earliest possible issuance of a permit and within 72 hours from the discovery of such emergency, a permit shall not be required to commence such work; provided, however, that an application as required by section 32-59 shall be submitted within 72 hours after the commencement of the work; and provided, further, that notification of such emergency work shall be given by telephone, or other means, to the city engineer or his authorized representative immediately. Such application will be made upon the same form and in the same manner as that required by section 32-59, except that it will specify the emergency condition that existed. Any person commencing an emergency excavation without a permit as allowed herein thereby implies that he accepts all those conditions and agreements set forth in section 32-59 and elsewhere in this article and that he will conform to the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 32-45; Code 1988, § 32-58; Ord. No. 2002-43, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-27-2017)  
Sec. 32-59. - Application for permit; applicant's bond. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, any person required to obtain a permit by section 32-58 shall make application therefor to the city engineer on a form prescribed by him, which form shall state: 
(1)  The type, amount and dimensions of the work to be performed; 
(2)  The place where such work is to be performed; 
(3)  The purpose of such work; 
(4)  The time at which the work is to be commenced and the time at which the work is to be completed; 
(5)  That such person agrees to indemnify, save and hold the city free and harmless from liability accruing or growing out of the work performed and to defend the city against any claim occasioned by the work performed; and 
(6)  Such other information as is required by the city engineer. 
(b)  Any corporation which is subject to the jurisdiction of the state corporation commission and which furnishes utility services within the city shall be required to obtain a permit by making application therefor to the city engineer on a form prescribed by him, which form shall state: 
(1)  The type, amount and dimensions of the work to be performed; 
(2)  The place where such work is to be performed; 
(3)  The purpose of such work; 
(4)  The time at which the work was commenced and the time in which the work is to be completed; 
(5)  That such corporation agrees to indemnify, save and hold the city free and harmless from liability accruing or growing out of the work performed and to defend the city against any claim occasioned by the work performed; and 
(6)  Such other information as is required by the city engineer. 
(c)  The applicant shall sign the application and accompany the same with a bond in a form and of a type approved by the city attorney in the penal amount provided below payable to the city and conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with this article and the conditions and agreements of his application and conditioned to save harmless the city from any loss or damage by reason of any injury to any person or property occasioned by the negligence of the applicant, his servants, agents, employees, subcontractors or any independent contractors hired by him or occasioned by the failure of the same to comply with this article or the conditions and agreements of the application. The bond shall contain a further provision that, upon demand by the city, the applicant shall be required to defend, pay the cost of defense, furnish attorney for the defense of, any claim made against the city which may be based upon any injury to any person or property occasioned by the negligence of the applicant, his servants, agents, employees, subcontractors or any independent contractors hired by applicant or occasioned by the failure of the same to comply with this article or the conditions and agreements of the application. The amount of the bond shall be $5,000.00 or the stated value of the work, whichever is greater; except that a corporation covered by the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall annually on or before the first working day in January post a bond in the amount of $100,000.00 which shall cover any work performed by the contractor during the year. The city engineer may reduce the bond if he determines that the potential impact on the right-of-way is minimal. 
(Code 1973, § 32-46; Code 1988, § 32-59; Ord. No. 2002-43, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Sec. 32-60. - Issuance of permit; revocation. 
(a)  The city engineer upon receipt of application in proper form, of a proper bond, and of satisfactory written evidence of adequate and effective insurance coverage, or self-insurance, shall determine the charges to be paid by the applicant to the city in accordance with the charges set forth in section 32-61 and inform the applicant of same. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the proposed work is a necessary and proper use of the city's streets or rights-of-way and all proper and reasonable requirements to assure future maintenance are satisfied, he shall issue a permit for same. 
(b)  If the city engineer shall fail to approve any such application the aggrieved applicant may appeal to the city council, and the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(c)  A permit as issued under this article may be revoked at any time during the period it covers by the city engineer for failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of this article or the conditions and agreements of his application. For failure to rectify such default after revocation, the former permittee shall be held to be in violation of this article for each and every day such default shall continue. The city engineer may in his discretion cause such work to be performed as is necessary to rectify such default, and the costs or expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the former permittee. The revocation of a permit may be appealed by the aggrieved former permittee to the city council, and the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(d)  Any person performing or directing the performance of land disturbance work in the right-of-way without a valid right-of-way permit shall pay the fee set forth in appendix A to this Code in addition to all fees necessary to obtain a valid permit. 
(Code 1973, § 32-47; Code 1988, § 32-60; Ord. No. 2002-43, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 1, 5-12-2020)  
Sec. 32-61. - Schedule of fees and charges. 
(a)  Nonresidential construction. An inspection fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged for land disturbance in the right-of-way, not exceeding 100 square feet. An additional fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged for such land disturbance in excess of 100 square feet. The unit fee for utility poles shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code per pole. Installation of underground utilities shall be charged as above. The area of land disturbance for purpose of calculating the inspection fee for the installation of underground utilities shall be the linear length of the line installed by three feet wide. 
(b)  Residential construction. For each permit issued under this article, an inspection fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code per residential lot shall be charged. The inspection fee shall cover any disturbance in the right-of-way, with the exception of driveway aprons. 
(c)  Inspections and reinspections. The city engineer or designee shall inspect all such work, which shall be subject to conditions prescribed as to materials and construction. If reinspection is required due to a condition caused by the permittee a reinspection fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code must be paid prior to the reinspection. 
(d)  Individual work locations included on one permit. Up to ten individual work locations may be included on one permit if: (i) each cut is not larger than one square yard in area, (ii) all such cuts are within 300 linear feet along any one street, (iii) the inclusion of additional cuts will not increase the inspection services required for any one cut, and (iv) all such cuts will be able to be repaved or resurfaced at one time. For each such permit issued, charges for repaving or resurfacing will be levied based on the schedule contained in subsection (b) of this section prorated to the nearest one-tenth of a square yard for the total area involved. 
(e)  Underestimations. Should it develop that the amount of land or pavement removed or disturbed was underestimated, the applicant shall pay any resulting difference in fees. 
(f)  Fees for street or lane closures. A fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged for temporary street or lane closures necessitated by work in the right-of-way. 
(Code 1973, § 32-48; Code 1988, § 32-61; Ord. No. 2002-43, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 4, 5-12-2020) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 32-62. - Protective measures. 
The permittee shall by adequate barricades, fencing, railways, passways, lights or any other necessary safety equipment protect the public from injury. Such protective measures shall be maintained until the city commences resurfacing such area or until the city accepts such area without further resurfacing. 
(Code 1973, § 32-49; Code 1988, § 32-62)  
Sec. 32-63. - Protection of traffic. 
The permittee shall not block or reroute traffic without the permission of the traffic engineer. The permittee shall develop a plan to route and control such traffic in accordance with the latest edition of the Virginia Work Area Protection Manual, and such plan shall be approved by the city engineer or designee. Warning signs, cones, flaggers or any other necessary traffic-control device shall be maintained and positioned at such site so as to protect motorists at all times during which traffic flow is or may be disturbed. 
(Code 1973, § 32-50; Code 1988, § 32-63)  
Sec. 32-64. - Protection of utilities. 
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the city engineer and the utility company or person owning the utility. If it becomes necessary to remove an existing utility this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work is borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless it makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or across such work. In case any such pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and his or its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility and its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. 
(Code 1973, § 32-51; Code 1988, § 32-64)  
Sec. 32-65. - Protection of adjoining property. 
The permittee shall at all times and at his or its own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the purpose. The permittee shall, at his or its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure to properly protect and carry out such work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as required in this article. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property the appropriate city department or city official having control of such property. 
(Code 1973, § 32-52; Code 1988, § 32-65)  
Sec. 32-66. - Protection of sidewalks. 
Any excavation made in any sidewalk or under a sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over such excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that foot passengers can pass over safely at all times. Any excavation of a sidewalk which disturbs only a portion of the square or rectangular pattern will require the repaving of the entire square or rectangle. 
(Code 1973, § 32-53; Code 1988, § 32-66)  
Sec. 32-67. - Protection of watercourses. 
The permittee shall provide for the flow of all watercourses, sewers or drains intercepted during the excavation work and shall replace the same in as good condition as it found them or shall make such provisions for them as the city engineer may direct. The permittee shall not obstruct the gutter of any street but shall use all proper measures to provide for the free passage of surface water. The permittee shall make provision to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations in accordance with chapters 11 and 31.1. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide. 
(Code 1973, § 32-54; Code 1988, § 32-67)  
Sec. 32-68. - Protection of monuments. 
The permittee shall not remove or disturb any monuments found on the line of the excavation work without first obtaining the permission of the city engineer to do so. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments shall only be granted upon the condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of such monument by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 32-55; Code 1988, § 32-68)  
Sec. 32-69. - Return to city or replacement of bricks, materials. 
The permittee shall save and return to the city if it so desires all brick or other material taken up, or replace same if lost or broken. 
(Code 1973, § 32-56; Code 1988, § 32-69)  
Sec. 32-70. - Cleanup. 
As the excavation work progresses, the work area shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at such site shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 32-57; Code 1988, § 32-70)  
Sec. 32-71. - Restoration of right-of-way. 
The permittee shall restore all disturbed land and pavement in the right-of-way in accordance with the City of Portsmouth Standards and the City of Portsmouth "Engineering Standards for Work in the Right-of-Way." Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris shall not be used in the restoration. 
(Code 1973, § 32-58; Ord. No. 2002-43, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Secs. 32-72—32-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING SETBACK LINES 
 
Sec. 32-91. - Construction within lines prohibited; purpose of article. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 1 misdemeanor for any person to enlarge, extend or build any porch, bay window extension, shed or other building or structure on any of the land abutting on the streets set out in the following sections of this article within the building setback lines prescribed for any such street. Such building setback line shall apply equally to both sides of such streets unless the contrary intention is stated. The purpose and intention of this article is to facilitate the acquisition of the land required to widen such streets to the uniform width indicated. 
(Code 1973, § 32-70; Code 1988, § 32-91) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 32-92. - Limitation on issuance of building permits. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 4 misdemeanor for the building official or any other official of the city to issue any building permit for any enlargement, extension or construction of any structure within the prescribed building setback lines of the streets set out in the following sections of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 32-71; Code 1988, § 32-92) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 32-93. - Street with setback line of 30 feet from centerline. 
A building setback line of 30 feet from the centerline of the following street is hereby established: 
Deep Creek Boulevard, from Jefferson Street to Paradise Creek. 
(Code 1973, § 32-72; Code 1988, § 32-93)  
Sec. 32-94. - Streets with setback line of 40 feet from centerline. 
A building setback line of 40 feet from the centerline of the following streets is hereby established: 
Clifford Street from Airline Boulevard to Bains Creek. 
County Street, at its various locations between Dinwiddie Street and Rodman Avenue. 
George Washington Highway, from Elm Avenue to the southern city limits. 
London Street, from Dinwiddie Street to Williamsburg Avenue. 
Portsmouth Boulevard, from Green Street to Turnpike Road. 
Rodman Avenue, from Atlantic Coast Line railroad to Portsmouth Boulevard. 
Truxton Avenue, from Portsmouth Boulevard to Elliott Avenue. 
Turnpike Road, from Constitution Avenue to Alexander's Corner. 
(Code 1973, § 32-73; Code 1988, § 32-94)  
Sec. 32-95. - Streets with setback line of 50 feet from centerline. 
A building setback line of 50 feet from the centerline of the following streets is hereby established: 
Cherokee Road, from Navajo Trail to Hodges Ferry Road. 
Deep Creek Boulevard, from Paradise Creek to the southern city limits. 
Elliott Avenue, from Deep Creek Boulevard to Freedom Avenue. 
Elm Avenue, from High Street to South Street and from Jefferson Street to George Washington Highway. 
Elmhurst Lane, from Park Manor Road south to its terminus just south of Airline Boulevard. 
Greenwood Drive, from Deep Creek Boulevard to Airline Boulevard. 
Gust Lane, from Victory Boulevard to the southern city limits. 
Hodges Ferry Road from Cherokee Road to Airline Boulevard. 
Navajo Trail, from Portsmouth Boulevard to Cherokee Road. 
Thelmar Lane, from Lamper Road to the western city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 32-74; Code 1988, § 32-95)  
Sec. 32-96. - Street with setback line of 60 feet from centerline. 
A building setback line of 60 feet from the centerline of the following street is hereby established: 
Airline Boulevard, from High Street to the western city limits. 
(Code 1973, § 32-75; Code 1988, § 32-96)  
Sec. 32-97. - Requirement as to certain portion of Victory Boulevard. 
In order to provide for a future street width of 120 feet, a building setback line of 120 feet south of the north line of Victory Boulevard, between the entrance to St. Julian Ammunition Depot and Nicholson Street, is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 32-76; Code 1988, § 32-97)  
Sec. 32-98. - Requirement as to certain portion of County Street. 
In order to provide for future widening, a building setback line of 60 feet north and 40 feet south of the centerline of County Street as it exists on April 12, 1966, between Crawford Street and Dinwiddie Street, is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 32-77; Code 1988, § 32-98)  
Sec. 32-99. - Requirement as to certain portion of London Street. 
In order to provide for future widening, a building setback line of 40 feet north and 60 feet south of the centerline of London Street as it exists on April 12, 1966, between Crawford Street and Dinwiddie Street, is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 32-78; Code 1988, § 32-99)  
Sec. 32-100. - Requirement as to certain portion of George Washington Highway. 
In order to provide for future widening, a building setback line of 60 feet north and 40 feet south of the centerline of George Washington Highway as it exists on September 10, 1970, between Chestnut Street and Elm Avenue, is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 32-79; Code 1988, § 32-100)  
Sec. 32-101. - Requirement as to certain portion of Towne Point Road. 
In order to provide for future widening, a building setback line of 80 feet from the existing western right-of-way line of Towne Point Road and 25 feet from the existing eastern right-of-way line of Towne Point Road as it exists on March 9, 1972, between the City of Chesapeake corporate limits to its future Interchange with Route 164, the Western Freeway is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 32-80; Code 1988, § 32-101)  
Secs. 32-102—32-124. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STREET POLES 
 
Sec. 32-125. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless communications services. 
Base station means a station that includes a structure that currently supports or houses an antenna, transceiver, coaxial cables, power cables, or other associated equipment at a specific site that is authorized to communicate with mobile stations, generally consisting of radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies, and other associated electronics. 
City engineer means the city engineer or his designee. 
City facilities means city-owned existing structures located within the public way. City facilities may include, by means of example, city-owned light poles and city-owned traffic signal poles and structures. 
Co-locate means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to a base station, building, existing structure, utility pole, or wireless support structure. "Co-location" has a corresponding meaning. 
Existing structure means any structure within a public way that is installed or approved for installation at the time a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider provides notice to the city of an agreement with the owner of the structure to co-locate equipment on that structure. "Existing structure" includes any structure that is within a public way that is currently supporting, designed to support, or capable of supporting the attachment of wireless facilities, including towers, buildings, utility poles, light poles, flag poles, signs, and water towers. 
Micro-wireless facility means a small cell facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
New city facility or new wireless support structure means a city facility or wireless support structure of the type described herein that has not been installed or constructed, or approved for installation or construction, at the time a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider applies to a locality for any required zoning approval. 
Non-small cell facility means a wireless facility which is not a small cell facility. 
Pole means a utility pole, wireless support structure or similar structure located in the public streets or public way. 
Public street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, avenue, sidewalk, way, bridge, viaduct, alley or other public right-of-way, including non-paved surfaces, now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel, communications, alarm, street lighting, power distribution, water or sewer easements or similar public use. 
Public way means and includes all public streets held or controlled by the city, but only to the extent of the city's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license to occupy and use such public streets for telecommunications facilities. 
Small cell facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet and (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no more than 28 cubic feet, or such higher limit as is established by the Federal Communications Commission. The following types of associated equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. Small cell facilities include, but are not limited to, micro-wireless facilities. 
Utility pole means a structure owned, operated, or owned and operated by a public utility, local government, or the Commonwealth of Virginia that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for communications, cable television, or electricity. 
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless services between user equipment and a communications network, including (i) equipment associated with wireless services, such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul, and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial, or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facilities include, but are not limited to, small cell facilities and micro-wireless facilities. 
Wireless facilities franchise agreement means an agreement approved by city council and executed by the city and a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider granting a non-exclusive, revocable license to use the public ways of the city for the purposes of constructing, installing, using, maintaining, testing, inspecting, operating, repairing, and removing wireless facilities pursuant to and in accordance with the agreement and this article. 
Wireless infrastructure provider means any person, including a person authorized to provide telecommunications services in the state, that builds or installs transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures, but that is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services means (i) "personal wireless services" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i); (ii) "personal wireless service facilities" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(ii), including commercial mobile services as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d), provided to personal mobile communication devices through wireless facilities; and (iii) any other fixed or mobile wireless service, using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, provided using wireless facilities. 
Wireless service provider means a provider of wireless services. 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a pole, monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, or a suitable existing structure or alternative structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include any telephone or electrical utility pole or any tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service. 
(Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-126. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any violation or refusal on the part of any person to make such alteration and repairs in their present or future construction as may be required to comply with the provisions of this article shall work immediate suspension of all permits, rights and franchises held by such person. 
(Code 1973, § 28-1; Code 1988, § 32-126) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 32-127. - Permit and franchise or encroachment permit required. 
No person shall erect a post or a pole in any of the city's streets or rights-of-way unless he first obtains (1) a franchise or encroachment permit and (2) a permit therefor from the city engineer as required by section 32-58. 
(Code 1973, § 28-2; Code 1988, § 32-127; Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 2, 6-27-2017)  
Sec. 32-128. - Plan of location and other materials to accompany permit application. 
Any application for a permit to erect poles on the public streets shall be accompanied by the following materials: 
(1)  A plan indicating the proposed location of the same, subject to the approval of the city engineer; 
(2)  The diameter of such pole at the butt; 
(3)  The minimum depth to which such pole is to be set or pole base design, as applicable; 
(4)  The height of such pole above the surface of the street; 
(5)  The service for which such pole is to be used; and 
(6)  Any other information prescribed by the city engineer to the extent permitted by law. 
(Code 1973, § 28-3; Code 1988, § 32-128; Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-27-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-129. - Maintenance and identification. 
All companies owning, using or erecting poles in this city shall keep such poles in good condition. Such companies shall indicate upon each pole the name of the owner. 
(Code 1973, § 28-4; Code 1988, § 32-129; Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-27-2017)  
Sec. 32-130. - Main line poles. 
The poles of the main line on any street shall be confined to one side of the street, unless a special permit to the contrary is granted, and the lowest crossarm or wires shall not be less than 18 feet from the surface of the ground. Poles of sufficient size and height shall be used so as to safely and efficiently accommodate all wires placed on them, and any future micro-wireless facilities suspended on such wires. 
(Code 1973, § 28-5; Code 1988, § 32-130; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-131. - Joint use generally. 
In granting permits to erect poles, the city reserves the right, if the interest of the city demands and to the extent permitted by law, to authorize other companies or persons to use the same poles for their purposes upon payment of proper compensation to the owner thereof. All permits shall be subject to these conditions, and, in accepting the permit, the applicant binds himself thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 28-7; Code 1988, § 32-131; Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-27-2017)  
Sec. 32-132. - Use by city. 
Except in the case of wireless support structures governed by section 32-369, to the extent permitted by law, the city reserves the right to place city-owned communication and signal wires and other related equipment and facilities on all poles erected in its alleyways or public places or streets, free of cost or expense to the city, provided that such city-owned equipment and facilities do not exceed the pole's load bearing capabilities as constructed and are otherwise compliant with applicable law. 
(Code 1973, § 28-6; Code 1988, § 32-132; Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-27-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-133. - Damaging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage any pole in the city. In addition to any penalty imposed for a violation of this section, the person guilty of the violation shall be liable for the cost incurred in replacing or repairing the damaged pole. 
(Code 1973, § 28-8; Code 1988, § 32-133; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-134. - Removal of abandoned or dangerous poles. 
(a)  Every pole shall be removed from the street at the time of abandonment by the person or entity responsible for such pole. For purposes of this section, a pole shall be deemed to be abandoned upon termination of its use as an active utility pole or wireless support structure. 
(b)  Whenever a pole shall, in the judgment of the city engineer, become a danger to persons or property, it shall be removed by the person or entity responsible for such pole. 
(Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-135. - Uniformity of height. 
All poles installed by virtue of a permit granted under this article shall be of uniform height, unless the city engineer shall authorize to the contrary for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-27-2017)  
Sec. 32-136. - Height limit. 
No pole shall exceed 50 feet in height, measured from the surface of the street, unless the city engineer shall authorize to the contrary for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-27-2017)  
Sec. 32-137. - Underground districts. 
Except as authorized by section 32-154, no new pole shall be installed in an underground district designated under article V of this chapter, provided however that installation of new wireless support structures in underground districts shall only be prohibited if: 
(1)  The undergrounding requirement or comprehensive plan objective resulting in creation of the undergrounding requirement existed at least three months prior to the submission of the application for erection of the wireless support structure; 
(2)  Co-location of wireless facilities on existing utility poles, city-owned structures with the city's consent, existing wireless support structures, or a building within the underground district is permitted; 
(3)  The replacement of existing utility poles and wireless support structures with poles or support structures of the same size or smaller is permitted in the underground district; and 
(4)  The disapproval of the application for erection of a wireless support structure in the underground district would not unreasonably discriminate between the applicant and other wireless services providers, wireless infrastructure providers, providers of telecommunications services, and other providers of functionally equivalent services. 
(Ord. No. 2017-51 , § 2(Exh. A), 6-27-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-138. - New and replacement poles and wireless support structures. 
(a)  New poles, including utility poles, and new wireless support structures shall be as consistent as possible with the materials, finish and color of the adjacent poles in the surrounding area. 
(b)  Where it is necessary to replace an existing pole or wireless support structure due to age, maintenance, condition or structural issues, the replacement pole shall not be considered a new pole or new wireless support structure so long as the new pole or new wireless support structure does not exceed 50 feet in height, measured from the surface of the street, and is not more than ten feet taller than the tallest existing utility pole located within 500 feet of the replacement pole within the same public way or within the existing line of poles. 
(Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Secs. 32-139—32-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - UNDERGROUND WIRES 
 
Sec. 32-151. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 32-151) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 32-152. - Designation of underground districts. 
(a)  District I—Downtown Underground Utility District. All that portion of the city within the following described area is hereby designated as District I—Downtown Underground Utility District for underground wires: 
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the Port Warden Line of the southern branch of the Elizabeth River and the centerline of Queen Street extended; thence in a southerly direction along said Port Warden Line to the centerline of King Street extended; thence in a westerly direction along the centerline of King Street to the centerline of Effingham Street; thence in a northerly direction along the centerline of Effingham Street to the centerline of Queen Street; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Queen Street to the point of beginning. 
(b)  District II—Olde Towne Underground Utility District. All that portion of the city within the following described area is hereby designated as District II—Olde Towne Underground Utility District for underground wires: 
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerlines of Crawford Street and London Boulevard; thence west along the centerline of London Boulevard to the centerline of Washington Street; thence north along said centerline to the centerline of Crawford Parkway; thence easterly and thence southerly along said centerline to its terminus at the intersection of the centerlines of North Street and Crawford Street; thence continuing south along the centerline of Crawford Street to the centerline of London Boulevard, the point of beginning. 
(c)  District III—Olde Towne South Underground Utility District. All that portion of the city within the following described area is hereby designated as District III—Olde Towne South Underground Utility District for underground wires: 
Beginning at a point at the intersection of the centerlines of Fort Lane and Crawford Parkway; thence in an easterly direction along the centerline of Crawford Parkway to the centerline of Washington Street; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of London Boulevard; thence east along said centerline to the centerline of Crawford Street; thence north along said centerline to its terminus at the intersection of the centerlines of North Street and Crawford Parkway; thence continuing north and thence northwesterly along the centerline of Crawford Parkway a distance of 900 feet to a point; thence east along a line projected to the Port Warden Line of the southern branch of the Elizabeth River; thence south along said line to the centerline of Queen Street projected easterly; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of Effingham Street; thence south along said centerline to the centerline of King Street; thence east along said centerline projected easterly to the Port Warden Line of the southern branch of the Elizabeth River; thence southerly along said centerline 800 feet to a point which is the easterly projected centerline of Interstate 264; thence westerly along said centerline to the centerline of Effingham Street; thence north along said centerline to the centerline of County Street; thence west along said centerline to the centerline of Chestnut Street; thence north along said centerline to its terminus with the centerline of London Boulevard; thence continuing north along the centerline of Fort Lane to the centerline of Crawford Parkway; the point of beginning. 
(Code 1973, § 28-19; Code 1988, § 32-152)  
Sec. 32-153. - Removal of aerial wires, cables, etc., in underground districts. 
All aerial wires, cables and poles, other than distributing wires, wires for municipal decorative lighting and such city-owned communication and signal wires as in the opinion of the city manager are necessary to be maintained overhead, shall be moved from the streets of the city within the territory defined in section 32-152 at an approximately uniform, annual rate so as to be accomplished by the following dates: For District I, January 1, 1975; for District II, January 1, 1980; for District III, January 1, 1991. If the proper proportion of construction is not attained in any one year, the deficiency shall be made up during the following year. Each person maintaining and operating pole and wire lines in the city shall submit to the city manager for his approval a schedule for such work. The city manager shall so adjust and modify these schedules as to involve the minimum breaking up of street surfaces and inconvenience to the public. 
(Code 1973, § 28-20; Code 1988, § 32-153)  
Sec. 32-154. - Erection or maintenance of aerial wires, cables, etc., in underground districts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain aerial wires, cables, wireless support structures or poles within the underground utility districts described in this article after the dates applied to the respective districts in section 32-153 except as otherwise stated in section 32-137 and subsection (b) below. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, replacing utility poles and wireless support structures with poles or wireless support structures of the same size or smaller shall be permissible under this article V. 
(b)  No exception shall be granted unless the city manager finds that such requested exception would not be injurious to the neighborhood, that denial would create severe and undue hardship for the person, and that denial would result in no appreciable benefit to the neighborhood. The granting of an exception shall be at the sole discretion of the city manager. 
(c)  The exception provision set forth in subsection (b) above may be applied to any type of pole or wireless support structure, including without limitation new poles and wireless support structures and the replacement of existing poles and wireless support structures with poles and wireless support structures of greater size and height. 
(Code 1973, § 28-21; Code 1988, § 32-154; Ord. No. 1991-111, § 1, 12-10-1991; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-155. - Underground electric, telephone and CATV service for new structures. 
(a)  All newly constructed buildings and other structures, whether situated within or without the underground wiring districts set forth in section 32-152, shall be provided with underground electric, telephone and CATV service, except in areas zoned industrial; provided that: 
(1)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switch gear, meter pedestals and telephone pedestals which are normally installed aboveground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution systems may be so installed; and 
(2)  Meters, service connections and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the premises served may continue to be so installed. 
(b)  The work of constructing subways and manholes for conduits and of erecting poles for local distribution and the location of all such subways, manholes, conduits and poles shall be under the supervision and subject to the approval of the city engineer or such other person as the city manager may from time to time designate. Manholes shall at all times conform to the grades of the street. 
(c)  All improvements required by this section shall be constructed in accordance with accepted standards for underground construction. 
(d)  Whenever relocation of utility facilities is compelled by any construction undertaken by any unit of government, the provisions of this section may be waived by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 28-22; Code 1988, § 32-155)  
Secs. 32-156—32-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SIDEWALK VENDORS IN DOWNTOWN DISTRICT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Street vendors of ice cream, § 15-101 et seq.; sale of flowers, plants, etc., on streets, § 36-3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 32-171. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for regulation of sidewalk vending activities in the downtown district in order to more fully promote the public interest by contributing to an active and attractive pedestrian environment. In recognition thereof, reasonable regulation of street and sidewalk vending is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and the interest of the city in the primary use of public streets and sidewalks for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1988, § 32-171; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-120), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-172. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Downtown district means that portion of the city designated in the zoning ordinance as the "Downtown District." 
Mobile vending unit means a movable cart or vehicle that is operated from a fixed location and which may be moved without the assistance of a motor and which is not required to be licensed and registered by the division of motor vehicles used for the displaying, storing or transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor. 
Vending means the sale of food, nonalcoholic beverages and/or flowers from a mobile vending unit on any public street or sidewalk. 
Vendor means any person, including an employee or agent of another, engaged in vending on any public street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-122), 7-26-1988) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2; zoning ordinance, ch. 40.  
Sec. 32-173. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The placement of any vending unit or other type of device on any sidewalk in violation of the provisions of this article is declared to be a public nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 32-173; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-133), 7-26-1988) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 32-174. - Legal status of article. 
The adoption of this article is intended by the city council to be temporary in nature and is subject to amendment, revision or repeal upon action by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 32-174; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 2, 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-175. - Hours of operation. 
No vendor shall operate except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. All mobile vending units must be removed from public property during nonoperating hours. Hours of operation may be extended by the city manager for approved special events. 
(Code 1988, § 32-175; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-124(a)), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-176. - Signs restricted. 
All signs are prohibited on or with any mobile vending unit except for price signs and sign or logo not more than two square feet in area identifying the name of the vendor or the product being sold. 
(Code 1988, § 32-176; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-124(b)), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-177. - Location of machines restricted. 
No coin-operated vending machine shall be permitted in any portion of any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, except for boxes for the sale of newspapers. 
(Code 1988, § 32-177; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-124(c)), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-178. - Parking, standing of units. 
No mobile vending unit shall be located in the portion of any street intended for use of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1988, § 32-178; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-124(d)), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-179. - Control of trash, debris; containers. 
(a)  All trash or debris accumulating within 20 feet of any mobile vending unit shall be promptly collected by the vendor and be disposed of in a proper trash container. 
(b)  Vendors of food and beverages must provide receptacles for trash as part of their mobile vending unit. 
(Code 1988, § 32-179; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-124(e), (g)), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-180. - Sales to persons in vehicles prohibited. 
No vendor shall solicit or sell to any person in a motor vehicle on the street adjacent to his mobile vending unit. 
(Code 1988, § 32-180; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-124(f)), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-181. - Attendant required. 
All mobile vending units shall have an attendant present at all times. 
(Code 1988, § 32-181; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-124(h)), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-182. - No property right in vendor locations. 
Nothing contained in this article shall create a property right for any vendor in the vending location used by such person pursuant hereto. Any vendor shall comply immediately with the request of any police officer, firefighter, or city or public utility employee to move his unit for emergency reasons or to permit maintenance of the pavement, utilities or other public facilities. 
(Code 1988, § 32-182; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-125), 7-26-1988)  
Secs. 32-183—32-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 32-201. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on vending upon the public streets or sidewalks in the downtown district without first having obtained a permit to do so. 
(Code 1988, § 32-201; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-121), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-202. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Applications for a permit shall be filed at the office of the city manager on or after November 15 of the preceding year on forms deemed appropriate by the city manager. Every application for such permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code which shall not be refundable. All applications for such permit shall be investigated by such departments or officers of the city as the city manager may direct. A decision to issue a permit shall be based on this information, other applicable ordinances and any other requirements as may be set forth herein. 
(b)  The applicant shall satisfy the following requirements before a vending permit can be issued: 
(1)  Submit the name and home and business address of the applicant, the name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant, of the vending business or mobile vending unit to be used in the operation of the vending business. 
(2)  Submit an accurate drawing showing the public area to be used along with plans detailing the design and size of the vending unit to be used and its placement or location thereon. 
(3)  Submit a description and a photograph, drawing, or artist's or architect's rendering of any mobile vending unit to be used in the operation of the vending business. 
(4)  Submit a description of the type of food, beverage or flowers to be sold. 
(5)  Submit written approval to use the vending site from the abutting property owners or tenants or their legal representative. 
(6)  Submit a certificate evidencing comprehensive general liability insurance, including products/completed operations liability insurance, naming the city as an additional insured. The coverage shall provide for a minimum liability of $500,000.00 for personal injury and property damage. The city attorney shall review for approval the certificate of insurance establishing same. 
(c)  All applications for a permit shall be referred to the downtown design committee for issuance or denial of a certificate of compliance regarding an applicant's mobile vending unit and related signs, if any. 
(Code 1988, § 32-202; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-123), 7-26-1988; Ord. No. 1988-110, § 1(32-123), 12-13-1988)  
Sec. 32-203. - Location review. 
Upon receipt of an application for permit required by the provisions of this division, the city shall review the location to determine if it is suitable for vending. In making this determination, the city shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  A mobile vending unit is limited to one assigned location. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued for a location within 25 feet of a location for which a permit has already been granted. 
(3)  The use of the mobile vending unit at such location must be compatible with the public interest to use the public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way. In making such determination, the city manager or his designee shall consider the type and intensity of use, the width of the sidewalk, the proximity and location of existing street fixtures, including but not limited to signposts, lampposts, parking meters, bus shelters, benches, phone booths, trees and newsstands, as well as the presence of bus stops, truck loading zones and taxi stands. The city manager shall also consider other factors deemed relevant in determining whether or not the proposed use would result in congestion of the public way. 
(4)  A minimum eight-foot sidewalk width must be maintained for pedestrian travel at all times. 
(5)  A mobile vending unit may not be placed within 200 feet of a like business unless the applicant owns the establishment or has written consent of the proprietor. Subsequent to the issuance of a permit should a like business located within 200 feet of the approved location the prohibition contained in this section shall not apply for the remainder of the permit year. 
(Code 1988, § 32-203; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-129), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-204. - Fees. 
The fee for a permit required by the provisions of this division shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code and shall be collected prior to issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1988, § 32-204; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-127), 7-26-1988) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to establish and collect fees and charges, § 2.14.  
Sec. 32-205. - Issuance. 
After the filing of a completed application for a permit and upon compliance by the applicant with all requirements, the city manager shall, and is authorized to, issue a permit. Such permits shall be valid for one calendar year and all permits, regardless of when issued, shall expire on December 31 of each year. In the event two or more applications for the same location are received, the earliest application, if approved, shall be allowed to use the location. 
(Code 1988, § 32-205; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-128), 7-26-1988; Ord. No. 1988-110, § 1(32-128), 12-13-1988)  
Sec. 32-206. - Grounds for denial. 
Applications for permits required by this division may be denied on the basis of nonconformity with any of the standards established directly or by reference in this article or with any other relevant law or regulation. 
(Code 1988, § 32-206; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-130), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-207. - Notice of denial. 
Upon denial of the application for a permit required by the provisions of this division, the applicant shall be so notified in writing and the notice shall state the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 32-207; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-128), (32-130), 7-26-1988; Ord. No. 1988-110, § 1(32-128), 12-13-1988)  
Sec. 32-208. - Compliance with other regulations. 
The issuance of a permit under the provisions of this division shall not relieve the permittee of the obligation to comply with the requirements or regulations of the department of public health or other applicable state or local agencies or departments and to obtain and maintain in full force and effect all applicable licenses and permits. 
(Code 1988, § 32-208; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-124(i)), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-209. - Additional licenses and approvals. 
The permit required by the provisions of this division shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any business license which may be required pursuant to this Code and any approval which may be required by the health department or any other agency or regulatory authority over the proposed vending operation. A permit will not be issued under this division until any and all business licenses and other approvals required under this Code and any other applicable laws and regulations have been issued. 
(Code 1988, § 32-209; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-126), 7-26-1988) 
Cross reference— Licenses, ch. 20.  
Sec. 32-210. - Nontransferable. 
Each permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be issued in the name of the applicant and shall not be transferable to any other person. 
(Code 1988, § 32-210; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-128), 7-26-1988; Ord. No. 1988-110, § 1(32-128), 12-13-1988)  
Sec. 32-211. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Any permit issued under this division may be revoked or suspended by the city manager. Written notice of such suspension or revocation shall be delivered to such vendor's place of business or mailed to such vendor's last known address. 
(b)  Grounds for suspension or revocation may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Misrepresentation of information contained in the application for the permit; 
(2)  Misrepresentation made in the course of the vending operation; 
(3)  Conduct of the vending operation in a manner so as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; or 
(4)  Conduct which is contrary to the provisions of this article, any other law or regulation applicable to the vending operation, or conditions of the permit. 
(Code 1988, § 32-211; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-131), 7-26-1988)  
Sec. 32-212. - Appeals. 
Persons who are denied permits required by the provisions of this division, or whose permits are suspended or revoked by the city manager, may appeal in writing within ten days of receipt of notice thereof to the city council, setting forth fully their grounds of appeal. The city council's review of the appeal shall occur no later than the second regular scheduled council meeting following submission of the written appeal. 
(Code 1988, § 32-212; Ord. No. 1988-80, § 1(32-132), 7-26-1988)  
Secs. 32-213—32-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SIGNS NEAR INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of outdoor advertising in sight of public highways, Code of Virginia, §§ 33.1-351—33.1-381; special provisions pertaining to interstate highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-370. 
 
Sec. 32-231. - Violations of article. 
A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $50.00. 
(Code 1988, § 32-231) 
State Law reference— Similar penalty for violation of state law pertaining to signs near interstate highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-377.  
Sec. 32-232. - Definitions. 
The following terms, wherever used or referred to in this article, shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
Advertisement means any writing, printing, picture, painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign or similar device which is posted or displayed outdoors on real property and is intended to invite or to draw the attention or to solicit the patronage or support of the public to any goods, merchandise, property, real or personal, business, services, entertainment or amusement manufactured, produced, bought, sold, conducted, furnished or dealt in by any person or for any political party or for candidacy of any individual for any nomination or office; the term shall also include any part of an advertisement recognizable as such. 
Advertising structure means any rigid or semirigid material with or without any advertisement displayed thereon situated upon or attached to real property outdoors primarily or principally for the purpose of furnishing a background or base or support upon which an advertisement may be posted or displayed. 
Centerline of the highway means a line equidistant from the edges of the median separating the main-traveled ways of an interstate divided highway or the centerline of the main-traveled way of a nondivided interstate highway. 
Distance along centerline means the distance measured between two vertical planes which are normal or perpendicular to and intersect the centerline of the highway and which pass through the termini of a measured distance. 
Distance from edge of a right-of-way means the horizontal distance measured along a line normal or perpendicular to the centerline of the highway. 
Entrance roadway means any public road or turning roadway, including acceleration lanes, by which traffic may enter the main-traveled way of an interstate highway from the general road system within this city irrespective of whether traffic may also leave the main-traveled way of such road or turning roadway. 
Exit roadway means any public road or turning roadway, including deceleration lanes, by which traffic may leave the main-traveled way of an interstate highway to reach the general road system within this city irrespective of whether traffic may also enter the main-traveled way by such road or turning roadway. 
Highway means every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in this city. 
Historic place or shrine means only places that are maintained wholly at public expense or by a nonprofit organization. 
Interchange means a grade separated intersection with one or more turning roadways for travel between intersection legs or an intersection at grade where two or more highways join or cross. 
Legible means capable of being read without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
Maintain means to allow to exist. 
Main-traveled way means the traveled way of an interstate highway on which through traffic is carried. In the case of a divided interstate highway, the traveled way of each of the separated roadways for traffic in opposite directions is a main-traveled way. The term "main-traveled way" does not include such facilities as frontage roads, turning roadways or parking areas. 
National system of interstate and defense highways and interstate system means the system presently described in subsection (e) of section 103 of Title 23, United States Code. 
Post means to post, display, print, paint, burn, nail, paste or otherwise attach. 
Protected area means all areas which are adjacent to and within 660 feet of the edge of the right-of-way of any highway which is a part of the national system of interstate and defense highways. 
Real property means any property physically attached or annexed to real property in any manner whatsoever. 
Scenic area means any public park, area of particular scenic beauty or of historical significance designated as a scenic area by the city manager. 
Sign means any outdoor sign, display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard or other thing which is designed, intended or used to advertise or inform, any part of the advertising or informative contents of which is visible from any place on the main-traveled way of the interstate system. 
Trade name means a brand name, trademark, distinctive symbol or other similar device or thing used to identify particular products or services. 
Traveled way means the portion of a roadway for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of shoulders. 
Turning roadway means a connecting roadway for traffic turning between two intersection legs of an interchange. 
Visible means capable of being seen (whether or not legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
(Code 1973, § 32-90; Code 1988, § 32-232) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 32-233. - Signs permitted in protected areas. 
The following signs may be erected or maintained in protected areas: 
(1)  Class 1, official signs. Directional signs, historical markers, signs indicating the availability of food, lodging and vehicle service or other official signs or notices erected and maintained by public officers or agencies pursuant to and in accordance with direction or authorization contained in state or federal law for the purpose of carrying out an official duty or responsibility. The city manager shall determine the type, size, location and number of signs of this class which may be erected. 
(2)  Class 2, on-premises signs. Signs not prohibited by other parts of this article which are consistent with the applicable provisions of this article and which advertise the sale or lease of or activities being conducted upon the real property where the signs are located; provided, that: 
a.  Not more than one sign advertising the sale or lease of the same property may be erected or maintained in such manner as to be visible to traffic proceeding in any one direction on any one interstate highway. 
b.  Not more than one sign, visible to traffic proceeding in any one direction on any one interstate highway and advertising activities being conducted upon the real property where the sign is located, may be erected or maintained more than 50 feet from the advertised activity, and no such sign may be located more than 250 feet from the center of the advertised activity. 
c.  No sign, except one which is not more than 50 feet from the advertised activity, that displays any trade name which refers to or identifies any service rendered or product sold shall be erected or maintained unless the name of the advertised activity is displayed as conspicuously as such trade name. 
(3)  Class 3, signs in the specific interest of the traveling public. Signs otherwise conforming to law which are designed to give information in the specific interest of the traveling public, including only signs giving information about public places operated by the federal or the state government or any political subdivision thereof, natural phenomena, historical sites, areas of natural scenic beauty or naturally suited for outdoor recreation, designated as such by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 32-91; Code 1988, § 32-233)  
Sec. 32-234. - Signs prohibited in protected areas. 
(a)  No sign or advertising structure which is visible from the main-traveled way of the interstate system shall be erected, maintained or displayed within a protected area which: 
(1)  Advertises activities which are illegal. 
(2)  Is not securely affixed to a substantial advertising structure. 
(3)  Is obsolete. 
(4)  Is not clean and in good repair. 
(5)  Is not consistent with this article or other ordinances of this city. 
(b)  No sign may be permitted within a protected area which attempts or appears to attempt to direct the movement of traffic or which interferes with, imitates or resembles any official traffic sign, signal or device. 
(c)  No sign may be permitted within a protected area which prevents the driver of a vehicle from having a clear and unobstructed view of official signs and approaching or merging traffic. 
(d)  No lighting may be permitted to be used in any way in connection with any sign in a protected area unless it is so effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the main-traveled way of the interstate system or is of such low intensity or brilliance as not to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or otherwise to interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle. 
(e)  No sign may be permitted within a protected area which moves or has any animated or moving parts or which contains, includes or is illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving lights. 
(f)  No advertisement may be erected or maintained on any tree nor be painted or drawn on any rock or other natural feature within a protected area. 
(g)  No sign may be permitted to exceed 20 feet in length, width or height or 150 square feet in area, including border and trim but excluding supports, except class 2 signs, as designated in section 32-233, not more than 50 feet from any advertised activities being conducted upon the real property where the sign is located. 
(Code 1973, § 32-92; Code 1988, § 32-234)  
Sec. 32-235. - Restrictions on class 3 signs in protected areas. 
(a)  In protected areas in advance of an intersection of the main-traveled way of an interstate highway and an exit roadway, class 3 signs, as designated in section 32-233, which are visible to traffic on the highway approaching such intersection may not exceed the following number: 
Distance from 
Intersection 	Number of Signs 
0—2 miles 	0 
2—5 miles 	6 
More than 5 miles 	Average of 1 per mile 
 
The specified distance shall be measured to the nearest point of the intersection of the traveled way of the exit roadway and the main-traveled way of the highway. 
(b)  Subject to the other provisions of this section, not more than two such signs may be erected or maintained within any mile distance measured from any point, and no such signs may be erected or maintained less than 1,000 feet apart. 
(c)  Such signs may not be erected or maintained in protected areas upon any part of the width of which is constructed an entrance or exit roadway. 
(d)  Such signs visible to interstate highway traffic which is approaching or has passed an entrance roadway may not be erected or maintained in protected areas for 1,000 feet beyond the furthest point of the intersection between the traveled way of such entrance roadway and the main-traveled way of the interstate highway. 
(e)  No such signs may be erected or maintained in scenic areas. 
(f)  No more than one such sign advertising activities being conducted as a single enterprise or giving information about a single place may be erected or maintained in such manner as to be visible to traffic moving in any one direction on any one interstate highway. 
(Code 1973, § 32-93; Code 1988, § 32-235)  
Secs. 32-236—32-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Ordinances relating to specific public improvements or special assessments not affected by Code or ordinance adopting Code, § 1-6(4). 
 
Sec. 32-251. - Authority to impose. 
(a)  The city council may impose taxes or assessments upon the abutting property owner or abutting property owners for making, improving, replacing or enlarging walkways upon existing streets, for improving and paving existing alleys, and for either the construction or the use of sanitary or stormwater sewers, including retaining walls, curbs and gutters; however, such taxes or assessments shall not be in excess of the peculiar benefits resulting from the improvements to such abutting property owner, and no assessment for retaining walls shall be imposed upon any property owner who does not agree to such assessment. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the city council may impose taxes or assessments upon abutting property owners for the construction, replacement or enlargement of sidewalks, water lines, sanitary sewers or stormwater sewers; for the installation of streetlights; for the construction or installation of canopies or other weather-protective devices; for the installation of lighting in connection with the foregoing; and for permanent amenities, including, but not limited to, benches or waste receptacles; provided that such taxes or assessments shall not be in excess of the peculiar benefits resulting from the improvements to such abutting property owner. 
(Code 1973, § 32-104; Code 1988, § 32-251) 
State Law reference— Authority to impose taxes or assessments for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2404.  
Sec. 32-252. - General procedure. 
Improvements referred to in section 32-251 may be ordered by the council and the cost thereof apportioned in pursuance of an agreement between the city and the abutting landowners, and in the absence of such an agreement, improvements, the cost of which is to be defrayed in whole or in part by local tax or assessment, may be ordered on a petition from not less than three-fourths of the landowners to be affected thereby, or by a vote of five of the members elected to the council, but notice shall first be given as provided in section 32-254 to the abutting landowners, notifying them when and where they may appear before the council to be heard in favor of or against such improvements. 
(Code 1973, § 32-105; Code 1988, § 32-252) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2405.  
Sec. 32-253. - How cost assessed or apportioned. 
The cost of improvements ordered under this article, when the same have been ascertained, shall be assessed or apportioned by the city assessor, between the city and the abutting property owners when less than the whole is assessed; provided, that except when it is otherwise agreed, that portion assessed against the abutting property owners shall not exceed one-half of the total cost of such improvement. 
(Code 1973, § 32-106; Code 1988, § 32-253) 
State Law reference— Cost assessment and apportionment, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2406.  
Sec. 32-254. - Notice to abutting owners of amount of assessment; landowner's right to object. 
(a)  When the assessment or apportionment provided for in this article is not fixed by agreement, notice thereof and of the amount so assessed or apportioned, shall be given each of the abutting owners and they shall be cited thereby to appear before the city assessor not less than ten days thereafter, at a time and place to be designated therein, to show cause, if any they can, against such assessment or apportionment. 
(b)  The notice required by this section may be given by personal service on all persons entitled to such notice, except that notice to an infant or insane person may be served on his guardian or committee and notice to a nonresident may be mailed to him at his place of residence or served on any agent of his having the property in charge, or on the tenant of the freehold, or in any case when the owner is a nonresident, or when the owner's residence is not known, such notice may be given by publication in some newspaper published or having general circulation in the city once a week for four successive weeks. Or, in any case, in lieu of such personal service on the parties or their agents and of such publication, the notice to all parties may be given by publishing the same in some newspaper published or having general circulation in the city, once a week for two successive weeks. The second publication shall be made at least seven days before the parties are cited to appear. Any landowner wishing to make objections to an assessment or apportionment may appear in person or by counsel and state his objections. 
(Code 1973, §§ 32-108, 32-109; Code 1988, § 32-254) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2408, 15.2-2409.  
Sec. 32-255. - Appeal by landowner. 
(a)  If a landowner's objections to an assessment or apportionment under this article are overruled he shall, within 30 days thereafter, but not afterwards, have an appeal as of right to the circuit court of the city. When an appeal is taken, the city assessor shall immediately deliver to the clerk of the court the original notice relating to the assessment, with his judgment endorsed thereon, and the clerk of the court shall docket the same. 
(b)  The appeal shall be tried by the court or the judge thereof, in a summary way, without pleadings in writing and without a jury, in term time or in vacation, after ten days' notice to the adverse party, and the hearing shall be de novo. 
(Code 1973, §§ 32-110, 32-111; Code 1988, § 32-255) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2410, 15.2-2411.  
Sec. 32-256. - Report and billing of assessments. 
The amount assessed against each landowner, or for which he is liable by agreement, pursuant to this article shall be reported as soon as practicable to the city treasurer. Persons against whom the assessments have been finally made shall be billed by the city treasurer, with the bills mailed not later than 14 days prior to the due date. The bills are to be separate and distinct from tax bills and the city treasurer shall maintain a record of all bills assessed and the payment thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 32-107; Code 1988, § 32-256)  
Sec. 32-257. - Installment payment of assessments. 
(a)  Persons against whom assessments have been finally made pursuant to this article may pay such assessments in equal installments over a period not exceeding five years, together with interest on the unpaid balance at a rate equal to the judgment rate of interest on the unpaid balances. Such installment shall become due at the same time that real estate taxes become due and payable in the city, and the amount of each installment including principal and interest, shall be shown on a bill mailed not later than 14 days prior to the installment due date to each such person, by the treasurer. When each bill assessed has been paid in full, the city treasurer shall transmit such information in writing to the city attorney, who shall have the lien marked satisfied. 
(b)  The council, in its discretion, may cause the payment of the amount finally assessed or apportioned against each landowner, or fixed by agreement with him, for improving walkways upon streets or for improving and paving alleys, to be made in such manner and divided into such installments as shall be determined by the council, bearing interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Code 1973, §§ 32-111, 32-113; Code 1988, § 32-257) 
State Law reference— Payment of assessments in installment payment of assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2413.  
Sec. 32-258. - Lien against abutting land. 
The amount finally assessed against or apportioned to a landowner, or fixed by agreement with him, pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be a lien enforceable in equity on his abutting land, from the time the work of improvement is completed; subject, however, to his right of appeal and objections as provided for in this article. Such lien shall be enforceable against any person deemed to have had notice of the proposed assessment under section 32-259, but if no abstract of the resolution or ordinance authorizing the improvement as docketed as provided in section 32-259, such lien shall be void as to all purchasers for valuable consideration without notice and lien creditors until and except from the time it is duly admitted to record in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 32-111; Code 1988, § 32-258) 
State Law reference— Enforcement of judgment, lien, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2411.  
Sec. 32-259. - Docketing of abstracts of resolutions or ordinances. 
(a)  When any improvement is authorized for which assessments may be made against the abutting landowners, the city council may, before the amount to be finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner or fixed by agreement is determined, cause to be recorded in the judgment docket of the clerk's office in which deeds conveying real estate are required by law to be recorded, in abstract of the resolution or ordinance authorizing such improvement, showing the ownership and location of the property to be affected by the proposed improvement and the estimated amount that will be assessed against or apportioned to each landowner or fixed by agreement with him, and the same shall be indexed in the name of the owner of the property. 
(b)  After the completion of the improvement, the estimated amount shall be amended to show the amount finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner or fixed by agreement with him, which final amount shall in no event exceed the estimated amount. The amount finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner may be greater than the initially assessed amount when the increased amount is for additional work being performed when the work was requested by the landowner and the additional work and its estimated amount is written into a separate agreement between the city and the affected landowner. From the time of the docketing of such abstract, any purchaser of, or creditor acquiring a lien on, any of the property described therein shall be deemed to have had notice of the proposed assessment. 
(Code 1973, § 32-112; Code 1988, § 32-259) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2412.  
Secs. 32-260—32-269. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PARKING LOTS 
 
Sec. 32-270. - Parking lot site development plan required. 
Site development plans for parking lots shall be prepared in accordance with and, where applicable, shall be included with the site development plan required by section 40-172.1 of this Code. Such plans shall be stamped by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed by the commonwealth. Site development plans for parking lots shall contain elevations based upon city data as furnished by the city engineer. Unless the city engineer shall determine that some deviation is necessary to prevent a demonstrable hardship upon the property owner or is in the best interest of the public safety, the site plan shall also demonstrate compliance with the construction requirements of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 32-270; Ord. No. 1991-24, § 1, 3-26-1991)  
Sec. 32-271. - Parking lot construction requirements generally. 
All parking lots shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements for on-site and off-site improvements: 
(1)  On-site improvements. On-site improvements shall consist of either: 
a.  Parkway curbs or curbs and gutters around the entire interior perimeter of the parking lot; or 
b.  Wheel stops located at the end of each designated parking space in the parking lot, as determined by the city engineer in his sole discretion. 
(2)  Off-site improvements. Off-site improvements to the right-of-way adjacent to the property being improved shall consist of seven-inch thick concrete aprons from the property line to the curb or edge of street pavement, not to exceed 15 feet in length measured from the edge of the curb or street pavement. The developer of the parking lot shall install curbs and gutters, with necessary street widening and sidewalks along the entire street frontage of the property being improved to the adjoining property lines. The developer shall also install drainage pipes in all ditches along the street frontage of the property. The off-site drainage requirements of section 33-33 of this Code shall apply to these improvements. 
The city engineer may modify or waive the required installation for street curbs, gutters, and/or sidewalks if he determines that the public safety will not be adversely affected by such waiver. A modification or waiver may only be issued if the subject property is located in an industrial M-1, industrial M-1-R, or industrial M-2 zoning district; if the street to be improved is not located within or immediately adjacent to a residentially-zoned area; or if the street serves primarily as an alley or service road and does not front on a commercial or residential area. Regardless of any modification or waiver of the curbing and guttering or sidewalk requirements, the city engineer may still require the widening of the roadway in accordance with city specifications. 
(3)  Existing parking lots. For the expansion of existing parking lots, the city engineer may grant an exception from the construction requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section if he deems that such an exception is necessary to prevent a demonstrable hardship upon the property owner based on the relative size of the expansion, and that the public health or safety will not be adversely affected by the exception. 
(4)  Construction methods and materials. Bituminous concrete or Portland cement concrete shall be utilized for all street improvements and widening and shall be designed and installed subject to the approval of the city engineer according to the street classification and use. All parking facilities shall be paved with bituminous concrete or Portland cement concrete. Parking lot wheel stops shall be constructed of concrete or of an equal material as approved by the city engineer. 
The city engineer may require paving surfaces and/or construction techniques which minimize surface stormwater runoff in areas where it is deemed necessary. The developer may select precast interlocking blocks, porous-type asphalt paving, detention basins or other methods approved by the city engineer. 
In M-1 and M-2 industrial zones, the city engineer may modify or waive the required installation of paving on storage areas away from street frontage so long as same do not result in dust, dirt, sand, gravel and similar materials being deposited or tracked on public streets or rights-of-way. Storage areas are defined as an area used for storage of materials and equipment not on a trailer, and non-temporary (greater than 30 days) storage of motor vehicles and trailers. Access aisles of storage areas shall be paved to the standards of a parking lot, and shall be no less than 24 feet wide. 
(5)  Phased improvements. The improvements to streets and parking facilities in this article may be phased in accordance with the schedule of improvements approved by the city engineer after considering the proposed use of the parking facility including the anticipated number of persons utilizing the area during the period of construction of the facility. 
(Code 1988, § 32-271; Ord. No. 1991-24, § 1, 3-26-1991; Ord. No. 1995-118, § 1, 12-12-1995)  
Sec. 32-272. - Parking lot nuisances; remedies. 
(a)  All parking lots shall be designed, constructed and maintained in such a manner that dust, dirt, sand, gravel and similar materials will not be deposited on public streets or rights-of-way. The owner or occupant of any land within the city in which a parking lot exists shall be responsible for cleanup operations. 
(b)  The depositing and tracking of dust, dirt, sand, gravel and similar materials from a parking lot shall be unlawful and shall also constitute a nuisance. Whenever it is determined by the city that such a nuisance exists, the owner or occupant of the site shall be given notice in writing of the existence of the nuisance, and if the nuisance is not abated within 15 days of receipt of the written notice, the city may cause the nuisance to be abated and bill the owner or occupant thereof for all costs incurred thereby. In addition, the city engineer may require that unimproved or graveled lots be promptly sealed with bituminous concrete, Portland cement concrete or bituminous surface treatment (double prime and seal) or be modified at the expense of the owner or occupant as may be necessary to assure elimination of the nuisance. The same requirement may also be imposed on parking lots with paved surfaces which have become neglected or not maintained thus causing the nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 32-272; Ord. No. 1991-24, § 1, 3-26-1991)  
Sec. 32-273. - Parking lots; internal drainage requirements. 
(a)  Internal drainage shall be required for parking lots where the city engineer considers sufficient room to exist for ten or more parked cars in standard configuration and where, in the opinion of the city engineer, the combination of rooftop area and parking lot area will cause sufficient stormwater runoff to warrant the requirement. Internal drainage requirements shall be calculated based upon all stormwater runoff within the property to be developed and shall include rooftops and parking areas. Only the concrete apron between the property line and the curb shall be allowed to drain to the street. Catchbasins, as may be required, for the internal drainage shall be provided in all parking areas outside of the street right-of-way, and storm drainage pipes shall extend to the nearest drainage facility of sufficient capacity. The above requirements shall be mandatory except: 
(1)  Where underground drainage pipe culverts are not available within 150 feet of the parking lot, and when the developer receives the concurrence of the city engineer, with the certified statement and calculations of the developer's registered professional engineer or a licensed (3B) land surveyor, that no hazard or danger would result from the restricted release of stormwaters into the city street or right-of-way while: 
a.  Using, in the calculations, a stormwater runoff coefficient for a parking lot paved in its entirety with nonporous bituminous concrete; and 
b.  Detaining all stormwaters up to a minimum storm of ten-year frequency with a controlled release into the city right-of-way of only those quantities that would result from a storm of a two-year frequency with the site in its undeveloped state. 
Criteria for finding that a hazardous condition exists may include, but are not limited to, the exceeding of an eight-foot spread of stormwater in a curbed street for a two-year storm frequency at the nearest downstream inlet. 
(2)  Where alterations are proposed to a building with an existing parking lot with inadequate internal drainage, the facility may continue to be used without installation of internal drainage if: 
a.  The city engineer concurs with the certified statement and calculations of the developer's registered professional engineer or licensed (3B) land surveyor that no hazard or danger would result from continuing the present method, rate and quantity of stormwater discharge and if paved in its entirety with nonporous bituminous concrete pavement; and 
b.  If no addition to the parking area and roof area is performed. 
(b)  Where the city engineer considers a danger or hazard to exist, the developer shall, prior to building occupancy, eliminate or minimize his site's contribution to the problem to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Where an addition to the parking lot or roof top area will result in additional stormwater runoff, drainage and/or site modifications shall be performed by the developer as approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1988, § 32-273; Ord. No. 1991-24, § 1, 3-26-1991)  
Sec. 32-274. - Waiver, modification of requirements. 
The city engineer may waive or modify any of the requirements of sections 32-271 through 32-273 in order to ensure site compliance with the provisions of chapter 9.1 (Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District Ordinance) of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 32-274; Ord. No. 1991-24, § 1, 3-26-1991)  
ARTICLE X. - FOOD AND ICE CREAM TRUCKS 
 
Sec. 32-275. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for regulations relating to the operation of food and ice cream trucks within City of Portsmouth public roadways in order to promote a vibrant sense of place and local entrepreneurship. In recognition thereof, reasonable regulation of street activity is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and the interest of the city in the primary use of public streets by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-276. - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Designated parking location means a specific parking space chosen by the city manager or the city manager's designee, in consultation with the city engineer and the planning director, to be reserved for use by a food truck. 
Downtown area means the area of the city located east of Effingham Street, north of Interstate 264, south of Queen Street, and west of the Elizabeth River's Southern Branch. 
Food truck means a food establishment that is located in or upon a self-propelled vehicle licensed by the state department of motor vehicles, containing a mobile kitchen, where food and non-alcoholic beverages are stored, prepared, and served in individual portions to walk-up customers. 
Food truck policies and procedures manual means a manual containing additional regulations and guidelines established by the city manager governing food trucks and/or food truck vending. 
Food truck program means a set of regulations, policies, and procedures approved by the city manager and designed to provide a working regulatory environment within which food trucks shall operate. 
Ice cream truck means a food establishment that is located in or upon a self-propelled vehicle licensed by the state department of motor vehicles that sells only ice cream, pre-packaged food, and non-alcoholic beverages, and that does not stop in a fixed location to wait for customers if no customers are present. 
Point of sale means the area, such as a window, where the vendor and the customer interact through ordering and purchasing food and non-alcoholic beverages. 
Vending means the sale of food and/or nonalcoholic beverages from a food or ice cream truck on any public street or sidewalk. 
Vendor means any person, including an employee or agent of another, engaged in vending on any public street or sidewalk. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-277. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The placement of any vending unit or other type of device related to the operation of a food truck or ice cream truck on any sidewalk in violation of the provisions of this article is declared to be a public nuisance detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(c)  Operating a food truck outside of authorized areas, without the possession of all required permits, and/or without any required consent from the city or private property owners shall be considered a violation of this article and may result in suspension from the food truck program and/or the revocation of the vendor's business license. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-278. - Hours of operation. 
No vendor shall operate except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. All mobile vending units must be removed from public property, designated parking locations, or approved vending locations during non-operating hours. Hours of operation may be extended by the city manager or the city manager's designee for special events. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-279. - Signs restricted. 
(a)  All signs must be firmly attached at all points to the food or ice cream truck. No sign may protrude off of the vehicle or extend off of the vehicle such that any portion of the rear of the sign is visible. 
(b)  Flags, banners, portable signs such as A-frames, or other decorative appurtenances, whether attached or detached, are prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-280. - Noise restricted. 
(a)  Food and ice cream trucks, including those operating with a generator, are subject to the prohibitions on excessive sound established in section 24-255 (as the same may be amended, moved, or superseded from time to time). Generators shall not operate at decibel levels above the lesser of the limitations set forth in section 24-255(d) (as the same may be amended, moved or superseded from time to time) or the following limitations: 
(1)  Residential zones; night. In a residential zone between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., sound meeting or exceeding 55 dBA. 
(2)  Residential zones; day. In a residential zone between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., sound meeting or exceeding 65 dBA. 
(3)  Commercial zones. In a commercial zone, sound meeting or exceeding 75 dBA. 
(b)  Generators shall either have labels evidencing compliant decibel levels or food or ice cream truck operators shall maintain documentation that shows the generator cannot operate above the decibel levels listed above. 
(c)  Food trucks and vendors shall not play any music that is amplified outside of the food truck. Music may be played inside the truck for the entertainment of food truck staff. This requirement does not apply to ice cream trucks. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-281. - Lighting restricted. 
No lighting, including but not limited to flashing lights and LED screens, shall be displayed on the exterior of the food truck. If a food truck or ice cream truck is operating after dark, appropriate lighting may be used to illuminate the menu board and the customer waiting area adjacent to the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-282. - Control of trash, debris; containers. 
(a)  All trash or debris accumulating within 20 feet of any food truck shall be promptly collected by the vendor and be disposed of in a proper trash container. No vendor shall leave their area of operation until all trash within 20 feet of the food truck has been removed and disposed of. 
(b)  Food truck vendors must provide a receptacle for trash as part of their food truck vending. These receptacles may be placed on an adjacent sidewalk within ten feet of the vendor's food truck so long as the receptacle does not in any way impede pedestrian or bicycle pathways. Vendors must remove all receptacles when the food truck ceases its operation at each specific location. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-283. - Designated locations. 
(a)  Outside of Downtown area. Food trucks may not operate in the public roadways in residential zoning districts outside of the Downtown area. Food trucks may operate in the public roadways in all non-residential zoning districts outside of the Downtown area under the following conditions: 
(1)  The food truck shall be lawfully parked in an existing parking space or parking area. 
(2)  The food truck shall not be within 25 feet of an intersection, crosswalk, driveway, bus stop, or fire hydrant. 
(3)  The food truck shall not be parked in a bicycle lane. 
(4)  Food trucks shall not be allowed to operate in the section of the Olde Towne neighborhood zoned Historic Residential (HR). 
(b)  City property. Food trucks and other similar types of vehicles offering items for sale to the public may operate on city-owned parcels with permission from the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(c)  Private property. The operation of food trucks on private property is governed by section 40.1-4.5(F)(8) of the City of Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance as said section may be amended, moved, or superseded from time to time. 
(d)  Under no circumstances shall a food truck operate within 100 feet of any military base installation, military office, or federal building without written permission from an authorized military official. 
(e)  No food truck or ice cream truck shall operate on the same property or within 500 feet of a concession stand or other type of location where food or beverages are being sold in conjunction with a youth athletic or scholastic event with proceeds of said sales to benefit a not for profit youth-oriented organization, such as a youth sports league, public or private school, parent-teacher association, or scholastic club, unless the food truck or ice cream truck vendor has obtained the written consent of the not for profit youth-oriented organization. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-284. - Operating in the Downtown area. 
(a)  Food trucks shall be allowed to operate in the Downtown area only during designated special events and festivals. 
(b)  Food trucks shall not be allowed to operate within 500 feet of any entrance to the Portsmouth Pavilion on days when a concert is scheduled except in accordance with regulations and guidelines with section 32-286 and set forth in the Food Truck Policies And Procedures Manual. In establishing regulations and guidelines under this subsection, the city manager may consider the city's interests in public safety, traffic control, the success of the Portsmouth Pavilion as a regional entertainment venue, and such other factors as the city manager deems necessary or appropriate. 
(c)  In order to vend in the Downtown area, food trucks must possess either a valid food truck or special events permit issued by the city. 
(d)  Except for food trucks operating in conjunction with and at the request of a microbrewery, food trucks shall not park within 25 feet of the main entrance of any open restaurant. 
(e)  Further rules for hours of operation, parking, and other logistical factors may be established by the city manager as provided in subsection 32-286(a). 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 2016-48 , § 2, 7-12-2016)  
Sec. 32-285. - Licensing requirements. 
Except as provided in subsection 32-284(c), no person or business entity, including religious or charitable organizations, shall operate a food truck without a food truck permit issued by the city. The city manager is hereby authorized to establish food truck permit application and approval requirements. Every application for a food truck permit shall be accompanied by an application fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code. Vendors shall display or keep within their food truck proof of all required permits and licenses at all times during operation. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 2017-36 , § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Sec. 32-286. - General operational requirements. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to establish additional regulations and guidelines from time to time for the food truck program, including regulations governing the operation and licensing of food trucks. 
(b)  At the city manager's option, additional regulations and guidelines established pursuant to this section 32-286 or section 32-285 may be set forth in the food truck policies and procedures manual. 
(c)  Under no circumstances shall a food or ice cream truck operate on the same property or within 500 feet of a concession stand or other type of location where food or beverages are being sold in conjunction with a youth athletic or scholastic event with all proceeds of said sales to benefit a not for profit youth-oriented organization, such as a youth sports league, public or private school, parent-teacher association, or scholastic club. This requirement may be waived, in writing, with the permission of the body overseeing the concession sales. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-287. - Ice cream trucks. 
This section shall apply only to ice cream trucks. In the event of a direct conflict between the provisions of this section and any other provision of this article, this section 32-287 shall control as to ice cream trucks. 
(a)  Ice cream truck vendors may vend from a stopped vehicle in all zoning districts and on all city roadways, provided the vehicle does not impede traffic or use flashing lights while stopped. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) below, ice cream trucks shall not stay parked and shall resume driving after the last customer in line is served. Ice cream trucks shall not wait at a location for customers to arrive for any period of time. 
(c)  Ice cream trucks shall be allowed to vend from a single location at special events, provided that they have been properly permitted and have received permission from the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(d)  No ice cream truck may operate without a valid City of Portsmouth business license and a valid City of Portsmouth Health Department permit. Vendors shall display or keep within their ice cream truck proof of all required permits and licenses at all times during operation. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
Sec. 32-288. - No property right in vendor locations. 
Nothing contained in this article or any regulation established pursuant to this article shall create a property right for any vendor in any vending location, including any designated parking location. Any vendor shall comply immediately with the request of any police officer, firefighter, or city or public utility employee to move his mobile vending truck for emergency reasons or to permit maintenance of the pavement, utilities or other public facilities. 
( Ord. No. 2016-08, § 2(Exh. A), 1-26-2016)  
ARTICLE XI. - WIRELESS FACILITIES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted December 12, 2017, in effect, repealed art. XI, §§ 32-301—32-310 and enacted a new art. XI as set out herein. Former art. XI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2017-51 , adopted June 27, 2017. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 32-301. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless communications services. 
Base station means a station that includes a structure that currently supports or houses an antenna, transceiver, coaxial cables, power cables, or other associated equipment at a specific site that is authorized to communicate with mobile stations, generally consisting of radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies, and other associated electronics. 
City engineer means the city engineer or his designee. 
City facilities means city-owned existing structures located within the public way. City facilities may include, by means of example, city-owned light poles and city-owned traffic signal poles and structures. 
Co-locate means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to a base station, building, existing structure, utility pole, or wireless support structure. "Co-location" has a corresponding meaning. 
Existing structure means any structure within a public way that is installed or approved for installation at the time a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider provides notice to the city of an agreement with the owner of the structure to co-locate equipment on that structure. "Existing structure" includes any structure that is within a public way that is currently supporting, designed to support, or capable of supporting the attachment of wireless facilities, including towers, buildings, utility poles, light poles, flag poles, signs, and water towers. 
Micro-wireless facility means a small cell facility that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
New city facility or new wireless support structure means a city facility or wireless support structure of the type described herein that has not been installed or constructed, or approved for installation or construction, at the time a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider applies to a locality for any required approval. 
Non-small cell facility means a wireless facility which is not a small cell facility. 
Public street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, avenue, sidewalk, way, bridge, viaduct, alley or other public right-of-way, including non-paved surfaces, now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel, communications, alarm, street lighting, power distribution, water or sewer easements or similar public use. 
Public way means and includes all public streets held or controlled by the city, but only to the extent of the city's right, title, interest or authority to grant a license to occupy and use such public streets for telecommunications facilities. 
Small cell facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet and (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no more than 28 cubic feet, or such higher limit as is established by the Federal Communications Commission. The following types of associated equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, back-up power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. Small cell facilities include, but are not limited to, micro-wireless facilities. 
Utility pole means a structure owned, operated, or owned and operated by a public utility, local government, or the Commonwealth of Virginia that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for communications, cable television, or electricity. 
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless services between user equipment and a communications network, including (i) equipment associated with wireless services, such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as microwave backhaul, and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial, or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facilities include, but are not limited to, small cell facilities and micro-wireless facilities. 
Wireless facilities franchise agreement means an agreement approved by city council and executed by the city and a wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider granting a non-exclusive, revocable license to use the public ways of the city for the purposes of constructing, installing, using, maintaining, testing, inspecting, operating, repairing, and removing wireless facilities pursuant to and in accordance with the agreement and this article. 
Wireless infrastructure provider means any person, including a person authorized to provide telecommunications services in the state, that builds or installs transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or wireless support structures, but that is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services means (i) "personal wireless services" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(i); (ii) "personal wireless service facilities" as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(ii), including commercial mobile services as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d), provided to personal mobile communication devices through wireless facilities; and (iii) any other fixed or mobile wireless service, using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, provided using wireless facilities. 
Wireless service provider means a provider of wireless services. 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a pole, monopole, tower, either guyed or self-supporting, or a suitable existing structure or alternative structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not include any telephone or electrical utility pole or any tower used for the distribution or transmission of electrical service. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-302. - Violations of article. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class I misdemeanor. 
(b)  In the event of violation by any person of any provision of this article, the city may immediately suspend all permits, rights and franchises held by such person. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-303. - Relationship to right-of-way permit. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to waive the independent requirement to obtain a right-of-way permit pursuant to article II of chapter 32 for any work involving wireless facilities that by its nature triggers the permit requirement set forth in section 32-58. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-304. - Permits revocable. 
Any permit issued under this article shall be revocable by the city engineer for non-compliance with any term of the permit or any applicable wireless facilities franchise agreement, or for non-compliance with any applicable requirement of this chapter 32. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Secs. 32-305—32-309. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CO-LOCATION OF SMALL CELL FACILITIES ON EXISTING STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 32-310. - Applicability. 
This division applies to the co-location of small cell facilities on existing structures within a public way except where the existing structure is a city facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-311. - Permit required. 
No person shall co-locate a small cell facility in or on any existing structure located within any public street, lane, alley or other public right-of-way in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-312. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The city engineer shall establish a standard application form for permits under this section. 
(b)  Applicants may submit not more than 35 individual permit requests with each application. 
(c)  Applicants shall deliver applications to the city engineer or the city engineer's designee, together with an application fee. No application shall be reviewed unless and until the application fee has been paid. 
(d)  The application fee shall be $100.00 each for up to five small cell facilities on a permit application, and $50.00 apiece for each additional small cell facility on a permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-313. - Materials to be submitted with application. 
(a)  When filing an application, an applicant shall submit the applicant's name and a valid electronic mail address at which the applicant may be contacted; 
(b)  When filing an application, for each individual permit requested in the application, the applicant shall provide: 
(l)  The address and latitude/longitude of the existing structure on which the small cell facility will be co-located; 
(2)  The name of the owner of the existing structure and an agreement or other evidence showing the owner has granted permission to the applicant to co-locate on the existing structure, which evidence may include the owner's signature on the application; 
(3)  Copies of any approvals for the site granted by a federal agency, including conditions imposed by that agency; 
(4)  A statement that the small cell facility and operation thereof will not materially interfere with other pre-existing communications facilities; 
(5)  To the extent permitted by law, documentation that the small cell facility and operation thereof will not materially interfere with other pre-existing communications facilities; 
(6)  Plans clearly depicting the dimensions and specifications of the small cell facility, including the antennae, base station, and all assorted wireless equipment; 
(7)  Detailed elevation drawings showing the co-location of the small cell facility, including the base station and all other associated equipment on the existing structure; and 
(8)  Such additional materials as are listed on the application form established by the city engineer and are reasonably required by the city engineer to determine the approvability of a permit in accordance with section 32-315. 
(c)  Any application not including all of the information listed in this section may be deemed incomplete by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-314. - Application review process. 
(a)  Provided applicant has provided a contact email address and paid the appropriate application fee, the city engineer or designee shall notify the applicant by email within ten days of application submittal if the application is incomplete. The notice shall specify why the application is considered incomplete. If the city engineer or designee does not so notify applicant, the application shall be deemed complete. 
(b)  During review of a complete application, the city engineer or designee may request applicant to provide additional information which is reasonably required to the extent permitted by law to determine the approvability of a permit in accordance with section 32-315. 
(c)  Within 60 days of submittal of a complete application, the city engineer or designee shall, for each individual permit request included in an application: (i) approve the individual permit request; (ii) deny the individual permit request in writing, including a written explanation of the reason[s] for denial. Except where the city and applicant have agreed upon an extension, any individual permit request not acted on within 60 days or such other period required by federal law shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-315. - Basis for denial. 
No individual permit request included in a complete application shall be denied except for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Material potential interference with other pre-existing communications facilities or with future communications facilities that have already been designed and planned for a specific location or that have been reserved for future public safety communications facilities; 
(2)  The public safety or other critical public service needs; 
(3)  Only in the case of an installation on or in publicly owned or publicly controlled property, aesthetic impact or the absence of all required approvals from all departments, authorities, and agencies with jurisdiction over such property; or 
(4)  Conflict with a city ordinance adopted pursuant to Va. Code § 15.2-2306. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-316. - Micro-wireless facilities. 
(a)  The installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro-wireless facilities that are suspended on cables or lines that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with national safety codes within the public way is exempt from the application and permitting requirements of this division. 
(b)  Any person who installs micro-wireless facilities as provided in subsection (a) and any subsequent owner, lessee or operator thereof shall ensure that the facilities are maintained in compliance with all national safety codes and so as not to constitute a nuisance or threat to the public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-317. - Applicability to co-location of small cell facilities on private property. 
Applications for co-location of small cell facilities on structures located on private property or otherwise outside the public way shall comply with the requirements of section 32-312 except that such applications shall be submitted to, and processed by, the zoning administrator. Except as provided in the foregoing sentence, the provisions of this division apply only to applications for permits to co-locate small cell facilities on existing structures within the public way. Applications for co-location of small cell facilities on existing structures located on private property or otherwise outside the public way shall be administered by the zoning administrator in accordance with the requirements of state law and chapter 40.1 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Secs. 32-318—32-324. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CO-LOCATION OF NON-SMALL CELL FACILITIES ON EXISTING STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 32-325. - Applicability. 
This division applies to the co-location of non-small cell facilities on existing structures within a public way except where the existing structure is a city facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-326. - Wireless facilities franchise agreement required. 
No person shall co-locate non-small cell facilities on existing structures in the public way except pursuant to, and in accordance with the terms of, a wireless facilities franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-327. - Permit required. 
Any party to a wireless facilities franchise agreement who desires to co-locate non-small cell facilities on existing structures in the public way must first obtain a permit from the city engineer in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-328. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The city engineer shall establish a standard application form for permits under this section. 
(b)  The application fee shall be $100.00 apiece for each individual permit request included with a single application. No application shall be reviewed unless and until the application fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-329. - Materials to be submitted with application. 
(a)  When filing an application, an applicant shall submit the applicant's name and a valid electronic mail address at which the applicant may be contacted; 
(b)  When filing an application, for each individual permit requested in the application the applicant shall provide: 
(1)  The address and latitude/longitude of the existing structure on which the wireless facility will be co-located; 
(2)  The name of the owner of the existing structure and an agreement or other evidence showing the owner has granted permission to the applicant to co-locate on the existing structure, which evidence may include the owner's signature on the application; 
(3)  Copies of any approvals for the site granted by a federal agency, including conditions imposed by that agency; 
(4)  A statement and supporting documentation confirming that the wireless facility and operation thereof will not materially interfere with other pre-existing communications facilities; 
(5)  Plans clearly depicting the dimensions and specifications of the wireless facility, including the antennae, base station, and all assorted wireless equipment; 
(6)  Detailed elevation drawings showing the co-location of the wireless facility, including the base station and all other associated equipment on the existing structure; 
(7)  A statement affirming that, to the best of its knowledge, the wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider is not in breach of its wireless facilities franchise agreement; and 
(8)  Such additional materials as are listed on the application form established by the city engineer and are reasonably required by the city engineer to the extent permitted by law to determine the approvability of a permit in accordance with section 32-330. 
(c)  Any application not including all of the information listed in this section may be deemed incomplete by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-330. - Review and determination. 
(a)  The applicant shall provide such additional information as the city engineer may reasonably request during review of the application. 
(b)  The city engineer shall deny a permit if: 
(1)  The proposed wireless facilities do not comply with applicable law and the terms of the wireless facilities franchise agreement; 
(2)  The proposed wireless facilities have a negative aesthetic impact on the surrounding area, considering the size and design of the facilities and the historic, residential, or commercial character of the surrounding area; 
(3)  The proposed wireless facilities pose a risk to the public safety, including but not limited to public travel within the public way; 
(4)  The proposed wireless facilities are inconsistent with the city's existing or planned public safety communications system; or 
(5)  Alternative, less impactful locations which reasonably meet the needs of the applicant are available for placement of the wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-331. - Conditions of approval. 
A permit granted under this section shall be subject to such conditions as the city may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Secs. 32-332—32-339. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CO-LOCATION OF WIRELESS FACILITIES ON CITY FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 32-340. - Applicability. 
This division applies to the co-location of wireless facilities on city facilities within a public way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-341. - Wireless facilities franchise agreement required. 
No person shall co-locate wireless facilities on city facilities except pursuant to, and in accordance with the terms of, a wireless facilities franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-342. - Permit required. 
Any party to a wireless facilities franchise agreement who desires to co-locate wireless facilities on city facilities must first obtain a permit from the city engineer in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-343.1. - Application for permit; small cell facilities. 
(a)  The city engineer shall establish a standard application form for permits for the co-location of small cell facilities on city facilities within the public way under this section. 
(b)  Applicants may submit not more than 35 individual permit requests with each application. 
(c)  Applicants shall deliver applications to the city engineer or city engineer's designee together with an application fee. No application shall be reviewed unless and until the application fee has been paid. 
(d)  The application fee shall be $100.00 apiece for each of the first five individual permit requests included with a single application, plus $50.00 apiece for each additional individual permit request above five included with a single application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted October 22, 2019 renumbered § 32-343 as § 32-343.1.  
Sec. 32-343.2. - Application for permit; non-small cell facilities. 
(a)  The city engineer shall establish a standard application form for permits for the co-location of non-small cell facilities within the public way under this section. 
(b)  Applicants shall deliver applications to the city engineer or city engineer's designee together with an application fee. No application shall be reviewed unless and until the application fee has been paid. 
(c)  The application fee shall be $100.00 apiece for each individual permit request included with a single application. 
(Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-344. - Materials to be submitted with application. 
(a)  When filing an application, an applicant shall submit the applicant's name and a valid electronic mail address at which the applicant may be contacted; 
(b)  When filing an application, for each individual permit requested in the application, the applicant shall provide; 
(1)  The address and latitude/longitude of the city facility on which the wireless facility is intended to be co-located; 
(2)  Copies of any approvals for the site granted by a federal agency, including conditions imposed by that agency; 
(3)  A statement and supporting documentation confirming that the wireless facility and operation thereof will not materially interfere with other pre-existing communications facilities; 
(4)  Plans clearly depicting the dimensions and specifications of the wireless facility, including the antennae, base station, and all assorted wireless equipment; 
(5)  Detailed elevation drawings showing the co-location of the wireless facility, including the base station and all other associated equipment, on the city facility; 
(6)  A proposed construction schedule for the installation of the wireless facility; 
(7)  A statement affirming that, to the best of its knowledge, the wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider is not in breach of its wireless facilities franchise agreement; and 
(8)  Such additional materials as are listed on the application form established by the city engineer and are reasonably required by the city engineer to the extent permitted by law to determine the approvability of a permit in accordance with section 32-345. 
(c)  Any application not including all of the information listed in this section may be deemed incomplete by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-345. - Review and determination. 
(a)  The applicant shall provide such additional information as the city engineer may reasonably request to the extent permitted by law during review of the application. 
(b)  For small cell facilities, the application review process shall comply with section 32-314. 
(c)  The city engineer shall deny a permit if: 
(1)  The proposed wireless facilities do not comply with applicable law and the terms of the wireless facilities franchise agreement; 
(2)  The proposed wireless facilities have a negative aesthetic impact on the surrounding area, considering the size and design of the facilities and the historic, residential, or commercial character of the surrounding area; 
(3)  The proposed wireless facilities pose a risk to the public safety, including, but not limited to, public travel within the public way; 
(4)  The proposed wireless facilities are inconsistent with the city's existing or planned public safety communications system; 
(5)  The proposed wireless facilities pose a risk to the stability or efficacy of the city facility; 
(6)  The existing or planned uses of the city facility are inconsistent with the co-location of the proposed wireless facilities; 
(7)  The city engineer deems the city facility inappropriate for the co-location of the proposed wireless facilities; or 
(8)  Alternative, less impactful locations which reasonably meet the needs of the applicant are available for placement of the wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-346. - Permit conditions. 
Any permit granted under this section shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The permittee shall be solely responsible for all costs pertaining to the installation, placement, maintenance, replacement or removal of the wireless facility on or from the city facility; 
(b)  The permittee shall be responsible for repairing all damage to the city facility resulting from the installation, placement, maintenance, replacement or removal of the wireless facility on or from the city facility, or for paying the cost incurred by the city to repair the city facility; 
(c)  In addition to complying with the right-of-way permit requirements set forth in article II of chapter 32, the permittee shall notify the city engineer prior to performing any work on the installation, placement, maintenance, replacement or removal of wireless facilities on or from city facilities; 
(d)  Prior to authorizing the commencement of work for the co-location, the city engineer may require the permittee to provide a bond securing the cost of completion of the co-location and the permittee's obligations under this section 32-346 and section 32-347; 
(e)  The issuance of a permit for the co-location of a wireless facility on a city facility does not constitute a representation or warranty of the fitness of the city facility for the use intended by the co-location; 
(f)  The city reserves the right to remove any city facility at any time for the protection of the public health, safety or welfare, with or without notice to the owner of the co-located wireless facilities, and the city shall have no liability for any such removal; and 
(g)  Such other conditions as the city may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-347. - Construction of new city facility. 
If as part of the permitted co-location the applicant intends to construct a new city facility, whether to replace an existing city facility or otherwise, then (1) the new city facility shall be constructed in strict accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer, (2) the applicant shall not commence to install the wireless facility onto the new city facility until the city engineer has inspected and accepted the new city facility, and (3) the applicant shall execute such documents or instruments as the city may require to confirm city ownership of the new city facility to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Secs. 32-348—32-359. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PLACEMENT OF NEW WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES WITHIN THE PUBLIC WAY 
 
Sec. 32-360. - Applicability. 
This division applies to the placement of new wireless support structures within a public way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-361. - Wireless facilities franchise agreement required. 
No person shall place new wireless support structures within the public way except pursuant to, and in accordance with the terms of, a wireless facilities franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-362. - Permit required. 
Any party to a wireless facilities franchise agreement who desires to place new wireless support structures within the public way must first obtain a permit from the city engineer in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-363. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The city engineer shall establish a standard application form for permits under this section. 
(b)  The application fee shall be $250.00 apiece for each individual permit request included with a single application. No application shall be reviewed unless and until the application fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017)  
Sec. 32-364. - Materials to be submitted with application. 
(a)  When filing an application, an applicant shall submit the applicant's name and a valid electronic mail address at which the applicant may be contacted; 
(b)  When filing an application, for each individual permit requested in the application the applicant shall provide: 
(1)  The address and latitude/longitude of the location where the applicant intends to place the wireless support structure; 
(2)  Copies of any approvals for the site granted by a federal agency, including conditions imposed by that agency; 
(3)  A statement and supporting documentation confirming that the wireless facility to be attached to the wireless support structure and operation thereof will not materially interfere with other pre-existing communications facilities; 
(4)  Plans clearly depicting the location, dimensions and specifications, including materials, of the proposed wireless support structure; 
(5)  Plans clearly depicting the dimensions and specifications of the wireless facility or facilities to be attached to the wireless support structure, including the antennae, base station, and all assorted wireless equipment; 
(6)  Detailed elevation drawings showing the proposed wireless support structure and all wireless facilities to be attached thereto, including the base station and all other associated equipment; 
(7)  A statement affirming that, to the best of its knowledge, the wireless services provider or wireless infrastructure provider is not in breach of its wireless facilities franchise agreement; and 
(8)  Such additional materials as are listed on the application form established by the city engineer and are reasonably required by the city engineer to the extent permitted by law to determine the approvability of a permit in accordance with section 32-365. 
(c)  Any application not including all of the information listed in this section may be deemed incomplete by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-365. - Application review process. 
(a)  Provided applicant has provided a contact email address and paid the appropriate application fee, the city engineer or designee shall notify the applicant by email within ten days of application submittal if the application is incomplete. The notice shall specify why the application is considered incomplete. If the city engineer or designee does not so notify applicant, the application shall be deemed complete. 
(b)  During review of a complete application, the city engineer or designee may request applicant to provide additional information which is reasonably required to the extent permitted by law to determine the approvability of a permit in accordance with section 32-366. 
(c)  Within 90 days of submittal of a complete application, the city engineer or designee shall, for each individual permit request included in an application: (i) approve the individual permit request; (ii) deny the individual permit request in writing, including a written explanation of the reason[s] for denial. Except where the city and applicant have agreed upon an extension, any individual permit request not acted on within 90 days or such other period required by federal law shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted October 22, 2019, renamed § 32-365 from "review and determination" to "application review process" and renumbered §§ 32-366 and 32-367 as §§ 32-368 and 32-369.  
Sec. 32-366. - Basis for denial. 
The city engineer shall deny a permit if: 
(a)  The proposed wireless support structure or wireless facilities do not comply with applicable law and the terms of the wireless facilities franchise agreement; 
(b)  The proposed wireless support structure or wireless facilities have a negative aesthetic impact on the surrounding area, considering the size and design of the structure or facilities and the historic, residential, or commercial character of the surrounding area; 
(c)  The proposed wireless support structure or wireless facilities pose a risk to the public safety, including, but not limited to, public travel within the public way; 
(d)  The proposed wireless support structure or wireless facilities are inconsistent with the city's existing or planned public safety communications system; 
(e)  The proposed wireless support structure does not comply with the requirements of article IV of chapter 32; or 
(f)  Alternative, less impactful locations which reasonably meet the needs of the applicant are available for placement of the wireless facilities intended to be housed by the wireless support structure. 
(Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-367. - Notification of denial. 
If an application submitted under this division 5 is denied in whole or in part, the city engineer shall provide the applicant with a written statement of the reasons for the disapproval and, if the city engineer is aware of modifications to the proposed wireless support structure or wireless facilities that, if made, would result in approval, the city engineer shall identify the modifications in the written statement. 
(Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019)  
Sec. 32-368. - Permit conditions. 
Any permit granted under this section shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The permittee and the wireless support structure shall comply with all requirements applicable to street poles under article IV of chapter 32; and 
(b)  Such other conditions as the city may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019) 
Editor's note— See editor's note, § 32-366.  
Sec. 32-369. - Use by city. 
To the extent permitted by law, the city reserves the right to request the placement of city-owned communication and signal wires and other related equipment and facilities on all wireless support structures erected in its public ways, free of cost or expense to the city, provided that the city equipment and facilities do not interfere with the structural integrity of the wireless support structure and do not interfere with the use of the wireless support structure by the owner and other existing users. An applicant's refusal of a request shall not be considered as a factor in the review and approval or denial of a permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-108 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2017; Ord. No. 2019-75 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-22-2019) 
Editor's note— See editor's note, § 32-366.  
Chapter 33.1 - SUBDIVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 33.1-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia," or simply as the "subdivision ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the terms and provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the harmonious and economic development of the city; for the orderly subdivision of land and its development; for the orderly development of the general area surrounding such subdivision; for the coordination of streets within such subdivision with other existing or planned streets within the general area; for adequate provisions for drainage, flood control, light, air, protection of the waters of the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries, and other public purposes; for the adequate and proper installation of streets, drainage, sanitary sewers, water and other utilities and facilities; for the dedication to the city of land for streets, alleys or other public purposes or the transfer to the city of easements or other rights or privileges; and for the reservation for the city of land to be acquired for public facilities. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-3. - Compliance with chapter mandatory. 
(a)  No person shall subdivide land without making and recording a plat of subdivision and fully complying with the provisions of this chapter, except that condominiums or conversion condominium plats shall be prepared in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 55-79.58 and a copy of all documents filed with the state real estate commission shall also be filed with the planning director. 
(b)  No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the agent. 
(c)  No person shall sell or transfer any land of a subdivision before such plat has been duly approved and recorded as provided herein unless such subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of a subdivision ordinance applicable thereto; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the recordation of the instrument by which such land is transferred or the passage of title as between the parties to the instrument. Under no circumstances shall a subdivision of land be recorded by deed only. 
(d)  No clerk of any court shall file or record a plat of a subdivision required by this chapter until such plat has been approved by the agent as required herein. 
(e)  The requirements of this chapter shall be considered separate from, and supplementary to, any requirements otherwise specified by this Code or by state or federal law. Nothing contained herein shall excuse compliance with other applicable ordinances or laws. Where local requirements are in conflict with mandatory state or federal requirements, the state or federal requirements shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-4. - Authority. 
The planning commission and the planning director have been established and created pursuant to the provisions of chapter 2 and chapter 40.1 of this Code. Pursuant to the expressed provisions of said chapters, and in accordance with the specific provisions of this chapter, the planning commission, the planning director and the city engineer shall have the powers and duties necessary to carry out the functions assigned to them under this chapter and the Code of Virginia. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-5. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred or sold. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt any transaction from such penalties or from other remedies. Each and every day any violation of this chapter shall continue shall, except as otherwise provided, constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this chapter and by state law: 
(1)  To subdivide land without any and all necessary approvals under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, subdividing land shall include any efforts to subdivide land, however preliminary, including, but not limited to, selling or offering to sell part of such land; 
(2)  To engage in any development, use, construction or other activity of any nature in any way inconsistent with any subdivision plat, variance or other action approved under this chapter; 
(3)  To violate, by act or omission, any term, condition or qualification placed by the city upon a required subdivision plat or other approval under this chapter; 
(4)  To erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure or to use any land in violation or contravention of any zoning, subdivision or general regulation of this chapter or any amendment thereto; 
(5)  To continue any of the above stated violations. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-6. - Administration and enforcement of chapter. 
The agent is hereby delegated to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The agent shall be considered the agent of the governing body. Notwithstanding an appeal as provided for in section 33.1-9, approval or disapproval by the agent shall constitute approval or disapproval as though it were given by the governing body. The agent may consult with the commission on matters contained herein and may call for written opinions or decisions from other city departments, the transportation department, and the health department in considering details of any submitted plat. 
Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceeding pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-819, 15.2-2208 and 15.2-2209. 
(1)  The city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent violations of this chapter, or the unlawful use of land, to restrain, correct or abate such violations, to prevent the subdivision and/or use or occupancy of said land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises or land. 
(2)  Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or wherever in this chapter the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, the violation of same shall be punished as provided for in section 33.1-5. 
(3)  The city may stop work on any development, excavation, building or structure on any land on which there is or has been an uncorrected violation of a provision of this chapter or of a permit or other form of authorization issued hereunder in accordance with its powers to stop work under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(4)  The city shall have such other enforcement powers and remedies as are and as may from time to time be provided for or permitted by state law for the violation of a subdivision ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-7. - Effect of private contracts. 
This chapter bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction, and the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction is not implied herein to any public official. When this chapter calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contract, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-8. - Changes, erasures and revisions. 
No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat, nor on accompanying data sheets, after the agent has approved in writing the plat or sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the agent. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-9. - Subdivider may appeal from disapproval of plat. 
In the event a plat for subdivision is disapproved by the agent or commission, the subdivider may appeal to the governing body. The governing body may override the recommendation of the agent or commission and approve said plat. No appeal shall be made unless it is filed in writing with the clerk of the governing body within 30 days of disapproval by the agent or commission. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-10. - Plan and plat preparation by whom prepared. 
Each subdivision plan and plat shall be prepared by an individual duly qualified as set forth in title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-11. - How chapter may be amended. 
This chapter may be amended in whole or in part by the governing body. Any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the commission for recommendation prior to adoption. If no recommendation is received from the commission after 60 days from submission, the governing body may act without a recommendation. No such amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing having been held by the governing body. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-12. - Resubdivision same as subdivision. 
Any change in a recorded subdivision plat that modifies, creates or adjusts lot lines shall be approved in the same manner and under the same requirements as a new subdivision. This section applies to any subdivision plat of record, whether or not recorded prior to the adoption of a subdivision ordinance. Where a street, alley, easement for public passage or other public area laid out or described in such plat is affected, the plat shall be vacated pursuant to section 33.1-16 prior to resubdivision. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-13. - Restrictions on division or subdivision of lots within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. 
Subdividers shall submit a Chesapeake Bay Site Plan, in accordance with the requirements of chapter 9.1, for any subdivision that includes any land within a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area. The Chesapeake Bay Site Plan shall comply with all requirements of chapter 9.1. 
The plan shall also show the proposed location and general extent of planned improvements. Any minimum lot size shall be adjusted to ensure sufficient buildable area outside of the CBPA RPA as delineated, or in accordance with any exceptions granted in accordance with chapter 9.1 of the City Code. 
No subdivision shall be approved until the Chesapeake Bay administrator has certified that all lots within the subdivision can meet all requirements pertaining to Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. The final plat shall identify the nature and extent of all Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-14. - Reservation or control of land for prohibiting access. 
No land shall be reserved, held or controlled for the purpose of prohibiting access to streets unless owned, held or controlled exclusively by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-15. - Depth in dwelling districts established pursuant to zoning law. 
Lots in dwelling districts established by or pursuant to chapter [40.1] shall have an average depth of not less than 75 feet. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "average lot depth" shall be defined to require that a minimum of 50 percent of the width of a lot have a corresponding lot depth of not less than 75 feet. The planning commission may approve lots with less minimum average depth on Downtown zoned property. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 2012-52, § 1, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 33.1-16. - Vacation of recorded plat. 
Any recorded plat, or part thereof, may be vacated pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2271 through 15.2-2276, as amended. Any such vacation shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated and to divest all public rights in, and to reinvest to the owners, proprietors and trustee, if any, the title to the streets, alleys, easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in such plat. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-17. - Conformance to comprehensive plan. 
A proposed subdivision shall conform generally to the requirements of the comprehensive plan of the city. Substantial changes in land use as set forth in the comprehensive plan shall not be permitted unless approved by the city council, either by formal amendment to the plan or by some other action such as granting a zoning change which implies approval of such proposed change. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-18. - Construction and severability of provisions. 
This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate its purposes. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection of this chapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, including a declaration that it is contrary to the constitution of the commonwealth or of the United States, or if the application thereof to any government, agency, person or circumstance is held invalid, such judgment or holding shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection hereof, or the specific application hereof, directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment or holding shall have been rendered or made, and shall not in any way affect the validity of any other clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection hereof, or affect the validity of the application thereof to any other government, agency, person or circumstance. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-19. - Private streets declaration. 
If approved streets in a subdivision are not to be constructed to meet the standards necessary for inclusion in the secondary system of state highways, or are not to be dedicated to the City of Portsmouth, the subdivision plat and all deeds conveying lots in the subdivision, shall contain a statement advising that the streets in the subdivision shall not be maintained by the transportation department or the city, and where applicable, do not meet city and state design standards. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-20. - Fees. 
Fees, as identified in appendix A of the City Code, shall be charged to offset the cost of reviewing plats and plans, making inspections and other expenses incidental to the administration of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-21. - Saving provision. 
The adoption of this chapter shall not abate any pending action, liability or penalty of any person accruing or about to accrue, nor waive any right of the city under any provision in effect prior to the adoption of this chapter, unless expressly provided for in this chapter. Any subdivision plan which has received preliminary approval prior to the adoption of this chapter and for which a final plat is recorded within one year from the date of preliminary approval shall have vested rights under the ordinance in effect at the date of preliminary approval. Failure to record a plat within one year shall render the preliminary approval null and void. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-22. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter. 
Agent. The City of Portsmouth Director of Planning or his designee. 
Alley. A minor way designed to give vehicular access to the side and rear of properties whose principal frontage is on another street. 
Approved. The word "approved" shall be considered to be followed by the words "or disapproved," when the sense so requires. 
Arterial streets. A street specifically designed to move high volumes of traffic from collector streets through the city and not designed to serve abutting lots except indirectly through intersecting streets. Arterial streets shall include all U.S. Highways, state primaries with one-, two-, or three-digit numbers, state secondary roads with three-digit numbers, and any other street which the agent determines is functionally equivalent to these transportation department classifications. This definition shall not include three-digit-numbered streets which are part of a recorded subdivision or an extension thereof. 
Block. Land containing lots which are bounded by streets or a combination of conservation areas, streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroads, rights-of-way, shorelines or boundaries of the city. 
Building setback line. A line within a lot or parcel so designated on a recorded plat or as otherwise established by the Code, and that defines the building envelope. 
Building setback line, front. As defined by chapter 40.1. If the front property line is straight, the building setback line is a line parallel to the front property line; if the front property line is curved, the building setback line is a line parallel to any tangent of the front property line. 
Commission. The City of Portsmouth Planning Commission. 
Common open space. A parcel of land, an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a site designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents, occupants, and owners within that development in which ownership is held in common with other owners of that development. Common open space is not a buildable lot. 
Condominium. A building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structures, common area, and common facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
City attorney. The Portsmouth City Attorney or his designee. 
City engineer. The Portsmouth City Engineer or his designee. 
Cul-de-sac. A street with only one outlet having a circular or "T" turn-around for a safe and convenient reverse traffic movement. 
Easement. A right granted by a property owner permitting a designated part or interest of the property to be used by others for a specific use or purpose. 
Exception. Permission to depart from the design standards of this section. 
Fire chief. The Portsmouth Fire Chief or his designee. 
Geographic information system (GIS). Geographic information system owned and operated by the city. 
Governing body. The Portsmouth City Council. 
Health department. The Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Health or an authorized official, agent or employee thereof. 
Highly erodible soils. Soils (excluding vegetation) with an erodibility index (EI) from sheet and rill erosion equal to or greater than eight. The erodibility index for any soil is defined as the product of the formula RKLST, as defined by the "Food Security Act (F.S.A.) Manual" of August, 1988 in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, where K is the soil susceptibility to water erosion in the surface layer; R is the rainfall and runoff; LS is the combined effects of slope length and steepness; and T is the soil loss tolerance. 
Highly permeable soils. Soils with a given potential to transmit water through the soil profile. Highly permeable soils are identified as any soil having a permeability equal to or greater than six inches of water movement per hour in any part of the soil profile to a depth of 72 inches (permeability groups "rapid" and "very rapid") as found in the "National Soils Handbook" of July 1983, as amended, in the "Field Office Technical Guide" of the U.S. Department of Agricultural Soil and Conservation Service. 
Hydric soils. Soils that are saturated, flooded or ponded long enough during the growing seasons to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part, which are saturated for usually one week or more in the growing period and have the capacity to support hydrophytic vegetation. 
Impervious cover. A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents infiltration of water into the soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to: roofs, buildings, streets, parking areas, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
Improvements. All public and quasi-public utilities and facilities including, but not limited to, streets, sanitary sewers, waterlines, stormwater management and erosion control facilities, electrical service, monuments, signs, sidewalks and streetlights required by this chapter. 
Lot. A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main structure or group of main structures and accessory structures, together with such yards, open space, lot width, and lot areas as are required by Chapter [40.1], Zoning, either shown on a plat of record or considered as a unit of property and described by metes and bounds. A lot is synonymous with parcel or tract. 
Lot, corner. A lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection. Of the two sides of a corner lot, the front shall be deemed to be the shorter of the two sides fronting on streets. 
Lot, double frontage. An interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
Lot, flag. A lot which has a narrow appendage, not less than 16 feet in width, providing the required street frontage and through which access is provided to an enlarged portion of the lot typically located behind another lot that abuts the street. 
Lot, frontage. The minimum width of a lot measured along a street right-of-way from one side lot line to the other along a straight line. 
Lot, interior. Any lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot of record. A lot, a plat or description of which has been recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court. 
Lot, width. The width of a lot shall be measured at the required setback line as established by chapter [40.1]. 
Monument. An iron pipe a minimum of three-quarter inches in diameter with a 24-inch length or a five-eighths inches in diameter reinforcing bar with a 24-inch length driven three inches to nine inches below the surface of the adjacent ground or an alternate type as approved by the city surveyor. 
Plat. A map or plan for a tract or parcel of land meeting the requirements of this chapter which is to be or which has been subdivided. When used as a verb, "plat" is synonymous with "subdivide." 
Property. A unit or units of land of such size and dimensions that it may be subdivided into two or more lots. 
Public sewer. A sewer system owned and operated by the City of Portsmouth or the Hampton Roads Sanitation District Commission. 
Public water. A water system owned and operated by the City of Portsmouth. 
Resource management area (RMA). Resource management area as defined and regulated by chapter 9.1. 
Resource protection area (RPA). Resource protection area as defined and regulated by chapter 9.1. 
Right-of-way. The total width of land dedicated or reserved for public or restricted travel, including pavement, ditches, drainage facilities, curb ing, gutters, pipes, sidewalks, shoulders and land necessary for the maintenance thereof. The right-of-way may contain public or private utilities. 
Road, future or planned future right-of-way. Any road or similar transportation facility as shown on an approved plan of development or master plan or designated on the comprehensive plan, six-year primary or secondary road plan, or any road plan adopted by the governing body. 
Runoff. Precipitation which enters downstream waterways or properties. 
Septic tank system. An individual non-discharge system approved by the health department which contains all the necessary apparatus for treating wastewater including a sewage holding tank and areas identified for primary and reserve drainfields. 
Setback line. A line showing the closest point from a property line that a dwelling or principal structure may be constructed consistent with the zoning ordinance. 
Street. An existing or platted right-of-way dedicated for the use of the general public, or portions thereof, either accepted by the transportation department or approved as a private transportation system under the zoning ordinance. A street shall provide access to property by vehicular and pedestrian traffic for all purposes of travel transportation or parking to which it is adopted and devoted. This term is synonymous with road, lane, drive, avenue, right-of-way, highway, or any other thoroughfare. 
Street continuity. The combination of several design practices that require not only a grid street system be developed but that no area with more than 24 lots have only one ingress/egress path via public right-of-way. 
Subdivide. The division of property into two or more lots. 
Subdivider. An individual, corporation, partnership or other entity owning any property to be subdivided. 
Townhouse. A dwelling unit for single-family occupancy in a structure containing three or more such dwelling units not more than three stories in height, attached by one or more vertical party walls extending to the roof sheathing without passageway openings to one or more additional such units, and each of which is serviced by an individual exterior entrance or entrances. 
Transportation department. The Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Transportation or an authorized official, agent or employee thereof. 
Yard. The space which lies between the lot line and the nearest point of a structure. The minimum yard required is defined for each zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-23. - Exceptions. 
A.  Generally. The commission may grant an exception to any requirement of the chapter (except use, setback, number of parking spaces, size of parking spaces or any landscape requirements), subject to the following: 
(1)  No such exception shall be granted unless the subdivider petitions the commission in writing. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the exception and all the facts relied upon by the subdivider. The agent may require such additional information as he may deem necessary to process the request for the exception. 
(2)  The agent shall provide written notification of the exception request to all adjacent property owners. The notification shall adhere to the following requirements: 
(a)  Such notice shall specifically describe the exception requested and the date, time and location of the planning commission meeting first considering such request; and 
(b)  Such notice shall be mailed by the agent at least ten days before the planning commission meeting; and 
(c)  Evidence that such notice was sent by first class mail to the last known address as shown on the current real estate tax assessment book shall be deemed adequate compliance. 
(3)  The burden shall be on the subdivider to demonstrate the need for an exception. 
(4)  The commission shall not approve any exception unless it first receives a recommendation from the director of planning and unless it finds that: 
(a)  The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to public safety, health, or welfare, and will not adversely affect the property of others; 
(b)  The facts upon which the request is based are unique to the property and are not applicable generally to other property so as not to make reasonably practicable the formulation of general regulations to be adopted as an amendment to this chapter; 
(c)  No objection to the exception has been received in writing from the transportation department, city engineer, health department, or fire chief; and, either 
(d)  Strict adherence to the ordinance requirement will cause substantial injustice or hardship. The hardship or injustice is created by the unusual character of the property, including dimensions and topography, or by other extraordinary situation or condition of such property. Personal, financial, or self-inflicted hardship or injustice shall not be considered proper justification for an exception; or 
(e)  The exception will permit development to follow standards consistent with those commonly referred to as Traditional Neighborhood Development or New Urbanism. 
(5)  The commission in authorizing an exception may impose such reasonable conditions in addition to the regulations of this chapter as it may deem necessary in the public interest. The commission may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(6)  If granted, such exception shall be specifically stated in writing together with the supporting justifications and filed with the subdivision plan or such plat or plans deemed necessary by the agent. A note shall be prominently placed on the record plat detailing any exception so granted. 
B.  Special provisions for the waiver of certain requirements for commercial subdivisions. In a commercial subdivision, as provided for in section 33.1-26 of this chapter, the following may be eligible for a waiver from minimum lot area, minimum lot width, side yard requirements, and lot frontage requirements: 
The subdivision of commercial property on which commercial units for sale, for sale in condominium, or for lease are both: 
(a)  Constructed as part of a multiunit structure in which the units share common walls, or as part of a multiple-structure commercial development; and 
(b)  The entire development has been planned and designed as a comprehensive coordinated unit under a single master plan which has been approved via the site plan process. 
In these instances, the planning commission may grant, at their discretion, a waiver from minimum lot area, minimum lot width, side yard requirements, and lot frontage requirements upon finding that: 
(1)  The overall complex or structure, if considered as a single unit, meets all of the requirements of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance; and 
(2)  Adequate parking is provided as per the requirements of chapter 40.1 and, where determined necessary by the planning commission, adequate easements or other agreements are recorded to guarantee access and maintenance of the parking areas and other common areas; and 
(3)  Where determined necessary by the planning commission, adequate easements, or agreements are recorded to allow grouping of signs on one standard, placement of signs in common areas or other appropriate arrangements made necessary because of the reduced yard area of the individual units; and 
(4)  The complex or structure is adequately designed and serviced from the standpoint of safety, and that the fire chief certifies that the fire safety equipment to be installed is adequately designed and the building official certifies the complex is designed to conform to the applicable building code, so as to offer adequate protection to life and property; and 
(5)  In accordance with Section 108.1 of the Building Code, application has been made to the building official to evaluate whether or not movement of a lot line increases the hazard to or decreases the level of safety of an existing building or structure in comparison to the building code under which such building or structure was constructed; and that following review and approval of said application, the building official recommends approval of the subdivision and any and all improvements required therein shall be required as a condition of final subdivision plat approval; and 
(6)  The request is not otherwise contrary to the city's Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and/or Subdivision Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 2012-52, § 1, 9-25-2012)  
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTS TO BE FILED 
 
Sec. 33.1-24. - Preapplication conference and submission of conceptual plan. 
(a)  Before submittal of any preliminary or final subdivision plan for a subdivision, the applicant is advised to confer with the subdivision agent and such other agencies of the state and city as the agent deems advisable concerning the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  Prior to the submission of any major subdivision plan, the applicant or his representative is advised to submit three copies of a conceptual plan for review by the director of planning, or his designee; such action does not constitute the submission of a preliminary plan and is not to be construed as an application for approval in computing time limitations in relation thereto. The planning division shall transmit comments to the applicant within 21 calendar days of submittal of a plan which meets all applicable submittal criteria. 
(c)  The conceptual plan may be granted conceptual plan approval with conditions that should be satisfied prior to final plan approval; such action does not constitute final subdivision approval or preliminary plan approval. Submittal of a preliminary plan that does not incorporate the conditions set forth during the conceptual plan review period, shall be reviewed by the commission under the requirements of section 33.1-29. Unless required by the planning director, a re-submittal of conceptual plans shall not be necessary. 
(d)  Conceptual plans shall, at a minimum, show: 
(1)  Property lines. 
(2)  Existing and proposed building locations and orientation. 
(3)  Building locations on adjacent properties. 
(4)  Landscape areas/buffers. 
(5)  Entrances/exits/access to the site (vehicular, pedestrian, etc.). 
(6)  Proposed use of site. 
(7)  Building/landscape setbacks per zoning ordinance requirements. 
(8)  Site zoning and zoning of surrounding properties. 
(9)  Location of stormwater management facilities. 
(10)  Graphic scale. 
(11)  Existing and proposed easements (conservation, utility, etc.). 
(12)  Unique natural features (water features, wetlands, RPA, RMA, IDA, floodplain, etc.). 
(13)  List of currently binding proffers or use permit conditions. 
(14)  Location of entry sign(s). 
(15)  Topography of site. 
(e)  If the planning director determines that one or more of the above submittal requirements is not applicable to the proposed project, the planning director may waive those requirements. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-25. - Master plan. 
For multi-phased subdivisions, the subdivider shall submit to the agent a master plan for all phases of the proposed subdivision as part of the preliminary plan submittal. The purpose of such a master plan is to permit the agent to advise the subdivider whether his plans are generally in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The director, upon submission of any master plan, may study it and advise the subdivider where it appears that changes are appropriate. The agent may mark the master plan indicating appropriate changes. The subdivider shall return such master plan to the agent with each preliminary plan. The master plan shall, at a minimum, show the name, location and dimensions of all streets entering the property, adjacent to the property or terminating at the boundary of the property to be subdivided. 
It shall also show the location of all proposed streets, their category (e.g., arterial, collector, etc.) and any future extensions, lots, development phases, parks, playgrounds and other proposed uses of the land to be subdivided and their approximate dimensions and a conceptual layout of the water and sewer systems. The master plan is not binding on the subdivider or the governing body. 
Review of a master plan does not constitute final subdivision approval or preliminary plan approval. For multi-phased subdivisions reviewed under this section, review of a master plan does not, in any way, guarantee approval of future subdivision phases. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-26. - Classification of subdivisions. 
(a)  Minor subdivision. A minor subdivision shall be a division of a tract of land into fewer than ten lots abutting an existing public road within the city system of primary or secondary highways and which does not create a new street or extend an existing street. Pursuant to section 33.1-12, any plat that modifies, vacates, or adjusts property lines shall be considered a minor subdivision. 
Any contiguous or internal property owned by the same subdivider, or deemed by the agent as a logical part of a contiguous or internal subdivision, cannot be subdivided into greater than ten lots without being reviewed as, and meeting the requirements of, a major subdivision. 
(b)  Major subdivision. A major subdivision shall be a division of a tract of land into ten or more lots or any division which creates a new street or extends any existing street. However, where additional lots are being created for the sole purpose of permanent open space or common areas, the subdivision may be reviewed as, and meet the requirements of, a minor subdivision. 
(c)  Townhouse or condominium subdivision. A townhouse or condominium subdivision shall be a division of a tract of land into lots for townhouses or condominiums as shown on an approved site plan pursuant to the zoning ordinance. A preliminary or final plan shall include only those requirements for design and minimum improvements required by article III of this chapter deemed necessary by the agent. 
(d)  Commercial subdivision. A subdivision of land on commercial zoned property where additional lots are being created for the purpose of additional infill outparcels, especially in the instance of creating a buildable lot where excess surface parking lots are currently in existence, or for the purpose of creating lot lines for mortgage or refinancing purposes or where anchor tenants must be subdivided off from attached, in-line space. A preliminary or final plan shall be approved upon the granting of an exception by the planning commission as required by subsection 33.1-23(B) of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 2012-52, § 1, 9-25-2012)  
Sec. 33.1-27. - Procedure for preliminary plan review of minor subdivisions. 
(a)  The subdivider shall submit to the agent 12 copies of the preliminary subdivision plan for a minor subdivision and pay the appropriate subdivision plan review fee. 
(b)  Upon meeting all submittal requirements, the plan shall be reviewed by the agent and other agencies of the city and state as deemed necessary by the agent. The agent shall within 60 days approve or deny the subdivision plan and notify the subdivider of the action in writing. If a final plan is approved, such approval shall be in accordance with section 33.1-34. The agent shall certify such approval by signing the record plat. If a preliminary plan is approved, the agent shall include in the notification of preliminary approval all conditions required for final approval. If disapproved, the agent shall state in the notification to the subdivider the specific reasons for denial. The reasons for denial shall identify deficiencies in the plan which cause the disapproval by reference to specific duly adopted ordinances, regulations or policies, and shall generally identify such modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the plan. 
(c)  If the streets, drainage or utilities for the proposed minor subdivision are not fully improved as required by this chapter, the planning director shall require as conditions of the minor subdivision approval that: 
(1)  Curb, gutter, paving, sidewalks, drainage and utilities be improved to the standards for improvements currently applicable to a subdivision that is not a minor subdivision. These improvements shall be provided as required by sections 33.1-49 and 33.1-50. 
(2)  The city engineer also approves the proposed plat by affixing his signature thereto. Such signature shall not be affixed until the improvements required by sections 33.1-49 and 33.1-50 are installed or a bond or other security is posted and an agreement executed and filed with the city engineer in accordance with section 33.1-49. 
(3)  A parcel of land containing an existing residential structure may be subdivided so as to create one additional residential lot which shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 33.1-49 and 33.1-50, pertaining to installation of curbs and gutters, street and pavement widening and offsite drainage requirements, upon the following conditions: 
(i)  All provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city are met; and 
(ii)  Each parcel so subdivided must front on an existing, improved public street and the proposed subdivision of such parcel shall not require the extension of an existing public street or the construction of a new public street. 
(iii)  The exemption provided by this subsection shall be applied only one time to any qualified parcel of land. Any additional resubdivision of such parcels, or any part thereof, shall not be entitled to such exemption. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-28. - Resubdivision with no new improvements; procedure. 
(a)  The city council has determined that due to the configuration of nonconforming lots and structures on certain parcels of land intended and zoned for residential uses but which were subdivided prior to the enactment of land subdivision ordinances by the City of Portsmouth or Norfolk County, that property owners may be unable to develop such areas which in turn hinders overall redevelopment in Portsmouth. 
(b)  Therefore, the planning commission is hereby authorized to approve resubdivision plats covering such property even though the requirements of article III of this chapter pertaining to installation of curbs and gutters, street and pavement widening and off-site drainage have not been included. 
(c)  An applicant for resubdivision under this section shall prepare and submit a resubdivision plat as provided in this chapter and shall include a request for approval, stating that the resubdivision meets the requirements of this chapter for resubdivision of exempted property. A request made under this section shall in all other respects be submitted, processed, reviewed and approved in accordance with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-29. - Procedure for preliminary plan review for major subdivisions. 
(a)  The subdivider shall submit to the agent 12 copies of the preliminary subdivision plan for a major subdivision and pay the appropriate subdivision plan review fee. 
(b)  Upon meeting all submittal requirements, the plan shall be reviewed by the agent and other agencies of the city and state as deemed necessary by the agent. The agent shall prepare a composite report on the proposed subdivision to determine if it meets the requirements of this chapter and the zoning ordinance. The report shall include review requirements by other agencies. The preliminary plan and the agent's composite report shall be reviewed by the planning commission. 
(c)  The commission shall consider the plan and either grant preliminary approval or disapprove it within 60 days of submittal. The plan may be granted preliminary approval with conditions. The agent shall notify the applicant of the commission's findings in writing within seven days of the commission meeting. Such notice shall state any actions, changes, conditions or additional information that shall be required to secure final approval of the subdivision. If disapproved, the notice shall state the specific reasons for disapproval. The reasons for denial shall identify deficiencies in the plan which cause the disapproval by reference to specific duly adopted ordinances, regulations or policies, and shall generally identify such modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the plan. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-30. - Preliminary plan review—Submittal requirements; major and minor subdivisions. 
The preliminary plan for a minor or major subdivision shall be on a blue-line or black-line print. If more than one sheet is used, sheets shall be numbered in sequence and an index shall be provided on the first sheet. The preliminary plan for a minor or major subdivision shall include the following information: 
(a)  The name of the subdivision, owner, subdivider, and surveyor or engineer, the date of drawing, number of sheets, north arrow, graphic scale, legend for all symbols used, the names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent thereto, and the names of the owners of record of adjacent unsubdivided property. Meridian shown shall be based on City of Portsmouth geodetic control network. If shown on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. The preliminary plan shall also list any proffers or use permit conditions that affect the property. 
(b)  The location of the proposed subdivision on an inset map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet, showing adjoining roads, their names and numbers, subdivisions and other landmarks. 
(c)  A closed boundary survey, or existing survey of record, total acreage, acreage of subdivided area, existing buildings, existing graves, objects or structures marking a place of burial, names of owners and existing property lines within the boundaries of the tract and for adjacent properties thereto, proposed monuments, lots, lot numbers, lot areas, blocks, building setback and yard lines. The boundary survey shall conform to the requirements of Section 18VAC10-20-370 of the Code of Virginia. 
If any exceptions have been granted by the planning commission in accordance with section 33.1-23, the preliminary plan shall include a note detailing any exception so granted. In addition any use permit conditions, variances or proffers attached to the property shall also be noted. 
(d)  All existing, platted and proposed streets, both private and public, including their names, numbers and widths; existing and proposed utility or other easements, culverts, drains, watercourses, lakes, their names and other pertinent data. If the streets are to be private, the plan shall include a private streets declaration in accordance with section 33.1-19. 
(e)  Where plan includes or abuts any natural or artificial body of water, show the approximate high waterline, bulkhead and pierhead lines where officially established, top of bank and toe of slope, proposed elevations and slopes for grading, and FEMA flood map and floodplain information. 
(f)  Lot lines with dimensions and proposed setback lines; if a residential lot, the total number, type, and density per type of dwelling units to be placed thereon if more than one. 
(g)  All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use, and the conditions, if any, of such dedication. 
(h)  A statement that appropriate erosion and sediment control methods shall be utilized prior to any clearing, grading or construction. 
(i)  The preliminary plan for a major subdivision shall contain a copy of conceptual plan reviewed under the requirements of section 33.1-24. 
(j)  Prior to application for final approval, the subdivider shall also submit to the city engineer and/or director of public utilities and secure approval of engineering development plans for those physical improvements set forth in sections 33.1-49 and 33.1-50 in accordance with the following: 
i.  Such plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor in the Commonwealth of Virginia and shall be complete, showing all essential details of the construction of the improvements at a scale generally acceptable to the city engineer. 
ii.  The city engineer and/or the director of public utilities shall examine such plans and determine whether they meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance in chapter 40.1 and this chapter and whether they are in accord with sound engineering principles. The subdivider shall then be advised of their approval, disapproval or any change that might be necessary to merit approval. 
iii.  Approval of the development plans by the city engineer or the director of public utilities does not constitute a guarantee of approval of the final plat. 
iv.  Such plan shall show existing and proposed sidewalks. 
v.  A drainage plan showing the proposed drainage system including all open ditches, closed storm drain pipes and stormwater management facilities proposed to convey the subdivision drainage to an adequate channel. The plan shall include sizes of all pipes and ditches, types of pipes and ditch linings, drainage easements and construction details of any stormwater management facilities. Drainage calculations shall be submitted with a drainage area map to verify the design of the drainage system including the adequacy of the channel receiving drainage from the proposed subdivision. 
vi.  For multi-phased subdivisions, a drainage area map shall be provided with drainage calculations for all phases of the subdivision to determine the adequacy of receiving channels. If receiving channels are not adequate, the map shall include the location of proposed stormwater management facilities. 
vii.  The drainage plan shall include the topographic plan and a soil map of the site. The topographic plan submittal requirements vary depending on the location of the proposed development. 
viii.  An erosion control plan showing the location, type and details of proposed erosion and sediment control devices to be used during and after construction. The plan shall meet all requirements of the erosion and sediment control ordinance and shall be provided at a scale of 100 feet to the inch except in cases where the city engineer approves an alternate scale. The plan shall show existing and proposed contours at intervals of no more than five feet. 
ix.  Cross-sections showing the proposed street construction, depth and type of base, type of surface, compaction, shoulders, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, bikeways, side ditches and other features of the proposed streets. 
x.  Street profiles showing the proposed grades for the streets and drainage facilities, including elevations of existing and proposed ground surface at all street intersections and at points of major grade change along the centerline of streets, together with proposed connecting grade lines therewith. 
xi.  Size and location of existing sanitary sewer and water facilities; location and method of proposed connections to existing sewer and water facilities; size and location of proposed sewer and water facilities showing location of proposed water meters, gate valves, fire hydrants, fittings, manholes, sewer laterals and cleanouts; grinder pump locations; profile views of water and sewer mains with manhole rim and invert elevations and percent of slope; sewage pump station location, design and details; and water well facility location, design and details. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-31. - Preliminary plan review—Submittal requirements; townhouse and condominium subdivisions. 
The preliminary plan for a townhouse or condominium subdivision shall be on a blue-line or black-line print. 
If more than one sheet is used, sheets shall be numbered in sequence and an index on the first sheet shall be provided. The preliminary plan shall include the following information: 
(a)  The name of the subdivision, owner, subdivider and surveyor or engineer, the date of drawing, number of sheets, north arrow and scale. Meridian shown shall be based on City of Portsmouth geodetic control network. The plan shall also list any proffers or use permit conditions that affect the property. 
(b)  Location of the proposed subdivision on an inset map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet, showing adjoining roads, their names and numbers, subdivisions and other landmarks. 
(c)  A closed boundary survey, or existing survey of record, total acreage, acreage of subdivided area, existing buildings, existing graves, objects or structures marking a place of burial, names of owners and existing property lines within the boundaries of the tract and for adjacent properties thereto, proposed monuments, lots, lot numbers, lot areas, blocks, building setback and yard lines. 
If any exceptions have been granted by the planning commission in accordance with section 33.1-23, the plan shall include a note detailing any exception so granted. 
(d)  All existing, platted and proposed streets, including their names, numbers and widths; existing and proposed utility, drainage or other easements, public areas and parking spaces; culverts, drains and watercourses, lakes, their names and other pertinent data. If the streets are to be private, the plan shall include a private streets declaration in accordance with section 33.1-19. 
(e)  All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use and conditions of such dedication. 
(f)  Flood map, floodplain, and Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-32. - Effect of approval of preliminary plan. 
Approval by the commission or the agent of the preliminary plan shall not constitute a guarantee of approval by the agent of the final plat. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-33. - Term of validity for the preliminary plan and extension. 
(a)  The subdivider shall have no more than 365 days from the date of approval of the preliminary plan to record a final subdivision plat in accordance with this chapter. A final plan shall be submitted and approved pursuant to section 33.1-34 prior to recordation. Failure to record a final plat within the specified time period shall make preliminary approval null and void. The agent may, on written request by the subdivider, grant one or more extensions of preliminary approval for a period of one year upon finding: 
(1)  That progress has been made in the project as defined by: 
a.  The subdivider has substantially satisfied all conditions of preliminary approval; 
b.  There has been no significant change in comprehensive plan policy or City Code requirements that affect the property; and 
c.  The project has progressed without being cited for any construction-related violation of the City Code or, in the event such violation has occurred, it has been corrected in a timely manner; or 
(2)  There have been unusual delays in proceeding with the subdivision process or construction caused by government agencies or acts of God. 
(b)  If a subdivider records a final plat, which may be a section of a subdivision as shown on an approved preliminary plan, and furnishes to the city a certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit in an amount and form acceptable to the city for the estimated cost of construction of the facilities to be dedicated within said section for public use and maintained by the locality, the commonwealth or other public agency, the developer shall have the right to record the remaining sections shown on the preliminary plan for a period of five years from the recordation date of the first section. Such right shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the Code of Virginia and subject to engineering and construction standards and the zoning ordinance requirements in effect at the time that each remaining section is recorded. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-34. - Procedure for approval of final plat. 
Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the agent, the subdivider shall submit two reproducible copies plus eight prints of the record plat to the agent for review and approval. 
The record plat shall not be approved until the applicant: 
(1)  Has complied with the requirements and minimum standards of design set forth in this chapter; 
(2)  Has incorporated such changes or complied with such conditions on the final plan as may have been stipulated in the letter of notification following action by the commission or agent on the preliminary plan; and 
(3)  Has made satisfactory arrangements for performance assurances as specified in article III of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-35. - Final plat—Submittal requirements. 
The final plat for a subdivision shall be on blue-line or black-line print. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a professional engineer or land surveyor licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. The size of the record plat shall not be smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches or larger than 18 inches by 24 inches. If more than one sheet is used, sheets shall be numbered in sequence and an index shall be provided. If several sheets are necessary, they shall all be of the same size and match points shall be clearly indicated. In addition to the requirements for a preliminary plat, the final plat for a subdivision shall also include the following: 
(a)  The accurate location and dimensions by bearings and distances, including all curve data, for all lots, and street lines and centerlines of streets and easements and other rights-of-way. Reference must be made to known permanent monuments, and, where required by the city engineer, to the state system of plane coordinates. Linear distances shall be in feet and decimals correct to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot. All dimensions, both linear and angular, shall be determined by an accurate control survey, which must close and balance with angular measurements correct to the nearest second. Meridian shown shall be based on City of Portsmouth geodetic control network. 
(b)  The data of all curves along the street frontage shall be shown in detail at the curve or in a curve data table containing the following: delta, radius, arc, tangent, chord and chord bearings. 
(c)  When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of these tracts shall be indicated by dashed lines, and the identification of the respective tracts shall be shown on the plat. 
(d)  Name and location of subdivision, name and address of record owner and subdivider, date of drawing, true north point, scale and a location map with a minimum scale of 1,000 feet to the inch. 
(e)  Name and right-of-way width and length of each street or other rights-of-way. 
(f)  Location, dimensions and purpose of any easements. 
(g)  Designating numbers or symbols for all lots and blocks. 
(h)  In the case of the resubdivision of existing recorded lots, existing lot lines shall be shown by dotted lines and the resubdivision by full lines, unless the requirement for dotted lines is waived by the planning commission. 
(i)  Location and description of new monuments (cross ref. section 33.1-48 for requirements). 
(j)  The zoning designation of all lots, including, but not limited to, residential, commercial or industrial areas, community facilities, recreational areas and usable open space. All parcels of land dedicated or reserved for public use, the use for which dedicated or reserved, and the conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation. 
(k)  Minimum building setback lines on all lots; widths and names of abutting roads, streets and alleys; names of record owners of adjoining unplatted land; reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by record name, date and map book reference. 
(l)  Street address numbers for each lot as assigned. 
(m)  Natural or noteworthy features to be preserved, tidal wetlands and Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas; and FEMA Flood Map information, including proposed minimum finished floor elevations for any lot which contains or is adjacent to a flood hazard district. 
(n)  Total area, usable area and unusable area in acres of each parcel or lot created. 
(o)  Reference to common or shared easements conveyed to public service corporations furnishing cable television, gas, telephone and electrical service to the subdivision. Such easements on the final plat shall include reference to a declaration of terms and conditions agreed to by such public service corporations and recorded in the land records of the city. 
(p)  A certification of each owner's consent duly acknowledged before a licensed notary public in the following format: 
Owner's Certificate 
The platting or dedication of the following described land (here insert a correct description of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any. 
_______ 
Date 	_______ 
Signature 
_______ 
Name printed 	
 
Certificate of Notarization 
Commonwealth of Virginia 
City/County of (Name) 
I, (Name Printed), a Notary Public in and for the City/County and State aforesaid, do hereby certify that the persons whose names are signed to the foregoing writing have acknowledged the same before me in the City/County aforesaid. 
Given under my name this _______ day of _______, (Year) _______. 
_______ 
(Signature) 
My commission expires _______. 
Notary registration number: _______. 
(q)  Certificates signed by the surveyor or engineer setting forth the source of title of the owners of the land subdivided, the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title, and that the subdivision conforms to all requirements of the ordinances of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia, in the following format: 
Certificate of Source of Title 
The property shown on this plat was conveyed by (previous owner) to (current owner) by (type of instrument), dated (date) and recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the (locality) in Deed Book (number), Page (number) or Instrument (number). 
Engineer or Surveyor's Certificate 
I hereby certify that, to the best of my knowledge or belief, this plat complies with all of the requirements of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia, regarding the platting of subdivisions within the City. 
_______ 
Date 	_______ 
Signature 
_______ 
Name printed 	
 
(r)  Certificate of approval as follows: 
Certificate of Approval 
This subdivision is approved by the undersigned in accordance with existing subdivision regulations and may be admitted to record. 
_______ 
Date 	_______ 
Director of 
Planning 
_______ 
Date 	_______ 
City Engineer 
 
(s)  If the subdivided property contains wetlands and/or resource protection areas, there shall be a note on the plat which states the following: 
"Wetlands and land within resource protection areas and associated buffers shall remain in a natural undisturbed state except for those activities permitted by Chapter 9.1 of the City of Portsmouth City Code." 
(t)  The plat shall include the following note: 
"Unless otherwise noted, all drainage easements designated on this plat shall remain private." 
(u)  If the streets are to be private, the plat shall include a private streets declaration in accordance with section 33.1-19. 
(v)  If any exceptions have been granted by the planning commission in accordance with section 33.1-23, the plat shall include a note detailing any exception so granted. 
(w)  In addition to the above requirements, a digital copy of the subdivision plat in a format approved by the city surveyor shall be submitted for any major subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-36. - Plats for minor subdivisions. 
The submission requirements for a minor subdivision shall be the same as are set forth in this article for all subdivisions, except that the planning director may, in his discretion, alter or amend the submittal requirements if in his judgment the proposed subdivision will be certified as a minor subdivision. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-37. - Condominium plats. 
Condominiums and conversion condominiums, as defined herein, shall be required to submit to the planning commission condominium or conversion condominium plats prepared in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 55-79.58 and a copy of all documents filed with the state real estate commission. Said plat and documents shall be subject to approval as required by this chapter for subdivision plats. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-38. - Term of validity for the final plan. 
The subdivider shall record the approved record plat in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the city within 180 days after approval thereof; otherwise, such approval shall become null and void. However, in any case where construction of facilities to be dedicated for public use has commenced pursuant to an approved plan or permit with an approved and accepted surety per the requirements of this chapter, the time for plat recordation shall be extended to one year after final approval or to the time limit specified in the surety agreement, whichever is greater. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN AND MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 33.1-39. - Unsuitable land. 
Land which the planning commission has found to be unsuitable for subdivision due to flooding, bad drainage, or other features likely to be harmful to the safety, welfare, and general health of the future residents, and which the planning commission considers appropriate for subdivision, shall not be subdivided, unless adequate remedies are formulated by the developer and approved by the city engineer and the planning commission. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-40. - Reservation of land. 
(a)  When a site for a proposed school, library, fire station, park, playground or other public building or facility shown in the comprehensive plan is located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, reservation of such area shall be required. 
(b)  Any reservation of land for public acquisition and use as required by this provision shall be void if not executed within ten years from the date of recordation unless the city council shall earlier release such reservation. 
(c)  Required reservations shall not exceed 25 percent of the total subdivision area unless the developer agrees to reserve a higher percentage. The acquisition price of such reserved sites shall be based upon the fair market value of such site at the time of recordation and shall be an express element of the subdivision agreement. The subdivision shall also be reimbursed annually by the city for such reservation at a rate of six percent of the acquisition price from the date of recordation until the date of acquisition or release of the reserved land. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-41. - Preservation of noteworthy features. 
In all subdivisions, to the maximum degree reasonably possible, efforts shall be made to preserve historic sites, scenic points, trees and other desirable natural growths, watercourses and other water areas, and other features worthy of preservation. Such preserved features shall be noted on the final plat. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-42. - Street and block layout. 
Street and block layout shall conform to the most advantageous development of adjoining areas, and the entire neighborhood, and shall provide for the following: 
(a)  Street continuity of appropriate streets. 
(b)  Streets shall intersect at right angles, or as nearly as possible with a minimum tangent of 100 feet prior to intersection streets classified as collector streets or higher. When two local streets intersect a minimum 50-foot tangent section shall be provided. 
(c)  Street or right-of-way jogs or off-sets shall be prohibited unless required by the city engineer. 
(d)  Less than full width streets, public or private, shall not be permitted unless required to provide access in accordance with plans approved by the planning commission. 
(e)  No major subdivision of more than 24 lots may be approved that provides only one access point. Should topography conditions exist, the planning commission may grant an exception based on the unique situation and provisions by the subdivider that additional safeguards will be utilized. Dead-end streets for subdivisions of less than 24 lots shall be avoided but if necessary a cul-de-sac must be provided. 
(f)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access and off-street loading adequate for the uses proposed. 
(g)  For residential lots fronting on major arterial highways, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, or such other treatment as may be necessary for protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(h)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, such as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirement of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(i)  The length, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(j)  The length of residential blocks shall generally not exceed 450 feet in length nor wider than 240 feet. 
(k)  Walks or pedestrian ways at a mid-block point may be required when determined to be essential by the planning commission to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, etc. 
(l)  The use of access control strips except for reasons of traffic safety shall be discouraged. 
(m)  No street intersections shall include more than four street approaches. 
(n)  Where two streets intersect a common street, the minimum distance between their rights-of-way shall be no less than 250 feet measured along the centerline of such common street. Should the two streets be a low volume local street with average daily traffic less than 1,500 vehicle trips per day, the minimum spacing between streets entering from opposite sides of the major street should be no less than 125 feet. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-43. - Rights-of-way and easements. 
(a)  Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, streets and street widths shall be designed in accordance with the Traditional Neighborhood Design provisions contained within the Virginia Department of Transportation's Subdivision Street Design Guide, as last amended, and the City of Portsmouth Master Transportation Plan. 
(b)  All dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way as approved by the city engineer. Unless future plans call for the creation of a cross street, a "T"-shaped turning space shall be avoided. 
(c)  Temporary dead-end streets (streets carried to boundary of tract for future extension of adjoining property) may be provided with a "T"-shaped turning space in the place of the required turning circle. 
(d)  Easements across the entire length of lots, even if a part of the lot is underwater or part of a natural watercourse, or centered on rear or side lot lines, shall be provided for utilities and surface drainage where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide. The plat shall clearly state that it is the obligation of abutting property owners to keep all drainage ditches open along said easements. 
(e)  In the event streets in a subdivision will not be constructed to meet the standards necessary for state street maintenance moneys to be paid to the city, the planning commission may require that the subdivision plat and all approved deeds of subdivision, or similar instruments, contain a statement advising that the streets in the subdivision do not meet state standards and will not be maintained by the city. In addition, the developer shall provide a financial commitment in the form as required by section 33.1-49 to provide for such street maintenance until such time as the city releases said commitment. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-44. - Grades and curves and design of streets. 
(a)  Minimum longitudinal street grades shall be 0.30 percent. 
(b)  Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, the design of streets and the radii of curvature on the centerline of streets shall be designed in accordance with the Traditional Neighborhood Design provisions contained within the Virginia Department of Transportation's Subdivision Street Design Guide, as last amended, and the City of Portsmouth Master Transportation Plan. 
(c)  A tangent at least 400 feet long shall be provided between reverse curves on arterial streets, 100 feet on collector streets. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-45. - Intersections. 
For subdivision purposes, the planning commission may permit chords in the place of rounded corners. Street curbs at intersections shall be designed in accordance with the Traditional Neighborhood Design provisions contained within the Virginia Department of Transportation's Subdivision Street Design Guide, as last amended, and the City of Portsmouth Master Transportation Plan. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-46. - Lots. 
(a)  The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location and for the type of development contemplated. The width, depth and area of each proposed lot shall be consistent with those in the immediate vicinity of the subdivision. Each proposed lot shall be oriented in a manner consistent with the existing platting pattern in the neighborhood. 
(b)  Where no public sewer is available, the average width shall not be less than 75 feet and the area not less than 10,000 square feet for each dwelling unit. 
(c)  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(d)  Corner lots for residential use shall be platted ten feet wider than interior lots, if necessary, to permit appropriate building setbacks on both streets. 
(e)  Lots having frontage on two streets (except corner lots), and reverse frontage lots abutting on an arterial or collector street with frontage on a lesser street, shall be avoided. 
(f)  Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right-of-way line of the street on which the lot faces. 
(g)  The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with frontage on a public street. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the provisions of the zoning ordinance, no lot shall be created by subdivision which has a street frontage of less than 16 feet. 
(i)  Minimum average depth of residential lots shall be 75 feet. The planning commission may approve lots with less minimum average depth in downtown neighborhoods. 
(j)  Flag lots may be permitted if the proposed flag lot makes it possible to better utilize an irregularly shaped property or if the flag lot is used to eliminate direct access to a collector or an arterial street. In all cases, the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  The flag lot shall not access an arterial street. 
(2)  No part of the flag lot's access to the street (the "flagpole" or "panhandle") shall be less than 16 feet in width for residentially zoned lots and 50 feet in width for non-residentially zoned lots. 
(3)  The front property line of a flag lot shall not abut the side yard of an adjacent lot. 
(4)  The strip of land used for access to the main portion of the flag lot (the "flagpole" or "panhandle") shall not be included in calculating the area of the lot for the purpose of determining compliance with the dimensional requirements of this chapter or chapter 40.1 of this Code, nor shall any part of the "flagpole" or "panhandle" be considered to be the front yard. 
(5)  No more than ten percent of the lots, in subdivisions which create ten or more lots, may be flag lots. 
(k)  Lot size. The minimum lot size shall be in accordance with the zoning ordinance provided, however that whenever there shall be plans in existence, approved by either the transportation department or by the governing body, for the widening, extension, or construction of any street or highway, the commission may require additional setbacks and yards for any new construction or for any structures altered or remodeled adjacent to the future planned right-of-way in order to preserve and protect the planned future right-of-way for such proposed street or highway. 
(l)  Lot arrangements, design and shape. The lot arrangement, design and shape shall be related to the topography such that each lot has: 
(1)  An acceptable building site in compliance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Suitable access to the building site from an approved street. Unusually shaped or elongated lots, as determined by the agent, established primarily for the purpose of providing minimum square footage shall not be permitted. 
(m)  Lot location. Each lot shall abut and have access to a proposed public street to be dedicated by the subdivision plat or to an existing publicly dedicated street, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter. If the existing streets do not meet the minimum city width requirement, including adequate right-of-way to accommodate the appropriate pavement width, drainage, sidewalks and bikeways, the subdivider shall dedicate adequate right-of-way necessary for the street to meet such minimum requirement. 
(n)  Lot remnants. Remnants of lots not meeting minimum lot requirements shall not generally be created by the subdividing of a tract. All such remnants shall be added to adjacent lots or, as approved by the agent, identified as common open space or natural open space. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-47. - Graves or places of burial. 
When any grave, object or structure marking a place of burial is located on the land proposed for subdivision, such grave, object or structure shall be identified on any plans or site plans or subdivision plans required by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-48. - Monuments. 
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners and at the tangent point of curves connecting intersecting street lines, at the points of curvature and tangency in curved street lines, and at all corners in the exterior boundary of the subdivision, and at such other points as may be designated by the city engineer. Monuments shall be set six inches below finished grade, shall be left visible for final acceptance inspection, and shall be either: 
(1)  Precast concrete, 30 inches in length, six inches square or eight inches in diameter, with a metal pin imbedded therein; 
(2)  A steel or iron pin five-eighths of an inch in diameter, set in poured concrete, at least 18 inches deep and ten inches square; or 
(3)  All lot corners shall be monumented with steel pins five-eighths-inch diameter set six inches below finished grade. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-49. - Utility and street improvements. 
(a)  In subdivisions, or parts of subdivisions, improvements shall be provided by the subdivider as follows: 
(1)  Streets shall be graded to the full width and shall be designed in accordance to the approved cross-sections and profiles and the Traditional Neighborhood Design provisions contained within the Virginia Department of Transportation's Subdivision Street Design Guide, as last amended, and the City of Portsmouth Master Transportation Plan. 
(2)  The pavement base and surface of streets shall be appropriate to the type of development and type of use contemplated and shall be installed in accordance with standards and specifications of the city. The thickness of base and pavement shall be determined by actual soil bearing tests of the California Bearing Ratio type or its equivalent (performed at the expense of the subdivider by an approved testing laboratory at locations specified by the city engineer) and by anticipated traffic loading methods developed by the Asphalt Institute or the Portland Cement Association. 
(3)  A drainage system shall be provided to ensure adequate drainage of both natural and stormwater. The system shall be constructed and installed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. The subdivider shall be required to install necessary drainage facilities outside the property limits of the land owned or controlled by the subdivider but necessitated, at least in part, by the construction or improvement of the subdivision. 
(4)  Curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city engineer and shall be designed in accordance with the Traditional Neighborhood Design provisions contained within the Virginia Department of Transportation's Subdivision Street Design Guide, as last amended, and the City of Portsmouth Master Transportation Plan. The use of valley gutters shall be avoided. 
(5)  Water lines shall be installed by the subdivider in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the director of public utilities. The subdivider shall be required to install necessary water facilities outside the property limits of the land owned or controlled by the subdivider but necessitated, at least in part, by the construction or improvement of the subdivision. 
(6)  Sanitary sewerage shall be installed by the subdivider in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the director of public utilities. The subdivider shall be required to install necessary sanitary sewage facilities outside the property limits of the land owned or controlled by the subdivider but necessitated, at least in part, by the construction or improvement of the subdivision. 
(7)  Sidewalks, at least five feet in width, shall be installed on both sides of all arterial and collector streets. Sidewalks, at least five feet in width, shall be installed along all street frontage planned for apartments or townhouses. Sidewalks, at least five feet in width, shall be required along one side of all minor and cul-de-sac streets; however, the planning commission may reduce or eliminate the requirements on any minor street, as defined in section 33.1-2 of the City Code, or cul-de-sac. The commission must find that such reduction will not create a pedestrian safety hazard. Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with plans and specifications of the city and must include ramps for wheelchair access at all intersections in accordance with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and in accordance with any revisions approved by the Federal Highway Administration. 
(8)  Standard city street signs shall be installed at all street intersections. 
(9)  Necessary traffic-control devices, including, but not limited to, traffic signals or traffic signs which are required within the subdivision or adjacent thereto and which are approved by the traffic engineer, shall be installed. 
(10)  Street lights shall be installed by the subdivider in accordance with the standards and specifications approved by the traffic engineer. The subdivider shall pay the cost of installation thereof and all costs to be incurred for the operation and maintenance thereof during the first year following the completion of installation. 
(11)  Bridge widths shall be designed to the ultimate right-of-way width. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of bridges unless waived by the city engineer. Timber construction, including timber pilings, shall not be permitted. Bridges shall be designed for H-20 loading (minimum). Architectural and ornamental work on bridges shall be compatible with the area in which the bridge is located and approved by the city engineer. 
(12)  Culverts shall be designed in accordance with the Virginia Department of Transportation design standards and details. Endwalls shall be provided as required by the city engineer and shall conform to Virginia Department of Transportation standards or city standards. The developer shall provide for soil bearing investigations to determine foundation requirements. Pilings for culvert support shall be provided if needed. Ample waterway shall be provided for in culvert design, based on five-year storm recurrence and the drainage area served by the culverts. When requested by the city engineer, the developer shall provide calculations for major culverts and bridge crossings which shall be based on a 25-year frequency to ensure that no flood hazard will result to the public rights-of-way or to residences or other structures. 
(13)  For the purpose of creating residential lots on existing streets, the planning director may modify or waive the street grading, pavement base, surface and curb and gutter requirements on an existing street constructed without such required improvements if: 
a.  The city has no plans to install such improvements on the street within the next ten years; 
b.  The street is currently improved or will be improved to a standard equivalent to similar streets in the neighborhood; 
c.  After consultation with the city engineer, a determination is made that the street will provide adequate and safe access and drainage to existing and future residents in accordance with the purposes of the subdivision ordinance; and 
d.  The real property for which the waiver or modification is sought contains no more than five new, adjacent lots. 
Any such waiver or modification shall not apply to required drainage improvements except for curbs and gutters. 
(b)  All engineering calculations, including soil test results, shall be furnished to the city engineer with required submittals. Approval by the city engineer shall not release the developer from the requirements for a safe and functional design. 
(c)  The developer shall be required to furnish all other data pertaining to bridges and culverts which shall be deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
(d)  The cost of all physical improvements required by the provisions of this section shall be paid by the subdivider. If the actual installation of improvements is not completed prior to the application made for final plat approval, the subdivider shall execute and file with the city engineer an agreement and bond in an amount equal to the estimated costs (as established by the city) of such improvements, plus ten percent, guaranteeing that the required improvements will be properly and satisfactorily installed within a reasonable length of time, but, in no event, more than two years. An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank in a form approved by the city attorney or a deposit of funds in escrow may be accepted in lieu of bond under the same terms and conditions applicable to bonds. The bond, letter of credit or deposit may be released by the city when specific improvements covered by the bond have been completed and approved by the city engineer as being in accordance with city standards and specifications. 
(e)  Upon written request by the subdivider to the city engineer, periodic partial releases of the bond, letter of credit, escrow or other performance guarantee may be made in an accumulative amount equal to no less than 80 percent of the original amount of such bond, letter of credit, escrow or other performance guarantee. Periodic partial releases shall be based upon the percentage of facilities completed and accepted by the city engineer. Periodic partial releases may not occur before the completion of at least 30 percent of the facilities. The city engineer shall not be required to approve more than three periodic partial releases in any 12-month period. Within 30 days after receipt of a written notice from the subdivider for a periodic partial release or a final complete release of any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee, the city engineer shall notify the subdivider of approval or nonapproval of such requests or of any specific defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures. If no such notice is provided to the subdivider within the two-year period, the periodic partial release shall be deemed approved. No final release shall be granted until after expiration of said two-year period and there is an additional request in writing sent by certified mail, return receipt, to the city manager. If no action is taken within ten days from the receipt of this request, then the final release of the bond, letter of credit, escrow or other performance guarantee shall be deemed approved. 
(f)  Upon acceptance of improvements, the subdivider shall execute and file with the city engineer a maintenance bond equal to ten percent of the total cost of the public improvements installed for the subdivision. The subdivider shall be responsible for all maintenance or repairs for the public improvements as required by the city engineer for a period of one year after acceptance of such improvements. 
(g)  In those instances in which any of the improvements as required by this section could be more conveniently installed by the city or its agent, the city may, in its discretion, accept payment of the total cost of such improvements in lieu of actual construction or bond as required above. Such payment will be set forth in an agreement approved by the city attorney, which agreement will set forth the conditions of payment and a time limit upon the use of such payment by the city, such time limit in no instance to exceed ten years. If such payment is not utilized by the city within the agreed time limit, it will revert to the subdivider. 
(h)  If a subdivider makes an advance of payments for or construction of reasonable and necessary road improvements located outside the property limits of the land owned or controlled by the subdivider, the need for which is substantially generated and reasonably required by the construction or improvement of the subdivision or development, and such advance is accepted, the city may agree to reimburse the subdivider from such funds as the city may make available for such purpose from time to time for the cost of such advance together with interest, which shall be excludable from gross income for federal income tax purposes, at a rate equal to the rate of interest on bonds most recently issued by the city on the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The city shall determine or confirm that the road improvements were substantially generated and reasonably required by the construction or improvement of the subdivision or development, and shall determine or confirm the cost thereof on the basis of a study conducted by qualified traffic engineers and approved and accepted by the subdivider. 
(2)  The city shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a report, accepted and approved by the subdivider indicating the governmental services required to be furnished to the subdivision or development and an estimate of the annual cost thereof for the period during which the reimbursement is to be made to the subdivider. 
(3)  The city may make annual reimbursements to the subdivider from funds made available for such purpose from time to time, including, but not limited to, real estate taxes assessed and collected against the land and improvements on the property included in the subdivision in amounts equal to the amount by which such real estate taxes exceed the annual cost of providing reasonable and necessary governmental services to such subdivision or development. 
(i)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the occupancy of any structure or building to be located in such subdivision unless and until the improvements required herein which are directly necessary to the use and enjoyment of such structure have been installed and accepted by the city, except that final roadway surface need not be applied prior to issuance of such certificate if a suitable base and interim sealing agent acceptable to the city have been laid. 
(j)  A subdivider or developer of land shall pay to the city the pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary sewerage, water and drainage facilities located outside the property limits of the land owned or controlled by the subdivider or developer but necessitated or required, at least in part, by the construction or improvement of the subdivision or development, subject to the following: 
(1)  No such payment shall be required until such time as the city shall establish a general sewer, water and drainage improvement program for an area having related and common sewer, water and drainage conditions and within which the land owned or controlled by the subdivider or developer is located. 
(2)  Such share shall be limited to the proportion of such total estimated cost which the increased sewage flow, water flow and/or increased volume and velocity of stormwater runoff to be actually caused by the subdivision or development bears to total estimated volume and velocity of such sewage, water and/or runoff from the applicable area having an established general improvement plan as required by subsection (j)(1) of this section. 
(3)  In lieu of any such payment, the subdivider or developer shall execute and file with the city engineer an agreement and bond with surety, satisfactory to the city attorney, equal to the estimated costs, as established by the city engineer, of such improvements conditioned upon payment at the commencement of construction of the facilities. An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank in a form approved by the city attorney may also be accepted under the same terms and conditions applicable to bonds. 
(4)  Any payments received shall be kept in a separate account for each of the individually established improvement programs until such time as they are expended for the improvement program. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-50. - Off-site drainage. 
(a)  New development. 
(1)  A building permit will be issued by the building official for proposed construction of new development only after the city engineer has determined that the additional off-site drainage flow from such proposed construction will not be a danger or hazard to an existing off-site drainage facility or property in the proposed construction sites' drainage basin. (Off-site drainage facilities are those facilities outside the property limits of the proposed construction site necessary to carry drainage flow from construction site to a drainage basin.) New open ditches or modification of existing ditches will not be permitted in areas zoned residential unless included in the city's master drainage plan. 
(2)  The city engineer will determine whether a hazard or danger exists from such additional off-site drainage flow by approved drainage computations furnished to the city engineer by the permit applicant in accordance with the city's master drainage plan, existing field conditions and zoning required by city council. Computations shall be based on a normal storm return period of ten years using U.S. Department of Commerce curves and utilizing applicable existing master drainage plans on file in the office of the city engineer, or as adjusted by the city. Where reasonably necessary to protect public or private property, the city engineer may require calculation of drainage flow and installation of improvements based on a normal storm return period of greater than five years. 
(3)  After the city engineer determines no hazard or danger results from additional offsite drainage flow, the building official will issue a building permit if other requirements are met. 
(4)  When the city engineer determines that a hazard or danger results from additional off-site drainage flow, and all other legal mandates are met, the building permit will be issued only after: 
a.  A plan is submitted by the permit applicant to provide the off-site drainage and is approved by the city engineer, and the permit applicant agrees to construct such approved off-site drainage pursuant to the bonding or other financing procedures set out in section 33.1-49 of this Code. 
b.  The city council, at its discretion, independently or in conjunction with the permit applicant, may agree to construct such approved drainage facilities; provided, that in areas zoned residential the city will construct such facilities using nonlocal funds only. (Nonlocal funds are those received by the city from federal or state grants.) 
(b)  Existing systems. All developments shall provide retention and mass detention facilities to reduce the additional drainage flow to all existing drainage systems where sufficient land exists to permit these facilities and/or where needed to permit proper utilization of existing and proposed drainage facilities. 
(c)  Safe and functional design. Approval by the city engineer will not release the liability of the developer from the requirements of a safe and functional design. 
(d)  Compliance with state law. The city shall comply with the express terms and conditions of Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2241 through 15.2-2276. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-51. - Minor subdivision standards. 
(a)  The planning director may certify a subdivision or resubdivision as a "minor subdivision" if he finds that: 
(1)  The subdivision meets the definition of "minor subdivision" set forth in article II of this chapter and existing facilities will adequately accommodate the modification; 
(2)  The proposal meets all requirements with respect to lot sizes and area of the zoning ordinance and of this chapter, and that the proposal will not create a violation of any of the provisions of the zoning ordinance; 
(3)  The proposal will not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel or of any other adjoining property; and 
(4)  In the case of an in-fill subdivision, the provisions of section 33.1-26 are met. 
(b)  If the planning director finds that the proposed subdivision or resubdivision meets all the requirements as set forth above and elsewhere in this chapter, he shall certify the proposed plat as a "minor subdivision" and, by affixing a notation to that effect and his signature thereto, grant final subdivision approval. 
(c)  If the streets, drainage or utilities for the proposed minor subdivision are not fully improved as required by this chapter, the planning director shall require as conditions of the minor subdivision approval that: 
(1)  Curb, gutter, paving, sidewalks, drainage and utilities be improved to the standards for improvements currently applicable to a subdivision that is not a minor subdivision. These improvements shall be provided as required by sections 33.1-49 and 33.1-50. 
(2)  The city engineer also approves the proposed plat by affixing his signature thereto. Such signature shall not be affixed until the improvements required by sections 33.1-49 and 33.1-50 are installed or a bond or other security is posted and an agreement executed and filed with the city engineer in accordance with section 33.1-49. 
(d)  For the purpose of creating residential lots on existing streets, the planning director may modify or waive the street grading, pavement base, surface and curb and gutter requirements on an existing street constructed without such required improvements if: 
a.  The city has no plans to install such improvements on the street within the next ten years; 
b.  The street is currently improved or will be improved to a standard equivalent to similar streets in the neighborhood; 
c.  After consultation with the city engineer, a determination is made that the street will provide adequate and safe access and drainage to existing and future residents in accordance with the purposes of the subdivision ordinance; and 
d.  The real property for which the waiver or modification is sought contains no more than five new, adjacent lots. 
Any such waiver or modification shall not apply to required drainage improvements except for curbs and gutters. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-52, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2012, repealed § 33.1-52, which pertained to in-fill subdivision standards and derived from Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, adopted Jan. 26, 2010.  
Sec. 33.1-53. - Location of utilities. 
(a)  All utilities, including, but not limited to, wires, cables, pipes, conduits and appurtenant equipment for electricity, telephone, gas, cable television or similar service, shall be placed underground; provided, that the following utilities shall be permitted aboveground: 
(1)  Electric transmission lines and facilities in excess of 50 kilovolts; 
(2)  Equipment, including electric distribution transformers, switch gear, meter pedestals, telephone pedestals, outdoor lighting poles or standards, radio antenna and associated equipment, which is, under accepted utility practices, normally installed aboveground; 
(3)  Meters, service connections and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the customer's premises. 
(b)  Whenever existing utilities are located aboveground in proposed subdivisions, they shall be removed and placed underground except where they are within ten feet of existing public street rights-of-way. 
(c)  Where approved by the city engineer, with the exception of sewer laterals and water service lines, all utilities shall be placed within easements or street rights-of-way, unless otherwise required by the city. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-54. - Private streets. 
There shall be no private streets permitted in any subdivision except where permitted by the zoning ordinance; provided, however, private streets may be allowed in townhouse and condominium subdivisions if the private streets are approved by the commission and meet, unless specifically exempted, all other street requirements in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010)  
Sec. 33.1-55. - Street and subdivision names. 
(a)  Proposed streets which align with existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Names of proposed streets or subdivisions shall not duplicate, irrespective of suffixes, or be similar in sound or spelling to existing street or subdivision names in the city. 
(b)  Street names shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plat and shall be approved by the agent. 
(c)  Names of existing streets or subdivisions shall not be changed except by approval of the governing body. Every applicant seeking to change the name of an existing street shall pay the costs set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
( Ord. No. 2010-06, § 2, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 2017-35 , § 1, 5-9-2017)  
Chapter 34 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1996-40, adopted June 25, 1996, amended and reordained chapter 34. Formerly, such chapter pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 34-2—34-11, 34-20—34-25, 34-32—34-34, 34-41, 34-42, 34-44 of the 1973 Code. At the editor's discretion, the section numbers have been to changed to incorporate reserved sections for future amendments. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 7; housing and community development, ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate and inspect swimming pools, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1110, 35.1-9. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Portsmouth Swimming Pool Ordinance." 
(Code 1988, § 34-1; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-2. - Scope. 
(a)  The Virginia Board of Health Swimming Pool Regulations and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended, including all future amendments thereto and editions thereof, and all model building codes and portions of other model codes or standards which are, or may hereinafter be, referenced, adopted or incorporated therein, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public swimming pools as indicated and defined in section 34-3, including, but not limited to, commercial pools, public or private school pools, gymnasium pools and health establishment pools. Public swimming pools for which building permits are issued subsequent to the effective date of this chapter shall be constructed in accordance with provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, fire prevention code, the zoning ordinance and this chapter. The administrative authority or authorized agent shall order reasonable changes in any public pool or related facility or in its operation if he finds any conditions that endanger the life, health or safety of the users of such public swimming pools. In considering whether to order such changes, the administrative authority shall consider the magnitude of the danger, cost of the changes required, and the requirements imposed by this chapter upon newly constructed public swimming pools. 
(c)  Private swimming pools shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  The provisions of the chapter shall apply to all auxiliary structures and equipment provided and maintained in connection with public pools, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Locker rooms. 
(2)  Shower rooms. 
(3)  Dressing rooms. 
(4)  Disinfecting equipment. 
(5)  Safety equipment. 
(Code 1988, § 34-2; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-3. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and the enforcement of this chapter. The word "shall" as used herein, indicates a mandatory requirement: 
Administrative authority means the director of public health or his authorized agent. 
Hydrostatic relief valve means a valve which, when properly installed will relieve underground water pressure caused by high water table under the pool shell. 
Maximum load means the number of bathers permitted in the pool area, to be determined by dividing the total water surface area in square feet (or square meters) of the swimming, spa or wading pool water space by 27 feet (8.18 meters). 
Operator or manager means the person appointed or engaged to conduct the operation and management of the swimming facility. 
Operator's certificate means a certificate that proves competency in pool operation issued by a source approved by the administrative authority. 
Owner means the person in whose name the license or use permit is issued. 
Pool management company means any person, firm, corporation or association contracting to manage or operate two or more public swimming pools. 
Pool permit means a permit issued to the facility by the administrative authority to allow for the operation of the public pool. 
Private swimming pool means any structure that contains water over 24 inches (610 mm) in depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or recreational bathing only by the family and guests of the resident in connection with a residential occupancy classified as Use Group R-3 under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. This includes residential in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
Public pool or public swimming pool means any pool, other than a private swimming pool. 
Spa and hot tubs means public pools designed for recreational or quasi-therapeutic use for physiological and psychological relaxation that include but are not limited to: Hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water, mineral baths, air induction systems or any combination of these. 
Wading pool means a pool designed for wading or partial immersion of the human body which is capable of impounding water to a depth not greater than 24 inches (0.6 meter) and which is separate from any other pool within the facility. 
Water slides/rides means a combination of pools and immersion troughs carrying water from pool to pool. 
(Code 1988, § 34-3; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-4. - Plans, construction and inspection. 
(a)  A person proposing to construct, reconstruct or alter a public swimming pool or auxiliary structure or equipment shall submit legible plans and specifications to the administrative authority for review and written approval prior to the issuance of any building, plumbing or electrical permit. 
(b)  The administrative authority may require the submission of such additional information as may be required to determine the compliance of plans and specifications submitted for approval. 
(c)  Within ten days of the receipt of final plans and specifications, the administrative authority shall notify the person submitting the plans and specifications of their approval or disapproval. In addition to these regulations, all applicable ordinances, including, but not limited to, plumbing, building, electrical and zoning shall also apply in the construction, maintenance and operation of all public swimming pools. 
(Code 1988, § 34-4; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-5. - Permit required; fee. 
(a)  No person shall operate a public swimming pool unless an annual permit has been secured from the administrative authority of the health department. This permit shall be issued only after approval by the administrative authority, approval by the electrical and plumbing official, application and payment to the health department of a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code for seasonal operation (four months or less) and a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code for year round operation. The operation and maintenance of any public swimming pool in a manner not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter will be justification for cancellation of this permit. 
(b)  A public swimming pool permit shall be posted in view of the public at the swimming pool involved. 
(c)  No public swimming pool permit shall be transferable and any person holding such a permit shall give notice in writing, to the administrative authority within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of his interest in or control of the pool involved. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such pool. 
(Code 1988, § 34-5; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-6. - Inspections. 
(a)  The administrative authority shall have the power to enter, at reasonable times, upon any private property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter or regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(b)  In addition to the inspections required by the department of planning, division of permits and inspections, all piping and appurtenances included in the recirculation and filter system shall be inspected prior to covering. All piping shall be tested at the time of inspection pursuant to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1988, § 34-6; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-7. - Owner's certification. 
(a)  To secure a pool permit, each public pool shall have a person employed who holds a valid operator's certificate issued by a source approved by the administrative authority. Operator's certificate shall be issued only to an individual over the age of 16 years. An applicant for an operator's certificate shall demonstrate basic knowledge of the water treatment process in public swimming pools. Presentation of a certificate from a swimming pool operators' training course acceptable to the administrative authority shall constitute demonstration of such knowledge. 
(b)  Every public pool shall have a person on premises at all times during periods of operation, who is fully capable of and shall assume responsibility for compliance with all requirements relating to pool operation, maintenance and safety of bathers. 
(c)  Routine (e.g., daily and weekly) operating procedures shall be permanently posted in a location accessible to and frequented by the operator. 
(d)  Manufacturer's instructions for operation and maintenance of mechanical and electrical equipment shall be kept available for the operator. 
(e)  No public pools shall be used or available for use until all requirements of section 34-5 and this section are complied with. 
(Code 1988, § 34-7; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-8. - Suspension of public pool permit. 
(a)  If the administrative authority finds that the health and safety of those who utilize a public swimming pool is endangered, due to improper operation or continued for flagrant violation, he may order the immediate suspension of the pool's permit until such time as he finds that the danger no longer exists. No person shall operate any public swimming pool when subject to an order of suspension. 
(b)  The administrative authority shall notify the owner, in writing, stating the reason for the suspension. The owner shall have the right to appeal the suspension to the administrative authority. However, such appeal shall not affect the order for suspension until such time that the appeal is heard and the order changed. The owner may request a reinspection when the condition causing the suspension has been corrected. Upon compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the suspension shall be removed. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the refusal to grant, or by the revocation or suspension of the permit of a swimming pool, shall have the right to appeal therefrom to the circuit court of the city after an administrative hearing. 
(Code 1988, § 34-8; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-9. - Violations of provisions governing prosecutions, notice, etc. 
The provisions of Volume I of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall govern the prosecution of violations relating to the design and construction of swimming pools and installation of related equipment. A violation of any other provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor and every failure, refusal or neglect to fully and completely comply with the provisions of this chapter and each day's continuance thereof beyond the time specified shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1988, § 34-9; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-10. - Pool management companies; duties. 
All pool management companies, within ten days after commencing operation of a public pool, shall provide the administrative authority with the names and locations of all public pools they operate in the city and the names, telephone numbers and addresses of their operating personnel. Such companies shall be responsible for assuring compliance with sections 34-5 and 34-7 of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 34-10; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-11. - Applicability of chapter to existing pools. 
The structural and equipment provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any public pool constructed prior to the effective date of this chapter, except as follows: 
(1)  Any alteration, placement or replacement of any equipment shall comply with such requirements. 
(2)  The provisions and requirements of this chapter with respect to operational procedures and standards, chemical feeding equipment, flow meters, pressure gauges and lifeguards shall be complied with by all public swimming pools, regardless of date of construction. 
(3)  The administrative authority may grant modifications to any of the provisions of this chapter which are not under the jurisdiction of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1988, § 34-11; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-12. - Severability clause. 
Should any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter in its entirety or of any part thereof other than that so declared to be invalid. 
(Code 1988, § 34-12; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Secs. 34-13—34-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 34-26. - Location. 
The location of a swimming pool shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1988, § 34-26; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-27. - Shape. 
Pools may be of any dimension or shape; provided that satisfactory recirculation of water can be obtained and undue hazards to bathers are absent. 
(Code 1988, § 34-27; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-28. - Recirculation systems. 
(a)  Filter room. Public pools shall be provided with a structure or room to contain the filtration equipment, pumps and other recirculation system appurtenances, and disinfection equipment. The room shall be finished in a light color and be constructed of materials which are impervious to water and chemicals necessary for the operation of the pool. Adequate illumination of 20 footcandles measured 24 inches (61 centimeters) above floor level, shall be provided by a minimum of two vaporproof lighting fixtures. The floor of the filter room shall be designed to provide for an adequate drainage with a minimum floor slope of 1:50 and a maximum of 1:24 to the drain and shall be kept dry, particularly in the vicinity of electrical panels. The filter room shall be adequately cross-ventilated and all equipment shall be installed so that it is convenient to operate and repair. Adequate headroom shall be provided above all filters. The provision of any facility for discharging filter backwashing water into the filter room floor is prohibited. The room shall be provided with a door of sufficient width to permit the removal of equipment, and shall be capable of being secured against entry by unauthorized persons. The entrance to the filter room shall be adjacent to the pool area or so located that the operator can enter the room without having to exit the enclosed pool area. 
(b)  Filters. The recirculation system shall be equipped with a filtration system that will filter the entire contents of the pool at the required rate. Filtration equipment shall be operated continuously 24 hours per day. Design criteria for the indicated type of filters shall be as follows: 
(1)  Rapid sand filter. A filter utilizing sand as the filter media, with filtration flow rate not exceeding three gallons per minute per square foot (122 liters per minute per square meter) of filter area. The backwash rate of flow shall be three times the filtration rate. 
(2)  Anthracite filter. A filter utilizing anthracite as a filter media, with filtration flow rate not exceeding three gallons per minute per square foot (122 liters per minute per square meter) of filter area. The backwash rate of flow shall be three times the filtration rate. 
(3)  High rate filter. A filter utilizing a media capable of filtration at a high rate of flow. The rate of flow shall be greater than five gallons per minute per square foot (203.7 liters per minute per square meter) of filter area. The backwash rate of flow shall be the same as filtration rate. 
(4)  Diatomaceous earth filter. A filter utilizing diatomaceous earth as a filter media. There are two types of these filters. 
a.  Pressure or vacuum-type. A diatomaceous earth filter through which the rate of flow does not exceed two gallons per minute per square foot (81.5 liters per minute per square meter). 
b.  Pressure or vacuum-type with slurry feeder. A filter equipped to continuously feed a diatomaceous earth suspension and having a rate of flow not exceed three gallons per minute per square foot (122 liters per minute per square meter). 
A backwash sump pit with a stand pipe shall be installed to collect spent diatomaceous earth so that it can be collected and disposed of with solid waste. Any other method for accomplishing this may be submitted for consideration. Other filtration systems which are equal to or better than those described above may be used in a pool recirculation system with the approval of the administrative authority. 
(c)  Gauges. Gauges shall be installed as required, on all filter systems to readily indicate the operating pressures of recirculating systems. All gauges shall measure pressure directly in pounds per square inch or kilograms per square meter and shall have an indicator at least two inches (5.08 centimeters) in diameter. 
(d)  Rate of flow indicators. The recirculating system shall be equipped with a rate of flow indicator, which has been approved by the administrative authority. The indicator shall read in gallons per minute or liters per minute and shall be located to indicate the rate of flow of filtered water being returned to the pool. The indicator shall be of fixed calibration and properly sized so as to indicate the designed rate of flow at approximately midscale. 
(e)  Hair and lint strainer. At all installations where it is possible for water from the pool to pass through the filters, a strainer shall be provided on the suction side of the pump to prevent hair, lint and other matter from reaching the pump and filters. Strainers shall be corrosion-resistant with openings not over one-eighth inch in size providing a free flow area at least four times the area of the pump suction line at the strainer connection and shall be accessible for frequent cleaning. 
(Code 1988, § 34-28; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-29. - Piping systems. 
(a)  The piping system for public pools shall be composed of N.S.F. approved materials or equal, designed for the following operations: 
(1)  Filling the pool; 
(2)  Washing each filter to waste; 
(3)  Recalculating the pool water through the treatment equipment; 
(4)  Backwashing to waste; 
(5)  Operating suction cleaner; 
(6)  Emptying the pool; and 
(7)  Draining the system. 
(b)  There shall be no direct connections between the pool recirculating system and the sewer or the potable water supply. Fill spouts may be located under diving boards, under guard chairs or adjacent to pool ladder handrails. Fill spouts shall be installed a minimum of two inches (5.08 centimeters) above the coping, or submersed fill spouts shall be equipped with a backflow preventer. 
(c)  Waste from backwashing shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer or in a manner approved by the administrative authority. 
(d)  The piping system within the filter room shall be securely anchored and shall be color coded as follows: 
Freshwater—Blue (to check valve). 
Backwash—Black. 
Influent—Yellow. 
Effluent—White. 
Vacuum—Orange. 
(e)  All piping shall be designed to reduce friction losses to a minimum and to carry the required quantity of water at a maximum velocity not to exceed ten feet per second (3.05 meters per second) for discharge piping, except for copper wire where the velocity for piping should not exceed eight feet per second (2.44 meters per second). Suction velocity for all piping should not exceed six feet per second (1.83 meters per second). Design system head calculations shall be required to confirm the adequacy of proposed pipe sizing and pump selection. 
(f)  A permanent specification placard shall be conspicuously displayed on or adjacent to the filter and shall be properly lighted. Specifications, shall be printed or types and readily legible. The following information shall be included on the placard: 
(1)  Name and location of facility; 
(2)  Date of construction; 
(3)  Capacity in gallons (liters); 
(4)  Water surface area in square feet (square meters); 
(5)  Turnover rate in hours; and 
(6)  Rate of flow in gallons per minute (liters per minute). 
(Code 1988, § 34-29; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-30. - Pool outlets. 
(a)  All pools shall have one or more main outlets in their deepest part for continuous removal of water for treatment and reuse or for emptying the pool. A main outlet shall be no less than 3.3 feet (1.14 meters) nor more than 19.7 feet (six meters) from another main outlet nor more than 16.4 feet (5.98 meters) from a pool wall. 
(b)  A main outlet opening shall be covered with a grating which is not hazardous to bathers, is secured in place, and is removable with tools. The grate opening area shall be large enough to have water entrance velocities not exceeding two feet per second (0.6 meter per second). 
(Code 1988, § 34-30; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-31. - Operational safety. 
(a)  Pumps, filters and other mechanical and electrical equipment for public pools shall be enclosed in such a manner accessible only to authorized persons. Construction and drainage shall be such as to avoid the entrance and accumulation of water in the vicinity of the electrical equipment. 
(b)  The crossing of outdoor public swimming pools by overhead electrical conductors is prohibited. 
(c)  All metal barriers or railing on which a broken electrical conductor might fall shall be effectively grounded. 
(d)  All lighting fixtures shall be prohibited directly above the water surface except as permitted by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and shall be protected in a manner which will prevent broken glass from falling on any surface within the pool area. All electrical switches and receptacles shall be of weatherproof construction and resistant to corrosion. 
(e)  Lights shall be prohibited directly above or within one meter horizontally of the pool rim in any indoor or covered swimming pool except as permitted in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1988, § 34-31; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-32. - Hydrostatic relief valve requirement. 
In all in-ground pools, one or more hydrostatic relief valves shall be installed for the purpose of relieving the water pressure on the pool shell. 
(Code 1988, § 34-32; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-33. - Pool lighting. 
(a)  Where public pools are to be used after dark, the swimming pool area shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of such number and design as to light all parts of the pool, the water therein, and the entire area. Fixtures should be installed in such a manner as to create no hazard to the bathers. The design and installation of the fixtures should be such that lifeguards can clearly see every part of the swimming pool, including decks, spring board and other appurtenances without being blinded by glare. 
(b)  Underwater lighting for such pools shall provide nine watts per square yard (8.2 watts per square meter) of water surfaces and shall require ground fault circuit interrupters (GFCI). (See Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code.) 
(Code 1988, § 34-33; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-34. - Decks. 
All fill under decks shall be properly tamped and proper supports shall be provided to prevent decks from settling. Roof runoff or other drainage shall not be wasted onto the deck. All areas surrounding the deck shall have surface drainage directed away from the deck area. 
(Code 1988, § 34-34; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-35. - Pool inlets. 
Where inlets are in pool walls, such inlets shall be spaced not more than 19.7 feet (six meters) on center around the pool perimeter. Where inlets are in the pool bottom, the number of such inlets and location shall be so designed as to ensure the proper distribution of filtered water. All inlets, except freshwater inlets and wading pool inlets, shall be at least 15 inches (38.1 centimeters) below the overflow level of the pool except for prefabricated gutters with 45-degree angle inlets in the bottom. Each inlet shall be provided with a means of adjusting flow through a range of at least 50 percent of its design capacity. The control shall be readily accessible. 
(Code 1988, § 34-35; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-36. - Suction cleaner. 
A suction cleaner shall be provided. Where a suction cleaner is operated by the recirculating pump, a device shall be provided for throttling the flow from the various pool outlet (main drain, skimmer, surge tank, etc.). The suction cleaner line shall be connected through a hair catcher. Portable vacuum cleaner units shall be provided with outlets near the pool for the discharge of effluent. Hydraulic jet type suction cleaners shall be permitted in lieu of the above where freshwater pressure is 30 psi (2.1 kilograms per centimeter 2 ) or greater and is provided with an approved backflow prevention or antisiphon device if connected to the public or private potable water supply. 
(Code 1988, § 34-36; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-37. - Safety and rescue equipment; other safety features. 
Every public swimming pool shall be equipped with the following aids to safety and rescue which shall be readily accessible at all times: 
(1)  One or more safety tubes or lightweight but strong poles with blunted ends, not less than 12 feet (four meters) in length. 
(2)  One or more throwing ring buoys of less than 15 inches (38 centimeters) in diameter having a 150 pound (68.4 kilogram) test line attached of sufficient length to reach twice the width of the pool, placed on racks at strategic points adjacent to the pool. 
(3)  A lifeline shall be provided at the break in grade between the shallow and deep portions of the swimming pool, or six inches (15.2 centimeters) of either shallow side of the break with its position marked with visible floats at not greater than seven-foot (2.10 meter) intervals. The lifeline shall be securely fastened to wall anchors or corrosion-resistant materials and of a type which shall be recessed or have no projection which shall constitute a hazard when the line is removed. The line shall be of sufficient size and strength to offer a good handhold and support loads normally imposed by bathers. 
(4)  A readily-accessible room or area designated and equipped for emergency care of casualties. Minimum equipment shall be an approved first aid kit and a backboard meeting Red Cross standards. 
(5)  A direct-dial telephone with numbers for police, fire and rescue shall be readily accessible at all times. 
(6)  Approved signs shall be maintained in a legible manner as follows: 
a.  Occupant load signs. A sign with clearly legible letters, not less than four inches (10.2 centimeters) high shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the main entrance to a pool which shall indicate the number of occupants permitted for each pool. 
b.  Spa/hot tub pool. The occupant capacity of a spa/hot tub pool shall be based on one bather for every ten square feet (1.9 meters 2 ) of pool water surface area. 
c.  The occupant capacity of all other pools shall be based on one bather for every 27 square feet (2.50 meters 2 ) of pool water surface area. Exception: Occupant capacity requirements do not apply to wading pools. 
d.  Permanent and conspicuous signs shall be posted indicating the most direct route to the pool. 
(7)  In areas so indicated, signs with clearly legible letters not less than four inches (10.2 centimeters) high shall be posted in a conspicuous place and shall state "NO DIVING ALLOWED." 
(8)  Warning signs for pools using gas chlorine. Pools at which gas chlorine is used for disinfection shall have a conspicuously posted sign on the exterior side of the entry door to the chlorine room, or on the adjacent wall area. In addition to displaying the appropriate hazard identification symbol for gas chlorine, the sign shall state with clearly legible letters not less than four inches (10.16 centimeters) high, "DANGER: GASEOUS OXIDIZER-CHLORINE." 
(9)  Spa/hot tub warning signs. A precautionary sign with clearly legible letters shall be posted in a prominent place near the entrance to a spa pool which shall contain the following language: 
"CAUTION" 
a.  Elderly persons, pregnant women, infants and those with health conditions requiring medical care should consult a physician before entering the spa. 
b.  Unsupervised use by children under the age of 14 is prohibited. 
c.  Hot water immersion while under the influence of alcohol, narcotics, drugs or medicines may lead to serious consequences and is not recommended. 
d.  Do not use alone. 
e.  Long exposure may result in nausea, dizziness or fainting. 
(10)  The depth of water in pools shall be marked at one-foot increments (30.48 centimeters) and at least every 20 feet (6.1 meters) on both the horizontal deck surface and vertical surfaces of the pool wall. Numerals and letters shall be at least four inches (10.16 centimeters) in height and have a good contrast with the pool walls and deck. 
(11)  Fixed and floating platforms in public swimming pools shall be constructed with an air space of at least one foot (0.3 meters) between the water surface and the underside of the platform. 
(12)  There shall be one elevated lifeguard chair provided for every public pool with a depth of over five feet (1.52 meters) or 2,000 square feet (202.99 meters 2 ) of water surface. An additional chair will be required for each additional 1,000 square feet (92.8 meters 2 ) of water surface. 
(Code 1988, § 34-37; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-38. - Disinfection equipment. 
(a)  Chemical feeding equipment. Means shall be provided for regulating the feeding of chemicals to the water in the recirculation system. The installation and use of mechanical, automatically operated, positive displacement chemical feeders or dye type chemical feeders is required. 
(b)  Chlorinating equipment. All public pools shall be provided with approved chlorinating equipment which shall be capable of applying a dose of not less than ten ppm of chlorine within the turnover time. 
(c)  Use of chlorine gas. The use of chlorine gas as a disinfectant shall require the approval of the administrative authority. Such approval will be granted only after it has been demonstrated that the gas chlorinator room or area will be located in a manner which will not adversely affect the safety and health of patrons, pool personnel or the public. Chlorine gas feeding equipment and chlorine gas cylinders and other hazardous chemicals shall be installed in an enclosed space or room, separate from the filter room and electrical panels and shall be equipped with a door capable of being locked. The operating gas cylinder shall be placed on an accurate scale and fastened in place during storage and use. Gas chlorinator rooms shall be equipped with a forced draft fan exhausting to the outside room from the floor level. The exhaust fan shall be capable of providing 60 air changes per hour against the resistance offered by duct work or any other local factors. A fresh air inlet shall be provided near the ceiling. The gas chlorinator shall be protected from direct sunlight. 
(d)  Gas masks. An approved, self-contained gas mask for chlorine or a gas mask with a supply of oxygen under positive pressure or compressed air, either of which have been approved by the Bureau of Mines, in addition to local approval by the fire department, shall be provided where chlorine gas is being utilized. The mask shall be located accessible to, but outside of, the gas chlorinator room. 
(Code 1988, § 34-38; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-39. - Water heating. 
Indoor public pools shall be provided with water heating equipment thermostatically controlled and capable of maintaining the entire pool contents between 70 and 85 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius and 29.48 degrees Celsius). All heated pools, spas and hot tubs shall maintain a minimum halogen residual of 2.0 ppm or mg/l at all times. Spas and hot tubs shall have, on display, a clock and thermometer visible to occupants. Spas and pool water temperature shall not exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit at any time that is occupied. 
(Code 1988, § 34-39; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-40. - Showers, water closets, lavatories, etc. 
(a)  Generally. Showers, water closets and lavatories shall be provided for each sex, in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. The part of the structure containing the showers, water closets, urinals and lavatories shall be designed so that these facilities shall be in the line of travel used by the patrons prior to entering the pool area and shall be provided with an entrance and a separate exit opening directly to the pool deck; however, such exit shall not be near the deep portion of the pool. 
(b)  Requirements. Floor for all dressing rooms, showers, toilets and lavatories shall be smooth but must have nonslip finish and the room shall be ventilated so that the floors do not remain damp or wet. Walls and floors for all dressing rooms, toilet rooms and lavatories shall be of waterproof, easily cleanable materials. 
(1)  Dressing rooms. Separate dressing rooms may be provided for both sexes. When provided, metal lockers, wire baskets, hooks or other sanitary means of storage of clothing and personal accessories shall be provided. All storage containers for clothing shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(2)  Showers. Showers shall be provided in the proportion of one for each 40 persons at the time of maximum load. Each shower shall supply an adequate quantity of tempered water. Water from each shower shall be provided with suitable facilities for making soap available. 
(3)  Toilets. Toilet facilities shall be provided as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(4)  Lavatories. Lavatories shall be provided as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(5)  Exceptions. Subsections (b)(1) through (b)(4) of this section shall not apply when bathers have access to these facilities either in living quarters located to more than 500 feet (152.4 meters) in travel distance from the pool, or in an adjacent building such as a recreational facility, clubhouse or cabana. 
(6)  Mirrors. Mirrors, if provided, shall be constructed in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1988, § 34-40; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-41. - Spectators/spectator areas. 
Spectator areas shall be so separated from the pool area that spectators do not have access to the pool area. Spectator balconies shall not overhang any portion of the pool surface. 
(Code 1988, § 34-41; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-42. - Wading pools. 
(a)  The slope of the bottom of any wading pool shall be no greater than 1:15 nor less than 1:40. 
(b)  Wading pools shall be so designed that no obstructions are within an area bounded by a line five feet (1.5 meters) outside of the pool perimeter. 
(c)  Wading pools shall be separated from the main pool by a suitable barrier with a self-closing and self-latching device. 
(d)  Wading pools shall be provided with their own water return line to provide an adequate flow of chlorinated water, or shall have a filter system completely separate from the main pool with a turnover of two hours or less. 
(e)  Wading pools shall be required to have a vacuum line. 
(Code 1988, § 34-42)  
Secs. 34-43—34-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION 
 
Sec. 34-56. - Conditions and equipment. 
All equipment shall be maintained in satisfactory operating condition during operation of a public pool. 
(Code 1988, § 34-56; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-57. - Water supply. 
All public pools using well water shall have a satisfactory bacteriological sample taken prior to opening each year. 
(Code 1988, § 34-57; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-58. - Clarity of water. 
When a public pool is open and in use, the water shall be sufficiently clear to permit a disc six inches (15.24 centimeters) in diameter, divided into alternate black and white segments, and placed on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point, to be clearly visible from the pool deck at all distances up to ten yards (9.14 meters) in a horizontal direction from the projection of the disc on the pool surface. The disc shall be available on premises at all times or may be permanently affixed to the bottom of the pool in the deepest area. 
(Code 1988, § 34-58; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-59. - Water treatment. 
(a)  Chemicals other than chlorine, bromine, hypobromous acid, sodium hypochlorite, calcium hypochlorite, muriatic acid, lime soda ash, sodium bicarbonate, aluminum sulfate (alum), cyanuric acid and sodium bisulfate shall not be used to treat swimming pool water without written permission from the administrative authority. 
(b)  The impounded water shall at all times be treated in a manner which will prevent the growth of algae and the breeding of mosquitoes or other vermin. 
(c)  When the unheated swimming pool is open for use, a minimum of one ppm (parts per million) free chlorine residual shall be maintained in all parts of the pool. 
(d)  When the swimming pool is open for use, the pH of the pool water shall be kept between 7.2 and 7.8 with a minimum total alkalinity of 80 ppm, calcium hardness of 150 ppm. 
(e)  Approved test kits for all tests required in this article shall be available and in good working condition at all times. 
(f)  The operator or manager of each public swimming pool shall maintain and operate all mechanical equipment in a safe and proper manner. 
(g)  Where cyanuric acid is used as a stabilizing agent for residual chlorine, or if the source of residual chlorine is from a chlorinated cyanurate, a chlorine residual of at least 1.5 ppm shall be maintained with cyanuric acid residuals of at least 40 ppm. 
(h)  The operator or manager of each swimming pool shall cause an adequate supply of chemicals for the proper treatment of pool water to be on hand and available for use at all times. 
(i)  Protective clothing, i.e., respirators, face masks, rubber gloves and aprons or coveralls shall be provided for personnel handling chlorine chemical compounds and other caustic chemicals. 
(Code 1988, § 34-59; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-60. - Records. 
(a)  Record forms supplied by the administrative authority shall be maintained up-to-date and shall be available for inspection while the pool is in use and shall be retained for a period of at least four months, or for at least one year in the case of pools that operate year around. 
(b)  Unless otherwise modified by the administrative authority, disinfection tests, i.e., free chlorine residual and pH tests, shall be made and recorded at least once every two hours while the pool is in operation. Alkalinity and calcium hardness tests shall be made and recorded at least weekly. 
(Code 1988, § 34-60; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-61. - Placards. 
Placards approved by the administrative authority and covering personal health and safety regulations shall be posted within the swimming facility. Areas restricted to operating personnel shall be prominently identified. Signs warning employees of emergency procedures to be followed in case of exposure or contact with hazardous materials shall be posted in the room or area where such hazardous materials are stored and/or used. 
(Code 1988, § 34-61; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-62. - Food and drink area. 
Any person in the process of eating or drinking shall be restricted to the area designated for the preparation and serving of food and drink. This area shall be at least ten feet (3.05 meters) from the pool edge. 
(Code 1988, § 34-62; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-63. - Cleaning and maintenance. 
(a)  Generally. All parts of the pool and related pool facilities and equipment shall be kept clean and maintained in good repair. Floors shall be kept free from cracks and other defects. Walls, ceilings, partitions, doors, lockers and similar surfaces and equipment shall be refinished in a manner acceptable to the administrative authority as often as necessary to be kept in good repair. 
(b)  Hoses; sanitation. Hoses shall be provided for regular flushing and cleaning. The whole pool area shall be kept clean, sanitary, and free of litter and vermin. 
(c)  Plumbing fixtures. Toilets, urinals, showers, wash basins and other plumbing fixture shall be maintained in a clean condition and in good repair. 
(d)  General housekeeping and health spa facilities. All floors, walls, ceilings, showers, bathtubs, saunas, steam and vapor rooms, cabinets, toilets, stalls and other physical facilities of the health spa must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. All equipment and fixtures shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively disinfected as often as needed to prevent the development of algae, fungi, mildew, mold or bacteria which may endanger the public safety or health. 
(Code 1988, § 34-63; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-64. - Precautions relative to communicable diseases. 
Any person having an obvious skin disease, nasal or ear discharge, inflamed eyes, or any communicable disease shall be excluded from the public swimming pool. 
(Code 1988, § 34-64; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-65. - Public safety; security. 
Public swimming pools shall be maintained in a manner which will not create a nuisance or hazard to the public safety and well-being when not in use, and the pool shall be adequately secured against entry by the public in general. 
(Code 1988, § 34-65; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-66. - Lifeguards. 
(a)  There shall be at least one lifeguard on duty at all times when the public pool is of 2,000 square feet (185.79 meters 2 ) of water surface or more and when open for use. 
(b)  Public pools which are less than 2,000 square feet (185.79 meters 2 ) may be used by adults, or children supervised by adults, without a designated lifeguard, provided it is posted as follows: "WARNING: No lifeguard on duty. Children under the age of 14 shall not be allowed to use a pool without an adult in attendance." 
(c)  Any individual retained as a lifeguard for public pools of 2,000 square feet (185.79 meters 2 ) or more shall possess a current certification for meeting the standard of a lifesaver as recommended by the American Red Cross, YMCA or other accredited agency for lifesaving personnel. 
(d)  The ratio of lifeguards to bathers shall be one lifeguard on duty for the first 75 bathers and an additional lifeguard for every additional 50 bathers, or fraction thereof. Lifeguards shall wear distinguishing emblems or clothing while on duty. 
(Code 1988, § 34-66; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-67. - Laundering. 
Bathing suits, towels and other reusable cloth materials furnished by a public pool shall be properly laundered so as to be sanitary before being issued to bathers. 
(Code 1988, § 34-67; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996)  
Sec. 34-68. - Animals. 
Animals, fowl and/or pets shall not be permitted within the public swimming pool. This section shall not apply to working dogs, such as seeing-eye dogs. 
(Code 1988, § 34-68; Ord. No. 1996-40, 6-25-1996) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4.  
Chapter 35 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— General authority of city as to taxation, § 2.02; duty of city treasurer to collect taxes, § 6.03. 
Cross reference— Dog license taxes, § 4-63 et seq.; finance, ch. 12; license taxes generally, ch. 20; vehicle license taxes, § 22-72 et seq.; special assessments for local improvements, § 32-251 et seq. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104; taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq.; local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3000 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Adoption of annual tax ordinance. 
The city council shall, at the first regular meeting in May of each year or as soon thereafter as practicable, adopt a tax ordinance, which shall specify the amount of per annum tax which is to be levied upon the real and personal property and upon persons within the city for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Code 1973, § 35-1; Code 1988, § 35-1) 
Cross reference— Procedure for adoption of ordinance or resolution imposing taxes, § 2-29(b).  
Sec. 35-2. - Due date; penalty and administrative costs for delinquencies—Real estate taxes. 
(a)  City taxes for each fiscal year shall be due and payable during the year for which the same are assessed in four equal installments, as follows: One-fourth thereof on September 30, one-fourth thereof on December 31, one-fourth thereof on March 31 and one-fourth thereof on June 30 of such year. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, city taxes on real estate payable by persons qualifying as elderly or disabled people for the exemption of real estate taxes provided in division 2 and division 3 of article IV of this chapter, shall be due and payable for each fiscal year hereafter during the year for which the same are assessed in four equal installments, as follows: One-fourth thereof on October 5, one-fourth thereof on January 5, one-fourth thereof on April 5 and one-fourth thereof on July 5. In addition, any person who is 65 years old or older or who is disabled shall, upon verification of same by the city treasurer, qualify for payment on said dates. 
(c)  In the event any installment of taxes on real estate is not paid on or before the time the same is due and payable, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the unpaid installment or $10.00, whichever is greater, but the penalty is not to exceed the amount of the unpaid installment. 
(d)  There is hereby imposed a fee to cover the administrative costs associated with the collection of delinquent taxes. Such fee shall be in addition to all penalties and interest, and shall be imposed in accordance with the provisions of section 35-3. 
(Code 1973, § 35-2; Code 1988, § 35-2; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 1, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 1994-86, § 1, 8-23-1994; Ord. No. 1995-103, § 1, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 1997-19, 3-25-1997; Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 7-22-2003) 
Charter reference— Penalties on delinquent taxes, § 2.13. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 35-3. - Delinquent taxes and charges; administrative costs, etc. 
(a)  Any provision of this Code notwithstanding, there is hereby imposed upon each person chargeable with delinquent taxes or other delinquent charges, fees to cover the administrative costs and reasonable attorney's or collection agency's fees actually contracted for. The attorney's or collection fees shall not exceed 20 percent of the taxes or other charges so collected. The administrative costs shall be in addition to all other penalties and interest, and shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to 30 or more days after notice of delinquent taxes or charges pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3919 but prior to the taking of any judgment with respect to such delinquent taxes or charges, and as set forth in appendix A to this Code for taxes or other charges collected subsequent to judgment. If the collection activity is to collect on a nuisance abatement lien, the fee for administrative costs shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code or 25 percent of the costs, whichever is less; however, in no event shall the fee be less than set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  No tax assessment or tax bill shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the collection procedures prescribed in the Code of Virginia during the pendency of any administrative appeal under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3980, so long as the appeal is filed within 90 days of the date of the assessment, and 30 days after the date of the final determination of the appeal, provided that nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the assessment or refund, following the final determination of such appeal, of such interest as otherwise may be provided by general law as to that portion of a tax bill that has remained unpaid or was overpaid during the pendency of such appeal and is determined in such appeal to be properly due and owing. 
(Code 1988, § 1-14; Ord. No. 2003-44, § 2, 7-22-2003) 
State Law reference— Penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, charges, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940 et seq.; payment of administrative costs, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3958.  
Sec. 35-4. - Same—Taxes on personal property and machinery and tools. 
(a)  City taxes on personal property, except as provided under section 35-11 of this Code, and machinery and tools shall be paid on or before June 5 of the year in which such taxes are assessed. 
(b)  City taxes on personal property and machinery and tools of public service companies which are assessed by the state corporation commission shall be paid on or before December 5 of the year in which such taxes are assessed. 
(c)  Any person who shall fail to file such return when due shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax assessable on such return or $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. If the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance then both such penalties may be assessed. Such penalty shall be assessed on the day after such return is due. Any such penalty when so assessed shall become a part of the tax. 
(d)  In the event any taxes on personal property and machinery and tools are not paid on or before the time the same are due and payable, there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten percent of such unpaid taxes or $10.00, whichever is greater, but the penalty is not to exceed the amount of the unpaid tax. 
(e)  There is hereby imposed a fee to cover the administrative costs associated with the collection of delinquent taxes. Such fee shall be in addition to all penalties and interest, and shall be imposed in accordance with the provisions of section 35-3. 
(f)  In the instance that the city treasurer collects any tax owed to the city as a consequence of an action by an agency of the commonwealth pursuant to any program authorized by the Code of Virginia, any fee that such agency is allowed to charge the city or the taxpayer, pursuant to the Code of Virginia for the agency's participation in such program may be billed and collected from the taxpayer by the city treasurer. 
(g)  Every fiduciary shall file the returns mentioned in this section with the commissioner of the revenue. Every taxpayer owning machinery and tools or business personal property, if requested by the commissioner, shall include on his annual return of such property information as to the total of original capitalized cost by year of purchase. Every such taxpayer shall file with his annual return a copy of the most recent depreciation schedule submitted to federal and state tax authorities. 
(Code 1973, § 35-3; Code 1988, § 35-3; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 2, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 1994-9, § 1, 2-22-1994; Ord. No. 1995-103, § 1, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 1, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 7-22-2003) 
Charter reference— Penalties on delinquent taxes, § 2.13. 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 35-5. - Interest on delinquencies. 
(a)  Any person failing to pay any taxes on real estate, tangible personal property, except as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, machinery and tools or other taxes due to the city shall incur, in addition to a penalty thereon, interest on that amount of taxes which is due plus interest on any penalty assessed. Interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the first day following the day such taxes are due and said penalty is assessed shall be collected upon the principal and penalties of all taxes and levies then remaining unpaid, and shall continue to accrue and be due until such time such taxes and penalty are paid in full. 
(b)  Any person failing to pay tangible personal property taxes on any vehicle from which the treasurer has deducted any amount to be paid by the commonwealth, as shown on the tax bill, shall incur interest on the principal amount of the tax, and any penalty assessed on the principal amount of the tax as a result of failure to pay, less the amount of the tax to be paid by the commonwealth. Interest shall be at the rate prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, and shall accrue in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Code 1973, § 35-8; Code 1988, § 35-4; Ord. No. 1989-60, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 1990-37, § 1, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1999-8, § 1, 4-27-1999)  
Sec. 35-6. - Payment of delinquent real estate taxes first; disposition of monies tendered as current tax payments. 
(a)  Whenever taxes on a parcel or real property are delinquent or past due, such taxes shall be paid and applied to the first or oldest tax recorded. A taxpayer offering to pay taxes on the parcel of real estate shall be directed by the city treasurer to pay first all delinquent taxes and then such current taxes as are due or past due. Where a taxpayer submits monies designated for payment of current taxes on a specific parcel of land which is subject to delinquent taxes, the treasurer shall, notwithstanding the taxpayer's instructions to the contrary, cause the payment to be applied to the first or oldest delinquent taxes. This application of funds shall be made in all cases, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, regardless of whether the taxpayer tendered the payment with or without the knowledge of the provisions of this section. Where funds are diverted and applied to delinquent taxes, the treasurer shall promptly give notice to the taxpayer of such application; provided, however, that the failure to give such notice shall not invalidate such application or relieve the taxpayer of the obligation to pay those taxes from which the original payment was diverted. 
(b)  The foregoing provisions to the contrary notwithstanding, no payments shall be applied to any delinquent taxes where such taxes have not been assessed in the name of the taxpayer remitting payment. Where a payment is tendered for taxes owed in respect of one parcel of land, such payment shall not be applied to any taxes which are attributable to a parcel of land separately assessed by the city assessor. 
(c)  The city treasurer may institute proceedings to sell in accordance with law any real estate when any taxes on such real estate are delinquent on December 31 following the first anniversary of the date on which such taxes have become due provided proper notice is given in accordance with subsection A of Section 58.1-3965 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1973, § 11-73.1; Code 1988, § 35-5; Ord. No. 1998-29, § 1, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 2011-43, § 1, 6-28-2011)  
Sec. 35-7. - Notice to taxpayers as to due date and penalty. 
The city treasurer shall, except as provided under section 35-11, at least ten days prior to the time any city taxes or installments thereon are due, give public notice by advertisement in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city of the due date for such taxes and the penalties for failure to pay same when due. 
(Code 1973, § 35-4; Code 1988, § 35-6; Ord. No. 1995-103, § 1, 11-14-1995) 
State Law reference— Treasurer to publicize tax due dates, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3911.  
Sec. 35-8. - Assessment of personal property. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall proceed annually, on the first day of January, except as provided in section 35-9, to make assessments of all personal property, other than personal property of public service companies which is assessed by the state corporation commission, subject to the taxation by the provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the city in the same manner and form as is required by the revenue laws of the state. He shall record such assessments, upon separate rolls or books of assessments for the city, making the necessary complete copies thereof. He shall deliver to the city treasurer a copy of the record of assessments of personal property on or before the fifteenth day of April of each year and at such times as is necessary for the levying of personal property taxes. He shall deliver to the city treasurer copies of the records of assessments of personal property of public service companies which are assessed by the state corporation commission within 30 days after he receives the same. 
(Code 1973, § 35-16; Code 1988, § 35-7; Ord. No. 2006-24, § 1, 3-21-2006)  
Sec. 35-9. - Tax relief for qualifying motor vehicles. 
(a)  Basis of tax relief. The tax relief provided under this section relates to the Personal Property Tax Relief Act of 1998, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3523 et seq. ("PPTRA"), which was modified by the enactment of Chapter 1 of the Acts of Assembly, 2004 Special Session I, and the provisions of Item 503 of Chapter 951 of the 2005 Acts of Assembly (the 2005 revisions to the 2004-06 Appropriations Act, hereinafter cited as the "2005 Appropriations Act"). Terms used in this section that have defined meanings set forth in PPTRA shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3523. 
(b)  Method of computing and reflecting tax relief. For tax years commencing in 2006, the provisions of Item 503.E of the 2005 Appropriations Act, providing for the computation of tax relief as a specific dollar amount to be offset against the total taxes that would otherwise be due but for PPTRA and the reporting of such specific dollar relief on the tax bill, shall apply. The city council, shall, by resolution or ordinance, set the percentage of tax relief at a level that is anticipated to exhaust PPTRA relief funds provided to the city by the commonwealth. Personal property tax bills shall set forth on their face the specific dollar amount of relief credited with respect to each qualifying vehicle. 
(c)  Allocation of relief among taxpayers. Relief with respect to qualifying vehicles shall be provided at a percentage, annually fixed and applied to the first $20,000.00 in value of each such qualifying vehicle that is estimated to exhaust all available PPTRA relief from the Commonwealth. 
(d)  Transitional provisions. Pursuant to authority conferred in Item 503.D of the 2005 Appropriations Act, the city treasurer shall collect personal property taxes, in the amount of 100 percent of tax due without regard to any formal entitlement to state PPTRA relief, plus applicable penalties and interest, to any taxpayer whose taxes with respect to a qualifying vehicle for tax year 2005 or any prior tax year remain unpaid on September 1, 2006, or such date as commonwealth funds for reimbursement of the commonwealth's share of such bill have become unavailable, whichever occurs first. 
(e)  Penalty and interest. Penalty and interest with respect to bills issued pursuant to this section shall be computed on the entire amount of tax owed. Penalties and interest shall be computed at the rate provided in sections 35-4(c) and 35-5(b) from the original due date of the tax. 
(Code 1988, § 35-7.1; Ord. No. 2005-115, § 1, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 2006-42, § 1, 5-23-2006)  
Sec. 35-9.1. - Exemption from personal property taxation for one motor vehicle owned and regularly used by an eligible disabled veteran. 
(a)  For the calendar year beginning January 1, 2016, and ending December 31, 2016, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, unless changed, not more than one motor vehicle owned and regularly used for personal use by an eligible disabled veteran shall be exempted from the personal property tax levied by the City of Portsmouth on motor vehicles. 
(b)  When used in this section, the phrase "disabled veteran" shall mean any veteran who has either lost, or lost the use of, one or both legs, or an arm or a hand, or who is blind, or who is permanently and totally disabled, and who therefore meets the requirements established in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3506(19), including that the disability is service connected, as certified by the department of veterans services. For purposes of this section, a veteran is blind if he or she meets the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
(c)  To qualify for the exemption established herein, a disabled veteran must submit to the commissioner of the revenue: 
(1)  A written statement from the department of veterans services confirming that he or she meets the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3506(19); and 
(2)  A written statement from the department of veteran services confirming that the disability is service connected; and 
(3)  An application in the form required by the commissioner of the revenue and specifically identifying the motor vehicle for which an exemption is sought. 
(d)  An eligible disabled veteran may have no more than one motor vehicle exempted from taxation pursuant to this section. All other motor vehicles owned or regularly used by said eligible disabled veteran shall be taxed or levied pursuant to the general tax rate established by city council on motor vehicles. 
(e)  If an eligible disabled veteran seeks to change the motor vehicle subject to the exemption, the veteran must first submit an application to the commissioner of the revenue identifying the new vehicle. The exemption established by this section shall not automatically transfer or retroactively apply to a new motor vehicle acquired by an eligible disabled veteran. If an eligible disabled veteran transfers the exemption from one motor vehicle to another but maintains ownership of the first motor vehicle, the exemption shall continue to apply to the original motor vehicle for the tax year of the transfer and shall not apply to the new vehicle until the next tax year. 
(f)  The exemption established by this section shall not continue with a motor vehicle upon transfer, sale or other disposition of the vehicle by an eligible disabled veteran. 
(g)  The exemption established by this section shall first take effect for the calendar year in which an eligible disabled veteran submits an application meeting the requirements of subsection (c) for a qualified motor vehicle. The exemption shall not be applied retroactively to previous years' tax filings. 
( Ord. No. 2015-41, §§ 1, 2, 6-23-2015 ) 
Editor's note— At the city's instruction, section 35-9.1, adopted by Ord. No. 2015-41 , adopted June 23, 2015, has been codified herein as set out. These provisions shall take effect on January 1, 2016.  
Sec. 35-10. - Charging off and correction of delinquent personal property taxes. 
The commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized to charge off or correct, from time to time, such unpaid and outstanding delinquent taxes for personal property as may be found to have been erroneously or incorrectly assessed. Prior to any such action, the commissioner of the revenue shall file with the city council, the chief financial officer and the city attorney a statement of the matter, and no such action shall become final until the expiration of ten days from the date that such statement shall have been received by the council in regular session. All such actions occurring in any one calendar month shall be consolidated into and filed as one report. 
(Code 1973, § 35-17; Code 1988, § 35-8; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-11. - Proration of tax on motor vehicles, trailers and boats. 
(a)  There shall be a personal property tax assessed and levied at the rate established each year by the city council on motor vehicles, trailers and boats ("hereafter referred to in this section as taxable property") which are titled or acquire a situs within the city on or after January 2 of any year. When taxable property acquires a situs within the city on or after January 2, the personal property tax for that year shall be assessed to the owner prorated on a monthly basis for the portion of the tax year during which the taxable property is titled or has situs within the city. When taxable property with a situs in the city is transferred to a new owner within the city, the personal property tax shall be assessed to the new owner prorated on a monthly basis for the portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the taxable property. For the purpose of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month, and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. All taxable property which acquires situs or has its title transferred after January 1 shall be assessed as of the first day of the month in which the taxable property acquires situs within the city or has its title transferred. The owner of taxable property acquiring situs within the city or to whom taxable property is transferred or who shall transfer title or acquire a new tax situs for the taxable property shall file a declaration with the commissioner of the revenue within 30 days of the date on which such property acquires a change of situs or title is transferred, on a form provided by the commissioner. 
(b)  When any taxable property loses its situs within the city or its title is transferred to a new owner, the taxpayer shall from that time be relieved from personal property tax on such taxable property on a prorated basis. The taxpayer is entitled to receive a credit for taxes already paid towards taxable property newly transferred to the taxpayer, or a credit against any property taxes outstanding against the taxpayer on a prorated basis. If there be no tax liability against which the credit can apply, the commissioner of the revenue shall apply to the city treasurer for a refund which can be made without further city council action. No refunds will be paid while the owner of the taxable property has any delinquent tax account with, or liability to, the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any taxable property which acquires a situs within the commonwealth in a nonprorating locality. 
(c)  Taxes on all taxable property titled or with a situs within the city acquired on or before April 15 of any year shall be paid on or before June 5 of that year. Any person failing to pay the tax by the due date shown on the bill shall incur interest and penalties as set forth in sections 35-4 and 35-5. 
(d)  Taxes on all taxable property which acquires situs within the city or has its title transferred after April first and through December thirty-first of any year shall be paid by the date shown on the bill which is mailed to the owner of the taxable property; provided, however, such due date shall be not less than 30 days after the date of the issuance of the tax bill. Any person failing to pay the tax by the date shown on the bill shall incur interest and penalties as set forth in sections 35-3 and 35-4. 
(e)  Any person who fails to file with the commissioner of the revenue as required in subsection (a) of this section, but is subsequently assessed with personal property tax, shall be taxed from the date that the title or situs was acquired and incur penalty and interest as provided herein. 
(f)  An exemption from the tax provided for in this section shall be granted for any tax year or portion thereof during which the property was legally assessed by another jurisdiction in the commonwealth, and such tax on the assessed property was paid and not refunded in whole or in part. 
(g)  Any person who moves to the city from a nonprorating locality in a single tax year shall be entitled to a property tax credit from the city if the person was liable for personal property taxes on a motor vehicle and has paid those taxes to a nonprorating locality and the owner replaces for any reason the original vehicle upon which taxes are due to the nonprorating locality for the same tax year. The city shall provide a credit against the total tax due on the replacement vehicle in an amount equal to the tax paid to the nonprorating locality for the period of time commencing with the disposition of the original vehicle and continuing through the close of the tax year in which the owner incurred tax liability to the nonprorating locality for the original vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 35-9; Ord. No. 1991-76, §§ 3, 5, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001; Ord. No. 2006-24, § 1, 3-21-2006) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3516; mailing certain bills to taxpayers; penalties; electronic transmission, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3912.  
Sec. 35-12. - Submitting false information; refusing to answer. 
If any person shall give to the commissioner of the revenue a false list of persons or property subject to taxation, or shall refuse to give a list on oath or affirmation, when required by the commissioner of the revenue, the person so answering falsely or refusing to answer shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed to list such person and his property according to the best information he can procure. 
(Code 1973, § 35-19; Code 1988, § 35-10) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 35-13. - Inaccessible persons to furnish list. 
Any person chargeable with taxes, who may be inaccessible to the commissioner of the revenue after due diligence on his part, shall, before June 1, furnish the commissioner of the revenue with such a list as it would have been his duty to furnish him in the usual way, and shall be subject to all the provisions of section 35-12 and chapter 20 of this Code. Any person failing to comply with this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 35-20; Code 1988, § 35-11) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 35-14. - Relief from erroneous assessments and erroneous payments generally. 
(a)  Any person who feels that he has been erroneously assessed for real estate tax or local levies on tangible personal property, machinery and tools, or a local license fee, or any other local levy, may, within three years from the last day of, the tax year for which such assessment was made, or within one year from the date of the assessment, whichever is later, make in writing application to the commissioner of the revenue regarding the assessment of local levies on tangible personal property, machinery and tools, or a local license fee, or any other local levy, or to the city assessor regarding the assessment of real estate, seeking by such application exoneration or abatement of such tax if same is unpaid or refund if such tax has been paid. An application that is not timely made will not be considered. 
(b)  If the commissioner of revenue when the application is for relief from the assessment of local levies on tangible personal property, machinery and tools, or a local license fee or any other local levy, or if the city assessor when the application is for relief from the assessment of real estate, is satisfied that he has erroneously assessed any applicant for the assessment in question, and assessment exceeds the proper amount, the commissioner of revenue or city assessor shall certify to the city treasurer and the city manager, or his designee, the amount erroneously assessed. If the taxes or fees have not been paid, the applicant shall be exonerated from payment of so much thereof as is erroneous, and if such taxes or fees have been paid, the city treasurer or his successor in office and the city manager, or his designee, shall refund to the applicant the amount erroneously paid, together with any penalties and interest paid thereon. When the commissioner of revenue or city assessor who made the erroneous assessment has been succeeded by another person, such person shall have the same authority as the commissioner or assessor making the original erroneous assessment, provided he makes diligent investigation to determine that the original assessment was erroneously made and certifies thereto to the city treasurer, the city manager, or his designee, and the city attorney. Additionally, the same refund procedure shall apply to the refunds of erroneous overpayment of taxes or fees by any applicant. 
(c)  If the assessment is less than the proper amount, the commissioner of the revenue or the city assessor shall assess such applicant with the proper amount. 
(d)  When an unpaid erroneous assessment of real estate is corrected under this section, and such real estate has been sold at a delinquent land sale, the city assessor shall certify a copy of such correction to the clerk of the circuit court of the city and the clerk shall note the correction in the delinquent land book opposite the entry of the tract or lot for the year or years for which the correction is made. 
(e)  Where the assessment which is subsequently considered erroneous was made as a result of miscalculation or ministerial error on the part of the commissioner of revenue, the city assessor, or any officer or employee of the city, interest on the amount erroneously assessed will be paid along with the refund at a rate of ten percent per annum from the date that the tax was paid or from the date the tax was required to be paid, whichever date is later. No interest will be paid where the assessment in question was based on a good faith assessment, was made as a result of a statutory assessment, or where the error was made on the part of the applicant. 
(f)  Whenever the city treasurer determines that there is a valid and legal claim against the city due by reason of the erroneous payment of any local tax, levy, license or fee, he is hereby fully empowered, authorized and directed, with the concurrence and approval of the city manager, and with the consent of the city attorney, to forthwith pay the amount of such claim to the respective claimant from the general fund or such special fund into which such tax, levy, license or fee may have been deposited. 
(Code 1973, § 35-7; Code 1988, § 35-12; Ord. No. 1990-91, § 1, 8-28-1990; Ord. No. 1992-32, § 1, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1998-12, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2006-24, § 1, 3-21-2006; Ord. No. 2018-114 , § 1(Exh. A), 11-27-2018) 
State Law reference— Mailing certain bills to taxpayers; penalties; electronic transmission, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3912; correction of tax assessment, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3981; refunds of local taxes erroneously paid, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3990.  
Sec. 35-15. - Payment of locally assessed business tax prerequisite to issuance of license. 
The commissioner of the revenue shall not issue a business license for any business unless and until he receives a tax receipt and certificate signed by the city treasurer setting forth that all delinquent business license, real estate, personal property, meals, transient occupancy, severance and admissions taxes and machinery and tools taxes assessed by the city against such business have been paid in full. The requirements of this section shall be in addition to the requirements of the existing law but shall not be applicable to any person who, under the laws of the state, was not legally assessable with a personal property tax or a machinery and tools tax. 
(Code 1973, §§ 20-10, 35-5; Code 1988, § 35-13; Ord. No. 1989-101, 10-24-1989; Ord. No. 1995-85, § 1, 7-25-1995; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 1-8-2013) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Requirement of evidence of payment of business license, business personal property, meals and admissions taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700.  
Sec. 35-16. - Giving bad check for payment of taxes. 
Any person uttering, publishing or passing any check or draft for the payment of taxes due the city which is subsequently returned because of insufficient funds, because there is no account or because the account has been closed, shall pay, in addition to the sum due, the fee prescribed in section 12-69 of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 35-6; Code 1988, § 35-15) 
State Law reference— Authority for bad check charge, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-614.1; authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106.  
Secs. 35-17—35-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REAL ESTATE ASSESSMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Real estate assessments, § 2.12. 
State Law reference— Real estate assessments and reassessments generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3250 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 35-61. - Annual assessment required; office of assessor created. 
All real estate in the city not exempted from taxation by the Constitution of Virginia and not assessable for taxation by the state corporation commission as provided by law shall be assessed annually for taxation by the city, and for that purpose the office of city assessor is hereby created. 
(Code 1973, § 35-50; Code 1988, § 35-61) 
Charter reference— Council to provide for annual assessment, § 2.12(b)(1).  
Sec. 35-62. - Appointment, term and general powers and duties of assessor. 
The annual assessment of real estate in the city shall be made by a single assessor appointed by the city council for such purpose, who shall give his entire time to the duties of his office. The city assessor shall hold office during the pleasure of the council. The city assessor shall be known as the city assessor, and he shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by the laws of the state for assessors of real estate, and all the duties now devolved upon the commissioner of the revenue with respect to the assessment of real estate for taxation shall be transferred to and devolve upon the city assessor upon his taking the oath of office. The city assessor shall, on July 1 in each year, or as soon thereafter as possible, prepare the land book, reflecting all changes or assessments for that tax year, and perform all other duties required by law to be performed by the commissioner of the revenue with respect to assessment of real estate for taxation. 
(Code 1973, § 35-51; Code 1988, § 35-62) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 2.12(b)(1), (3).  
Sec. 35-63. - Authority of assessor to summons witnesses and require production of books, records, etc. 
The city assessor, in performing his duties, shall have authority to summon taxpayers, their agents and other persons who may have information on the subject to appear and testify under oath concerning the ownership and value of real estate assessable by the city assessor and to require the production of books of account and other papers and records containing such information for inspection by the city assessor. Such summons may be served by an officer authorized by law to serve process or by registered mail. Any person refusing to answer the summons of the city assessor or failing or refusing to furnish information or to produce books of account, papers or other records required by the city assessor, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day's failure to answer such summons or to furnish such information or to produce such book of account or other papers, or records, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 35-60; Code 1988, § 35-63) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 35-64. - Departments and bureaus to furnish assessor with information. 
The departments and bureaus of the city having in their possession or under their control data or information which will aid the city assessor in carrying out his work shall furnish the same to the city assessor upon written application therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 35-62; Code 1988, § 35-64)  
Sec. 35-65. - General procedure. 
The city assessor shall assess annually for taxation at its fair market value all real estate within the city subject to assessment by him, which shall include all lands, buildings, structures and improvements thereon, and manufactured homes installed according to the Uniform Statewide Building Code, and all rights thereto and interest therein, and he shall have the right and power to do all things necessary to assess such property. Except with respect to new construction and other cases where the same is not practicable, such assessments shall be completed not later than January 31 of the year preceding the tax year for which the same shall be effective, and taxes for each year on such real estate shall be made on the basis of the last assessment made prior to such year, subject to such changes as may have been lawfully made. 
(Code 1973, § 35-52; Code 1988, § 35-65; Ord. No. 1994-55, § 1, 6-14-1994) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, § 2.12(b)(1), (2).  
Sec. 35-66. - Effective date. 
Every annual assessment of real estate shall be effective for tax purposes on July 1 of the fiscal year for which the assessment is made and the taxes and other charges shall be extended on the basis of every such assessment. The beginning of the tax and assessment year for the assessment of taxes on all real estate assessable by the city for taxation shall be July 1, and the owner of such real estate on that day shall be assessed with taxes for the fiscal year beginning on that day. 
(Code 1973, § 35-56; Code 1988, § 35-66)  
Sec. 35-67. - Notice of increase. 
Whenever the assessment of any real estate is increased by the city assessor, he shall give written notice thereof to the owner in whose name such property is listed by mailing the notice to the last known post office address of such owner or person having an interest in the property, but the validity of such assessment shall not be affected by any failure to give or receive such notice. Every such notice shall contain the assessed value of such real estate immediately preceding such increase. 
(Code 1973, § 35-53; Code 1988, § 35-67) 
State Law reference— Notice of change in assessment, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3330.  
Sec. 35-68. - Preparation, form and disposition of land book. 
When preparing the land book, the city assessor shall extend the taxes, prepare the tax bills and deliver the same to the city treasurer for proof and mailing. The form of the land book shall be prescribed by the city assessor and each and every parcel of real estate shall be entered separately thereon in the name of the owner thereof or in the name of the owner of any interest therein. The land book shall be so arranged that all real estate owned by the city, religious and fraternal societies and others exempt from taxation shall be listed separately from all other property assessed. No assessment of any real estate shall be held to be invalid because of any error, omission or irregularity in charging such real estate upon the land book unless it is shown by the person contesting such assessment that such error, omission or irregularity has operated to the prejudice of his or their rights. The original of the land book shall be filed in the office of the city assessor, and copies thereof shall be filed in the offices of the city treasurer and the clerk of the circuit court of the city. No change, alteration or addition to any entry appearing therein shall be made unless authorized by law. The city assessor shall, upon the completion of each annual assessment, certify on the land book, on oath, that all real estate subject to taxation by the city has been assessed by him at the fair market value thereof and that there are no errors on the face of the land book. The city assessor shall furnish to the state department of taxation one copy of the land book and such other information regarding the assessment as it may require. 
(Code 1973, § 35-54; Code 1988, § 35-68)  
Sec. 35-69. - Land book entry when street, alley, etc., closed to public use. 
Whenever any ordinance is passed closing any street, alley or other public place to public use or travel, the city clerk shall send a certified copy of such ordinance to the city assessor and the city assessor shall enter on the land book for the next ensuing year in the name of the abutting owners or persons who may be entitled to such property the parcels of land formerly occupied by such street, alley or other public place. 
(Code 1973, § 35-61; Code 1988, § 35-69)  
Sec. 35-70. - Assessment of nontaxable property; review of assessments by state corporation commission. 
The city assessor shall assess at its fair market value all real estate belonging to the city, religious and fraternal societies and others exempt from taxation. The city assessor shall review all assessments made by the state corporation commission and compare the same with the assessments of comparable property in the city and inform the state corporation commission of any discrepancies and inequities in the assessments. 
(Code 1973, § 35-55; Code 1988, § 35-70)  
Sec. 35-71. - Application for exemption. 
Every entity, except the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth, or the United States, which owns real property exempt from taxation pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3600 et seq., after receiving 60 days' written notice, shall file biennially an application on forms supplied by the city assessor as a requirement for retention of the exempt status of the property. Such application shall show the ownership and usage of the property, and shall be filed within the next 60 days preceding the year for which the exemption, or the retention thereof, is sought. 
(Code 1973, § 35-57.1; Code 1988, § 35-71) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3605.  
Sec. 35-72. - Assessment of new buildings and improvements; substantially completed. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, all new buildings substantially completed or fit for use or occupancy prior to May 1 of the fiscal year of completion shall be assessed when so completed or fit for use and occupancy, and the city assessor shall enter in the land books the fair market value thereof as of the first day of the next succeeding quarter year after the building has been substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy. Further, the assessor shall assess or reassess, as required, any lot, tract, piece or parcel of land upon or to which improvements have been made. No partial assessment as provided herein shall become effective until information as to the date and amount of such assessment is recorded in the office of the official authorized to collect taxes on real property and made available for public inspection. The total tax on any such new building or improvement for that fiscal year shall be the sum of: 
(a)  The tax upon the assessment of such new building or improvement, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the fiscal year such building or improvement is substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire fiscal year; and 
(b)  The tax upon the assessment of such new building or improvement as it existed on July 1 of that fiscal year, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the fiscal year such building or improvement was not substantially complete or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire fiscal year. 
(Code 1973, § 35-57; Code 1988, § 35-72; Ord. No. 2019-39 , § 1, 6-11-2019) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3992.  
Sec. 35-73. - Reduction of value when building damaged or destroyed. 
When from natural decay or other causes any previously assessed building or enclosure is either wholly destroyed or reduced in value below $100.00, the city assessor shall deduct from the charge against the owner the value at which such building and enclosure may have been assessed, and if the value of the building has been impaired by fortuitous happening beyond the control of the owner to the extent of $100.00 or more, the city assessor shall assess the building on its present condition and reduce the charge for the same to the amount so assessed. No such reduction shall be allowed in the case of damage to any building if the damage is repaired during the same calendar year in which it occurred. Application for such abatement shall be made by or on behalf of the owner of the building within the calendar year in which the building was damaged or destroyed or in which the damage was sustained and shall be effective from the first day of the quarter year after the application is made. 
(Code 1973, § 35-57; Code 1988, § 35-73) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3293. See also, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3222.  
Sec. 35-74. - Release of tax lien on portion of real estate. 
In the event that a purchaser acquires a portion of a tract of real estate, the purchaser may request the city assessor to determine the amount of any delinquent tax or assessment that is properly chargeable against such portion of the real estate. The city assessor shall determine the amount of tax or assessment due on such real estate. The city treasurer shall release such portion of real estate from any lien for delinquent taxes or assessments upon receipt of payment of the total amount of taxes, including penalty and interest, and assessments which may be determined to be due on such portion of the real estate; provided, however, the city hereby expressly retains its lien for delinquent taxes, including penalty and interest, and current assessments on that portion of the property which remains unsold, until such time as the taxes, penalty and interest and current assessments are paid in full. 
(Code 1973, § 35-64; Code 1988, § 35-74; Ord. No. 1998-22, § 1, 4-28-1998)  
Sec. 35-75. - Equalization of assessments generally. 
(a)  In order to equalize assessments of real estate annually, the city assessor shall hold hearings as often as may be necessary between February 1 and March 31 in each year for the purpose of receiving such evidence as may be presented to him by any taxpayer with respect to the inequality of the assessment made of the real estate owned by such taxpayer during the 12-month period ending on January 31 last ensuing. Any taxpayer feeling aggrieved by any such assessment of his property may apply to the city assessor for the equalization thereof on forms provided by the city assessor for that purpose. 
(b)  At least ten days before the hearings provided for in subsection (a) of this section, notice thereof shall be given by publication one time in one of the newspapers having general circulation in the city. Notwithstanding such notice, such hearings may be granted by the city assessor upon appointments. 
(c)  After hearing the evidence referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the city assessor may take such action as he may deem necessary to equalize assessments and shall record the action taken in the land book. Each taxpayer having made application for such hearing and any other taxpayer affected by the action of the city assessor shall be advised of the decision of the city assessor with respect to such assessment. 
(d)  The city assessor may authorize persons employed in his office who are competent so to do to hold any hearing referred to in this section provided that the evidence presented or a summary thereof is transmitted to the city assessor for action with respect thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 35-59; Code 1988, § 35-75)  
Sec. 35-76. - Board of equalization. 
(a)  There shall be a board of equalization as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3370. 
(b)  The members of the board of equalization shall receive per diem compensation for the time they are actually engaged in the duties of their office at the rate of $50.00 per day. Such per diem compensation may be limited to such number of days as in the judgment of the council is sufficient for the work of the board in any calendar year. 
(c)  The board of equalization shall proceed to hold its hearings during the months of April and May in each year and shall consider all assessments originally made by the city assessor during the 12-month period and on January 31 last ensuing, giving precedence in order of hearing to those assessments effective for the current tax year. 
(Code 1973, § 35-58; Code 1988, § 35-76; Ord. No. 2012-04 , § 1, 1-24-2012)  
Sec. 35-77. - Relief from assessments. 
Any person, or the city, aggrieved by any assessment made by the city assessor or by the board of equalization may apply for relief in the manner provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984. 
(Code 1973, § 35-63; Code 1988, § 35-77)  
Secs. 35-78—35-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USE VALUE ASSESSMENT OF CERTAIN REAL ESTATE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance similar to this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3231. 
 
Sec. 35-101. - Findings of fact. 
The city finds that the preservation of real estate devoted to open space uses within its boundaries is in the public interest and, having heretofore adopted a land use plan, hereby ordains that such real estate shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3229 et seq. and this division. 
(Code 1973, § 35-64.1; Code 1988, § 35-101)  
Sec. 35-102. - Owner's application generally. 
(a)  The owners of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3230 and 58.1-3233 must submit an application for taxation on the basis of a use assessment to the city assessor by November 1 preceding the tax year for which such taxation is sought. 
(b)  Application under this section shall be on forms provided by the state tax commissioner and supplied by the city assessor and shall include such schedules, photographs, drawings and additional information as may be required by the city assessor. 
(c)  An application shall be submitted under this section whenever the use or acreage of land previously approved changes, except when a change in acreage occurs solely as a result of a conveyance necessitated by governmental action or condemnation of a portion of any land previously approved for taxation on the basis of use assessment. 
(d)  A separate application shall be filed under this section for each use for which qualification is sought. 
(e)  A property owner must revalidate annually, with the city assessor, any application previously approved under this division on forms prepared by the city assessor and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 35-64.2; Code 1988, § 35-102) 
State Law reference— Application by property owners for assessment, etc., continuation of assessment, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3234.  
Sec. 35-103. - Misstatements in application. 
(a)  In the event of a material misstatement of facts in the application or a material change in such facts prior to the date of assessment, such application for taxation based on use assessment granted thereunder shall be void and the tax for such year extended on the basis of value determined under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3236(D). No application for assessment based on use shall be accepted or approved if, at the time the application is filed, the tax on the land affected is delinquent. Upon the payment of all delinquent taxes, including penalties and interest, the application shall be treated in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Any person failing to report properly any change in use of property for which an application for use value taxation had been filed shall be liable for all such taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if he had complied herewith and assessments had been properly made, and he shall be liable for such penalties and interest thereon as may be provided by ordinance. Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any such application shall be liable for all such taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if such property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate in the taxing jurisdiction, together with interest and penalties thereon. If such material misstatement was made with the intent to defraud the locality, he shall be further assessed with an additional penalty of 100 percent of such unpaid taxes. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, incorrect information on the following subjects will be considered material misstatements of fact: 
(1)  The number and identities of the known owners of the property at the time of application; 
(2)  The actual use of the property. 
The intentional misrepresentation of the number of acres in the parcel or the number of acres to be taxed according to use shall also be considered a material misstatement of fact for the purposes of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 35-64.6; Code 1988, §§ 35-103, 35-107) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3234, 58.1-3238.  
Sec. 35-104. - Determinations by city assessor. 
(a)  Prior to the assessment of any parcel of real estate, the city assessor shall: 
(1)  Determine that the real estate meets the criteria set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3230 and the standards prescribed thereunder to qualify for one of the classifications set forth therein, and he may request an opinion from the director of the state department of conservation and recreation, the state forester or the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services; 
(2)  Determine further that real estate devoted solely to: (i) agricultural or horticultural use consists of a minimum of five acres; except that for real estate used for purposes of engaging in aquaculture as defined in Code of Virginia, § 3.1-73.6 or for the purposes of raising specialty crops, the city council may by ordinance prescribe that these uses consist of a minimum acreage of less than five acres, (ii) forest use consists of a minimum of 20 acres, and (iii) open-space use consists of a minimum of five acres or such greater minimum acreage as may be prescribed by ordinance; except that for real estate adjacent to a scenic river, a scenic highway, a Virginia Byway or public property in the Virginia Outdoors Plan or for any real estate in any city, county or town having a density of population greater than 5,000 per square mile, the city council may by ordinance prescribe that land devoted to open-space uses consist of a minimum of one quarter of an acre. The minimum acreage requirements for special classifications of real estate shall be determined by adding together the total area of contiguous real estate excluding recorded subdivision lots recorded after July 1, 1983, titled in the same ownership. For purposes of this section, properties separated only by a public right-of-way are considered contiguous; and 
(3)  Determine further that real estate devoted to open-space use is: (i) within an agricultural, a forestal, or an agricultural and forestal district entered into pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4300 et seq., or (ii) subject to a recorded perpetual easement that is held by a public body, and promotes the open-space use classification, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3230, or (iii) subject to a recorded commitment entered into by the landowners with the city council, or its authorized designee, not to change the use to a nonqualifying use for a time period stated in the commitment of not less than four years nor more than ten years. Such commitment shall be subject to uniform standards prescribed by the director of the state department of conservation and recreation pursuant to the authority set out in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3240. Such commitment shall run with the land for the applicable period, and may be terminated in the manner provided in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4314 for withdrawal of land from an agricultural, a forestal or an agricultural and forestal district. 
(b)  Upon the refusal of the state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services, the state forester or the director of the state department of conservation and recreation to issue an opinion or in the event of an unfavorable opinion which does not comport with standards set forth in the statements filed pursuant to this section, the party aggrieved may seek relief in the circuit court and in the event that the court finds in his favor, it may issue an order which shall serve in lieu of an opinion for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-64.3; Code 1988, § 35-104) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3233, 58.1-3240.  
Sec. 35-105. - Land book entries; tax to be extended from use value. 
The use value and fair market value of any property qualifying under this division shall be placed on the land book before delivery to the city treasurer and the tax for the next succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value. 
(Code 1973, § 35-64.4; Code 1988, § 35-105) 
State Law reference— Real estate valuation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3236.  
Sec. 35-106. - Roll-back tax when use changes to nonqualifying use. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a roll-back tax, in such amount as may be determined under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3237, upon any property or portion thereof as to which the use changes to a nonqualifying use under this division, plus simple interest on such roll-back taxes at the rate of ten percent per annum. 
(b)  The city assessor shall determine and assess the roll-back tax of the owner of any real estate liable for such tax, which shall be paid to the city treasurer within 30 days of assessment. Failure to make such payment shall cause the owner to be liable for an additional penalty of ten percent of the amount of the roll-back tax, which penalty shall be collected as part of the tax. In addition to such penalty, there is hereby imposed interest at the rate of ten percent per annum on the amount of roll-back tax duly assessed, and the penalty thereon, to the extent the same remains unpaid. 
(Code 1973, §§ 35-64.5, 35-64.6; Code 1988, § 35-106; Ord. No. 1990-70, § 1, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Change in use or zoning of real estate assessed; roll-back taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3237; penalties, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3915, 58.1-3916.  
Sec. 35-107. - Applicability of general tax law. 
The provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq. applicable to local levies and real estate assessment and taxation shall be applicable to assessments and taxation under this division mutatis mutandis including, without limitation, provisions relating to tax liens and the correction or erroneous assessments, and for such purposes the roll-back taxes shall be considered to be deferred real estate taxes. 
(Code 1973, § 35-64.7; Code 1988, § 35-108) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3243.  
Secs. 35-108—35-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXEMPTIONS FROM REAL ESTATE TAXES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 35-121—35-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF REAL ESTATE TAXES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Payments in lieu of real estate taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3400 et seq. 
 
Sec. 35-131. - Service charge on certain real property exempt from taxation, imposed. 
There is hereby imposed, pursuant to the authority of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3400 et seq., a fee or service charge which shall be collected from the owners of all real estate within the city which is exempt from taxation under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3606(A)(1), which is property owned directly or indirectly by the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 35-231; Code 1988, § 35-131)  
Sec. 35-132. - Computation. 
(a)  The fee or service charge imposed in section 35-131 shall be based on the assessed value of the real estate and the amount which the city expended in the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year such charge is assessed for the purpose of furnishing police and fire protection and for the collection and disposal of refuse. The cost of public school education shall be included in such amount in determining the service charge imposed or faculty and staff housing of an educational institution. Any amount received from federal or state grants specifically designated for such purposes and assistance provided to the city pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 14.1-84.1 et seq. shall not be considered in determining the cost of providing such services for the real estate. The expenditures for services not provided for certain real estate shall not be applicable to the calculations of the service charge for such real estate, nor shall such expenditures be applicable when a service is currently funded by another service charge. The service charge shall not be applicable to public roadways or property held for future construction of such roadways. This service charge shall not exceed the real estate tax which would have been payable had such property been fully taxable. The service charge shall be fixed by dividing such expenditures by the assessed fair market value of all the real estate within the city, except real estate owned by the United States government or any of its instrumentalities, expressed in $100.00, including nontaxable property, provided there first be listed and published by the city assessor in the land book of the city in the same manner as taxable real estate, all the exempt real estate. 
(b)  In the valuation of exempt real estate for purposes of this section, artistic and historical significance shall not be taken into account. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the assessment or the valuation of real estate for the purposes of this section may apply to the city assessor for correction thereof. If the city assessor advises that the assessment or valuation is erroneous, he shall correct the same. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city assessor may appeal to the circuit court of the city, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984. 
(Code 1973, § 25-232; Code 1988, § 35-132) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3401.  
Sec. 35-133. - Billing; time of payment. 
The service charge imposed in section 35-131 shall be calculated and billed by the chief financial officer with payment made to the city treasurer. The payment shall be due on June 1 of the fiscal year in which billing is made. 
(Code 1973, § 35-233; Code 1988, § 35-133; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-134. - Tax exemption of real and personal property by classification and designation. 
The real and personal property of certain entities and organizations may be determined exempt from taxation by classification and designation as provided by article XVI of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 35-134; Ord. No. 2005-28, § 1, 4-26-2005)  
Sec. 35-135. - Environmental restoration sites. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority granted by § 58.1-3664 of the Code of Virginia, environmental restoration sites are hereby determined to be a separate class of property which is exempt from real estate taxation up to limit set herein, as set forth in this section. 
(b)  An environmental restoration site means real estate which contains or did contain environmental contamination from the release of hazardous substances, hazardous wastes, solid waste or petroleum, the restoration of which would abate or prevent pollution to the atmosphere or waters of the Commonwealth of Virginia and which (i) is subject to voluntary remediation pursuant to § 10.1-1232 of the Code of Virginia and (ii) receives a certificate of continued eligibility from the Virginia Waste Management Board during each year for which it qualifies for the applicable tax exemption. 
(c)  An environmental restoration site shall be classified as such for a single five-year period. That period shall commence on the date that the department of environmental quality issues a certification of voluntary completion for the property. A classification issued at any time during a calendar year shall be effective for the entire calendar year, without pro rating. The classification shall be for the current year and subsequent years only, no property shall be eligible for the classification for any year prior to 2006, and requests for reclassification for years prior to 2006 are both unauthorized and prohibited. No property shall be eligible for more than one five-year classification period. 
(d)  If an environmental restoration site is located in an enterprise zone designated by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia to take effect as of but not prior to January 1, 2014, then the classification granted by this section shall be for the full assessed value of land and improvements for any qualified tax parcel, up to a maximum assessed value of $5,000,000.00. Any assessed value in excess of $5,000,000.00 for any qualified tax parcel shall be fully taxable. For all other environmental restoration sites, the classification granted by this section shall be for the full assessed value of land and improvements for any qualified tax parcel, up to a maximum assessed value of $3,000,000.00. Any assessed value in excess of $3,000,000.00 for any qualified tax parcel shall be fully taxable. 
(e)  The burden shall be on the property owner to provide to the city assessor, within 90 days of the property owner's receipt: (i) a certification of voluntary completion from the department of environmental quality showing that the property qualifies initially as an environmental restoration site; and (ii) a certificate of continued eligibility from the Virginia Waste Management Board for each subsequent year of the five-year tax exemption period for which an exemption is sought. The city assessor shall have no responsibility to issue or to maintain the classification authorized under this section unless the property owner timely provides full and proper documentation of eligibility during each applicable tax year. 
(f)  If the owner of any property classified hereunder as an environmental restoration site fails to timely pay to the City of Portsmouth any other taxes which are legally owed to the city, he shall be deemed to have waived his claim to have the property classified under this section. This waiver shall apply for the tax year in question and for all subsequent tax years for which the property otherwise qualifies for an exemption. Once the classification of a property is deemed waived under this section, the waiver shall attach to the property and shall be irrevocable, regardless of possible change of ownership of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-45, § 1, 6-13-2006; Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1, 1-27-2015 )  
Secs. 35-136—35-155. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ELDERLY AND DISABLED PERSONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to grant exemption provided for in this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210. 
 
Sec. 35-156. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Affidavit means the real estate tax exemption affidavit. 
Applicant means a person who applies for a real estate tax exemption under this division. 
Director means the director of social services or his designee. 
Dwelling means the full-time residence of the person claiming exemption from real estate taxes under this division. 
Exemption means exemption from city real estate taxes under the provisions of this division. 
Owner means any person owning title or partial title to real property. 
Permanently and totally disabled means unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of the person's life. [6] 
Property means real property. 
Taxable year means the year for which an annual assessment is made and for which exemption is claimed under this division. 
(Code 1973, § 35-221; Code 1988, § 35-156) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217. 
 
Sec. 35-157. - Authorized. 
Subject to the annual appropriation by city council of funds at least equal to the total cost of such exemptions, real estate tax exemption is hereby authorized for qualified property owners who are not less than 65 years of age or who are permanently and totally disabled, and who are eligible according to the terms of this division. Persons qualifying for exemption are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth. Should any annual appropriation be less than the total cost of such exemptions, the tax exemption for the subject year shall be applied as a pro rata percentage of the applicable exemption. The pro rata exemption shall be calculated by dividing the appropriated funds by the total cost of the qualified exemptions. 
(Code 1973, § 35-222; Code 1988, § 35-157; Ord. No. 2009-45 , § 1, 5-12-2009, eff. 7-1-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3218.  
Sec. 35-158. - Administration. 
(a)  Eligibility. Eligibility for exemption shall be determined by the director of social services according to the provisions of this division. The director is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations in conformance with the provisions of this division and the laws of the commonwealth enabling this division as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption. 
(b)  Inquiries. The director shall make such inquiry of persons seeking exemption, requiring answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine the qualifications and eligibility for exemption. The director may, in addition, require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish the income or financial worth of any applicant for exemption. All inquiries made by the director and all information supplied by an applicant shall be deemed confidential and shall not be released to any person other than an employee or officer of the city having need for such information, unless otherwise ordered by a court of law. 
(Code 1973, §§ 35-223, 35-225; Code 1988, § 35-158) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213.  
Sec. 35-159. - General prerequisites to grant. 
An exemption shall be granted to persons eligible subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The person making application must own or partially own title to the property for which exemption is claimed. 
(2)  The person making application must be permanently and totally disabled or must be 65 years old or older as of June 30th of the immediately preceding taxable year. In the case of joint ownership between spouses occupying such property, eligibility of either spouse shall establish eligibility of both. 
(3)  The person making application shall not have disposed of assets to future heirs within the preceding five years if such assets would have made the applicant ineligible under the requirements of this section. 
(4)  The total combined income from all sources for the immediately preceding calendar year of the owner or owners claiming tax exemption and of the owners' relatives or other household member living in the subject dwelling shall not exceed $30,000.00; provided, that the first $4,000.00 of income of each relative other than spouse or other household member of the owner or owners who is living in the dwelling shall not be included in such total. In addition thereto, up to $7,500.00 of income of an owner who is permanently disabled shall not be included in such total. 
(5)  The net combined financial worth, including equitable interests, as of December 31st of the immediately preceding calendar year, of the owner or owners and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land, not exceeding one acre, upon which it is situated, and excluding furniture, household appliances and other items typically used in a home, shall not exceed $75,000.00. 
(Code 1973, § 35-224; Code 1988, § 35-159; Ord. No. 1988-42, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1988-109, §§ 1(35-224(e)), 2(35-224(f)), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-58, § 1, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 1990-39, § 1, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1992-32, § 1, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 2006-102, § 1, 12-12-2006) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that section 2 of Ord. No. 2006-102, provides, "That this ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2007 and shall apply to tax liens effective July 1, 2007." 
State Law reference— Similar provisions and authority of city as to income, net worth, etc., requirements, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3210—58.1-3212.  
Sec. 35-160. - Applicant's affidavit and certificate of disability—Generally. 
(a)  Not later than April 30 immediately preceding the taxable year in question, the person claiming exemption shall file a real estate tax exemption affidavit with the director of social services. Subject to the provisions of section 35-165, a person granted a real estate tax exemption shall refile said affidavit not later than April 30 of the third succeeding tax year following approval of an application; provided, however, each such person shall, prior to April 30 of each tax year, certify to the director that no information contained in the last preceding affidavit has changed to violate the limitations and conditions of the exemption. 
(b)  If the applicant is under 65 years of age, the affidavit required by this section shall have attached thereto a certification by the department of veteran's affairs or the railroad retirement board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors who are either licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth or are military officers on active duty who practice medicine with the United States Armed Forces to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in section 35-156. The affidavit of at least one of the doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of the person by such doctor. The affidavit of one of the doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining such permanent and total disability. 
(Code 1973, § 35-225; Code 1988, § 35-160; Ord. No. 1988-109, § 3(35-225(a)), 12-13-1988; Ord. No. 1990-71, § 1, 6-26-1990) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213.  
Sec. 35-161. - Same—Extension of time for filing. 
(a)  The city manager, upon determining good cause, may extend the time specification in section 35-160(a) for applying for the exemption, if the applicant qualified for exemption in the immediate past tax year. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of section 35-160, any person who qualifies for exemption as a result of amendment by the city council of the combined income or net combined financial worth requirements of section 35-159 shall be permitted to make application for exemption not later than the thirtieth day of June immediately preceding the taxable year in question. 
(Code 1973, § 35-225; Code 1988, § 35-161; Ord. No. 1992-39, § 2, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 2006-102, § 1, 12-12-2006) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that section 2 of Ord. No. 2006-102, provides, "That this ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2007 and shall apply to tax liens effective July 1, 2007."  
Sec. 35-162. - Certification of assessor; adjustment of tax records, etc. 
If after audit and investigation, the director determines that a person is qualified for exemption, he shall so certify to the treasurer of the city, who shall deduct the amount of the exemption from the claimant's real estate tax liability and shall adjust the tax records accordingly. Any remaining tax due shall be billed in equal installments in accordance with section 35-2. 
(Code 1973, § 35-225; Code 1988, § 35-162)  
Sec. 35-163. - Amount of exemption. 
The person or persons qualifying for and claiming exemption shall have exempted that percentage of the real estate tax levied on the qualifying dwelling set forth in the following schedule: 
Total Income All Sources 	Tax Exemption 
(Percent) 
$0.00—21,000 	100 
21,001—22,000 	90 
22,001—23,000 	80 
23,001—24,000 	70 
24,001—25,000 	60 
25,001—26,000 	50 
26,001—27,000 	40 
27,001—28,000 	30 
28,001—29,000 	20 
29,001—30,000 	10 
Over $30,000 	0 
 
(Code 1973, § 15-226; Code 1988, § 35-163; Ord. No. 1988-42, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1990-39, § 2, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1992-39, § 3, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 2006-102, § 1, 12-12-2006) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that section 2 of Ord. No. 2006-102, provides, "That this ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2007 and shall apply to tax liens effective July 1, 2007."  
Sec. 35-164. - Transfer. 
(a)  A taxpayer who is otherwise eligible for a tax exemption under this division shall not be deprived of such exemption if compelled by eminent domain proceedings, the threat of such proceedings or act of God to abandon the residence to which the tax exemption appertains. The tax exemption applicable to the residence that the taxpayer is forced to abandon shall be transferable to any residence purchased within 12 months after title to the first residence is conveyed or condemned. A taxpayer who is otherwise eligible for a tax exemption under this division shall not lose such eligibility and may transfer the same if he changes residences within the city. 
(b)  Any taxpayer seeking a transfer of an exemption shall make application therefor on forms provided by the director. Such forms shall include an affidavit reciting the facts that demonstrate eligibility for such exemption. If the director finds that the applicant is eligible for such exemption, he shall so certify to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall thereupon deduct the exempted amount from the applicant's real estate tax liability. The exemption transfer, if granted, shall take effect from the date of the filing of the transfer application. 
(Code 1973, § 35-224.1; Code 1988, § 35-164; Ord. No. 2006-102, § 1, 12-12-2006) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that section 2 of Ord. No. 2006-102, provides, "That this ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2007 and shall apply to tax liens effective July 1, 2007."  
Sec. 35-165. - Notice and effect of changes in status. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of any property owner to whom an exemption has been granted to notify the director immediately of any changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit is filed under this division and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided in this division. Such changes shall nullify any exemptions of real estate tax liability for the remainder of the then-current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following; provided, however, when change in property ownership resulted solely from the death of the qualifying individual, or sale of the property, the change shall result in a prorated exemption for the then-current taxable year, which prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption is the numerator and the number 12 is the denominator. The proceeds of the sale which would result in the prorated exemption shall not be included in the computation of net worth or income as provided in this section. 
(b)  Upon nullification or proration as provided in this section, the director shall so certify to the city treasurer who shall proceed to collect such taxes as may be due and to adjust his records accordingly. 
(Code 1973, § 35-227; Code 1988, § 35-165; Ord. No. 1989-58, § 2, 6-27-1989) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to nullification and authority to city to provide for proration, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3215.  
Sec. 35-166. - False claims. 
Any person falsely claiming an exemption shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 35-228; Code 1988, § 35-166) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 35-167. - Notice by city treasurer. 
The city treasurer shall enclose written notice, in each real estate tax bill for each taxable year of the terms and conditions of the real estate tax exemptions for elderly and disabled persons in the city. The treasurer shall employ any other reasonable means necessary to notify residents of the city about the terms and conditions of the real estate tax exemptions for elderly and handicapped persons. 
(Code 1988, §§ 35-167, 35-181; Ord. No. 1989-58, § 3, 6-27-1989; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993) 
State Law reference— Exemption or deferral of taxes on property of certain elderly and handicapped persons, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210; notice of local real estate tax exemption or deferral program for the elderly and handicapped included in tax bill, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213.1.  
Secs. 35-168, 35-169. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELDERLY AND DISABLED PERSONS; PARTIAL EXEMPTION FROM REAL ESTATE TAXES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Exemption or deferral of taxes on property of certain elderly and handicapped persons, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210; notice of local real estate tax exemption or deferral program for the elderly and handicapped included in tax bill, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213.1. 
 
Sec. 35-170. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Affidavit means the real estate tax exemption affidavit. 
Applicant means a person who applies for a real estate tax exemption under this division, who is not participating in the program as provided for in division 3 of this article. 
Director means the director of social services or his designee. 
Dwelling means a full-time residence of the person claiming exemption from real estate taxes under this division. 
Exemption means partial exemption from city real estate taxes for the amount by which the tax for any tax year exceeds the amount of tax on the subject dwelling for the tax year during which the owner claiming an exemption under this division was assessed in the 1993-1994 tax year or for the tax year thereafter if that was when the owner claiming an exemption first qualified for such exemption. Exemption for additions or substantial improvements to the subject dwelling, the value of which is determined by the city assessor, will be taxed at the rate currently in effect and added to the fixed annual amount together becoming the new annual fixed tax payable. 
Owner means any person owning title or partial title to real property. 
Permanently and total disabled means unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of the person's life. 
Property means real property. 
Taxable year means the year for which an annual assessment is made and for which exemption is claimed under this division. 
(Code 1988, ch. 35, art. IV, div. 2.1(intro.); Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993) 
State Law reference— Definition of taxable year and taxes, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1, 58.1-3600; definition of permanently and totally disabled, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217.  
Sec. 35-171. - Authorized. 
Subject to the annual appropriation by city council of funds at least equal to the total cost of such exemptions, real estate tax exemption is hereby authorized for qualified property owners who are not less than 65 years of age or who are permanently and totally disabled, and who are eligible according to the terms of this division. Persons qualifying for exemption are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth. Should any annual appropriation be less than the total cost of such exemptions, the tax exemption for the subject year shall be applied as a pro rata percentage of the applicable exemption. The pro rata exemption shall be calculated by dividing the appropriated funds by the total cost of the qualified exemptions. 
(Code 1988, § 35-171; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 2009-45 , § 1, 5-12-2009, eff. 7-1-2009)  
Sec. 35-172. - Administration. 
(a)  Eligibility. Eligibility for exemption shall be determined by the director of social services according to the provisions of this division. The director is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations in conformance with the provisions of this division and the laws of the commonwealth enabling this division as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption. 
(b)  Inquiries. The director shall make such inquiry of persons seeking exemption, requiring answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine the qualifications and eligibility for exemption. The director may, in addition, require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish the income or financial worth of any applicant for exemption. All inquiries made by the director and all information supplied by an applicant shall be deemed confidential and shall not be released to any person other than an employee or officer of the city having need for such information, unless otherwise ordered by a court of law. 
(Code 1988, § 35-172; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993)  
Sec. 35-173. - General prerequisites to grant. 
An exemption shall be granted to persons eligible, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The person making application must own or partially own title to the property for which exemption is claimed. 
(2)  The person making application must be permanently and totally disabled or must be 65 years old or older as of June 30th of the immediately preceding taxable year. In the case of joint ownership between spouses occupying such property, eligibility of either spouse shall establish eligibility of both. 
(3)  The person making application shall not have disposed of assets to future heirs within the preceding five years if such assets would have made the applicant ineligible under the requirements of this section. 
(4)  The total combined income from all sources for the immediately preceding calendar year of the owner or owners claiming tax exemption and of the owner's/owners' relatives or other household member living in the subject dwelling shall not exceed $50,000.00. 
The net combined financial worth, including equitable interests, as of December 31st of the immediately preceding calendar year, of the owner or owners and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land, not exceeding one acre, upon which it is situated, and excluding furniture, household appliances and other items typically used in a home, shall not exceed $175,000.00. 
(Code 1988, § 35-173; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 2005-95, § 1, 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 2006-102, § 1, 12-12-2006) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that section 2 of Ord. No. 2006-102, provides, "That this ordinance shall take effect on January 1, 2007 and shall apply to tax liens effective July 1, 2007."  
Sec. 35-174. - Applicant's affidavit and certificate of disability—Generally. 
(a)  Not later than April 30 immediately preceding the taxable year in question, the person claiming exemption shall file a real estate tax exemption affidavit with the director of social services. Subject to the provisions of section 35-179, a person granted a real estate tax exemption shall refile such affidavit not later than April 30 of the third succeeding tax year following approval of an application; provided, however, each such person shall, prior to April 30 of each tax year, certify to the director that no information contained in the last preceding affidavit has changed to violate the limitations and conditions of the exemption. 
(b)  If the applicant is under 65 years of age, the affidavit required by this section shall have attached thereto a certification by the department of veteran's affairs or the railroad retirement board, or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors who are either licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth or are military officers on active duty who practice medicine with the United States Armed Forces to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in section 35-170. The affidavit of at least one of the doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of the person by such doctor. The affidavit of one of the doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining such permanent and total disability. 
(Code 1988, § 35-174; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993)  
Sec. 35-175. - Same—Extension of time for filing. 
(a)  The city manager, upon determining good cause, may extend the time specification in section 35-174(a) for applying for the exemption, if the applicant qualified for exemption in the immediate past tax year. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 35-174(a), any person who qualifies for exemption as a result of amendment by the city council of the combined income or net combined financial worth requirements of section 35-173 shall be permitted to make application for exemption not later than the June 30 immediately preceding the taxable year in question. 
(Code 1988, § 35-175; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993)  
Sec. 35-176. - Certification of city treasurer; adjustment of tax records, etc. 
If after audit and investigation, the director determines that a person is qualified for exemption, he shall so certify to the treasurer of the city, who shall deduct the amount of the exemption from the claimant's real estate tax liability and shall adjust the tax records accordingly. Any remaining tax due shall be billed in equal installments in accordance with section 35-2. 
(Code 1988, § 35-176; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993)  
Sec. 35-177. - Amount of partial exemption. 
(a)  The person qualifying for and claiming exemption shall have exempted that percentage of the real estate tax levied on the qualifying dwelling set forth herein. 
(b)  Beginning with the tax year that commences on July 1, 1994, and for all tax years hereafter, with respect to persons 65 years of age or older, and permanently and totally disabled persons, the amount of tax exempted under this division on the subject dwelling for any year shall be a sum equal to the amount by which the tax for any tax year exceeds the amount of tax on the subject dwelling for the tax year during which the owner claiming an exemption under this division was assessed in the 1993-1994 tax year or for the tax year thereafter if that was when the owner claiming an exemption first qualified for such exemption. Exemption for additions or substantial improvements to the subject dwelling, the value of which is determined by the city assessor, will be taxed at the rate currently in effect and added to the fixed annual amount together becoming the new annual fixed tax payable. 
(Code 1988, § 35-177; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993)  
Sec. 35-178. - Transfer. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 35-173: 
(1)  A taxpayer who is otherwise eligible for a tax exemption under this division shall not be deprived of such exemption if compelled by eminent domain proceedings, the threat of such proceedings or act of God to abandon the residence to which the tax exemption appertains. The tax exemption applicable to the residence which the taxpayer is forced to abandon shall be transferable to any residence purchased within 12 months after title to the first residence is conveyed or condemned. 
(2)  A taxpayer who is otherwise eligible for a tax exemption under this division shall not lose such eligibility and may transfer the same if he changes residences within the city. 
(b)  Any taxpayer seeking a transfer of an exemption shall make application therefor on forms provided by the director. Such forms shall include an affidavit reciting the facts which demonstrate eligibility for such exemption. If the director finds that the applicant is eligible for such exemption, he shall so certify to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall thereupon deduct the exempted amount from the applicant's real estate tax liability. The exemption transfer, if granted, shall take effect from the filing of the transfer application. 
(Code 1988, § 35-178; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993)  
Sec. 35-179. - Notice and effect of changes in status. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of any property owner to whom an exemption has been granted to notify the director immediately of any changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit is filed under this division and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided in this division. Such changes shall nullify any exemptions of real estate tax liability for the remainder of the then-current taxable year and the taxable year immediate following; provided, however, when change in property ownership resulted solely from the death of the qualifying individual, or sale of the property, the change shall result in a prorated exemption for the then-current taxable year, which prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption is the numerator and the number 12 is the denominator. The proceeds of the sale which would result in the prorated exemption shall not be included in the computation of net worth or income as provided in this section. 
(b)  Upon nullification or proration as provided in this section, the director shall so certify to the city treasurer who shall proceed to collect such taxes as may be due and to adjust his records accordingly. 
(Code 1988, § 35-179; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993)  
Sec. 35-180. - False claims. 
Any person falsely claiming an exemption shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 35-180; Ord. No. 1993-35, § 1, 5-11-1993) 
Cross reference— Penalty for a class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 35-181—35-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - REHABILITATED REAL ESTATE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide exemption, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(A), 58.1-3221(A); amount and duration of exemption and authority of city relating thereto, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(B), 58.1-3221(B). 
 
Sec. 35-186. - Authorized; amount; duration. 
A real estate tax exemption is hereby authorized for residential, commercial and industrial real estate which has undergone substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement in an amount equal to the increase in the assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the real estate, as determined by the city assessor, and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment for a period of ten years commencing on July 1 of the year following completion of the rehabilitation. 
(Code 1973, §§ 35-229, 35-230; Code 1988, § 35-186; Ord. No. 1994-71, § 1, 6-28-1994; Ord. No. 2008-78, § 1, 11-25-2008) 
State Law reference— Authority to provide above exemption, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(A), 58.1-3221(A); amount and duration of exemption and authority of city relating thereto, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(B), 58.1-3221(B).  
Sec. 35-187. - What constitutes substantial rehabilitation—Residential real estate. 
For the purpose of this division, residential real estate shall be deemed to have undergone substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement when a structure which is not less than 25 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 40 percent without increasing the total square footage of this structure by more than 15 percent. If the total square footage of such rehabilitated, renovated, or replacement structure exceeds that of the original structure by more than 15 percent, the excess square footage above said additional 15 percent shall not be entitled to the real estate tax exemption authorized by this division. 
(Code 1973, § 35-229; Code 1988, § 35-187; Ord. No. 1994-55, § 2, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 2008-78, § 1, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 2009-105 , § 1, 10-27-2009) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3220(A).  
Sec. 35-188. - Same—Commercial or industrial real estate. 
For the purposes of this division commercial or industrial real estate shall be deemed to have undergone substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement when a structure which is no less than 25 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 60 percent without increasing the total square footage of the structure by more than 15 percent. In the event of complete replacement of such structure, the increase in the total square footage shall be no more than 100 percent. If the total square footage of such rehabilitated, renovated, or replacement structure exceeds that of the original structure by more than 100 percent, the excess square footage above said additional 100 percent shall not be entitled to the real estate tax exemption authorized by this division. 
(Code 1973, § 35-230; Code 1988, § 35-188; Ord. No. 1994-55, § 3, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 2008-78, § 1, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 2009-105 , § 1, 10-27-2009) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3221(A).  
Sec. 35-189. - Owner's application. 
The owner of property which has undergone substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement shall be required to file an application requesting the exemption provided for in this division with the city assessor not later than ten days after obtaining the building permit for the rehabilitation. The owner shall also be required to pay a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code to the city for processing the application. 
(Code 1973, §§ 35-229, 35-230; Code 1988, § 35-189; Ord. No. 1994-55, § 4, 6-14-1994) 
State Law reference— Authority for above fee, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(D), 58.1-3221(D).  
Sec. 35-190. - Does not apply when historic structure demolished. 
Where rehabilitation is achieved through demolition or replacement of an existing structure, the exemption provided for in this division shall not apply when any structure demolished is a local, state, and/or federally designated historic structure as defined in section 40-51. 
(Code 1973, §§ 35-229, 35-230; Code 1988, § 35-190; Ord. No. 2007-85, § 1, 9-11-2007, eff. 1-1-2008) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3220(E).  
Sec. 35-191. - Removal or repair of derelict buildings. 
Any building declared to be a "derelict building" pursuant to section 17-2 of the Code of the City of Portsmouth and which has been demolished or renovated shall be exempt from taxation for a period of ten years commencing on July 1 of the year following completion of the demolition or renovation in an amount equal to the fair market value of the demolition costs or the fair market value of the renovation improvements as determined by the real estate assessor for the city, and as reflected in the real estate tax assessment records. The abatement of taxes for demolition shall not apply if the structure demolished is a registered Virginia landmark or is determined by the department of historic resources to contribute to the significance of a registered historic district. This exemption shall be transferable with the property. 
( Ord. No. 2009-78, § 1, 8-11-2009)  
Sec. 35-192. - Division does not authorize listing reduced value in land book. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as to permit the city assessor to list in the land book any reduced value due to the exemption provided in this division. 
(Code 1973, §§ 35-229, 35-230; Code 1988, § 35-192) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(C), 58.1-3221(C).  
Secs. 35-193—35-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - REHABILITATED REAL ESTATE IN URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Further authority to provide above exemption, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(A), 58.1-3221(A); similar provisions as to amount and duration of exemption, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(B), 58.1-3221(B). 
 
Sec. 35-216. - Authorized; amount; duration. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 59.1-283, and the designation as an enterprise zone of such area(s) as approved by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia and described in those official Portsmouth, Virginia Enterprise Zone real estate parcel maps, which shall be retained by the local enterprise zone administrator, and as may be amended from time to time, a real estate tax exemption is hereby authorized for commercial, industrial, and mixed use real estate which is located within such zone and which has undergone substantial rehabilitation or renovation. For purposes of this division, the term "mixed use" shall mean any building developed as a mixed use development, as defined in chapter 40.1 of this code. The exemption shall be in an amount equal to the increase in the assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the real estate, as determined by the city assessor, and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment for a period of ten years commencing on July 1 of the year following the completion of the rehabilitation or renovation. 
If a commercial, industrial, or mixed use structure located within such zone has been improved through substantial rehabilitation or renovation so as to increase the assessed value of the structure by at least 100 percent without increasing the square footage of the structure by more than 15 percent, the exemption shall continue but shall be reduced by 15 percent annually for a period of five additional years so that the exemption in the 11th year will be 85 percent of the full exemption, 70 percent in the 12th year, 55 percent in the 13th year, 40 percent in the 14th year, and 25 percent in the 15th year. The exemption shall expire on June 30 of the 15th year. 
(b)  Property shall be eligible for the exemption referred to in subsection (a) of this section if the appropriate building permits were acquired by the property owner or the rehabilitation indicated on the application was completed subsequent to the inclusion of the property in the zone as verified by the city assessor. 
(Code 1973, § 35-234; Code 1988, § 35-216; Ord. No. 1994-55, § 5, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 2002-09, § 2, 3-12-2002; Ord. No. 2011-69, § 1, 9-13-2011)  
Sec. 35-217. - What constitutes substantial rehabilitation—Residential real estate. 
For the purposes of this division, residential real estate shall be deemed to have undergone substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement when a structure which is no less than 25 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 40 percent without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 15 percent. If the total square footage of such rehabilitated, renovated, or replacement structure exceeds that of the original structure by more than 15 percent, the excess square footage above said additional 15 percent shall not be entitled to the real estate tax exemption authorized by this division. 
(Code 1973, § 35-234; Code 1988, § 35-217; Ord. No. 1994-55, § 6, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 2009-105 , § 1, 10-27-2009) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3220(A).  
Sec. 35-218. - Same—Commercial, industrial, or mixed use real estate. 
For the purposes of this division, commercial, industrial, or mixed use real estate shall be deemed to have undergone substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement when a structure which is no less than 15 years of age has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 60 percent without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 15 percent. In the event of complete replacement of such structure, the portion of the replacement structure that shall be eligible for the real estate tax exemption shall not exceed 110 percent of the square footage of the original structure. 
(Code 1973, § 35-234; Code 1988, § 35-218; Ord. No. 1994-55, § 7, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 2009-105 , § 1, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2011-69, § 1, 9-13-2011) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3221(A).  
Sec. 35-219. - Same—Owner's application. 
The owner of rehabilitated real estate shall be required to file an application requesting the exemption provided for in this division with the city assessor not later than ten days after obtaining a building permit for the rehabilitation. The owner shall not be required to pay a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code to the city for processing the application. 
(Code 1973, § 35-234; Code 1988, § 35-219; Ord. No. 1994-55, § 8, 6-14-1994; Ord. No. 2011-69, § 1, 9-13-2011) 
State Law reference— Authority for above fee, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(D), 58.1-3221(D).  
Sec. 35-220. - Does not apply when historic structure demolished. 
Where rehabilitation is achieved through demolition or replacement of an existing structure, the exemption provided for in this division shall not apply when any structure demolished is a registered Virginia landmark or is determined by the state department of conservation and historic resources to contribute to the significance of a registered historic district. 
(Code 1973, § 35-234; Code 1988, § 35-220) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3220(E).  
Sec. 35-221. - Termination upon conveyance of property. 
The exemption provided for in this division shall terminate immediately upon conveyance of fee simple ownership of the subject property. 
(Code 1973, § 35-234; Code 1988, § 35-221)  
Sec. 35-222. - Division does not authorize listing reduced value in land book. 
Nothing in this division shall be so construed as to permit the city assessor to list upon the land book any reduced value due to the exemption provided for in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 35-234; Code 1988, § 35-222) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3220(C), 58.1-3221(C).  
Secs. 35-223—35-229. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - EXEMPTION FOR DISABLED VETERANS AND THEIR SURVIVING SPOUSES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 2011-20 states that this ordinance will take effect July 1, 2011. 
 
Sec. 35-230. - Grant of exemption for one hundred percent disabled veterans. 
For real estate tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2011, an exemption shall be granted to persons eligible on January l, 2011, and thereafter, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The person applying for the real estate tax exemption must be a veteran who has been rated by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or its successor agency to have a 100 percent service-connected, permanent and total disability. 
(2)  The veteran and his or her spouse must occupy the real property as their principal place of residence. 
(3)  A surviving spouse of a veteran eligible for this exemption shall also qualify for the exemption as long as (a) the death of the veteran occurs on or after January l, 2011, (b) the surviving spouse does not remarry, and (c) the surviving spouse continues to occupy the real property as his or her principal place of residence. 
(4)  The qualifying dwelling which is the principal place of residence shall not exceed one acre upon which it is situated. 
( Ord. No. 2011-20, § 1, 5-10-2011)  
Sec. 35-231. - Application for exemption, affidavit and official documentation. 
(a)  The veteran or surviving spouse claiming an exemption under this article shall file with the commissioner of the revenue on the application provided by the city an affidavit setting forth the following: 
(1)  The name of the disabled veteran and the name of the spouse also occupying the principal residence, if any. 
(2)  The address of the property for which the exemption is requested. 
(3)  Whether the real property is jointly owned by a husband and wife. 
(4)  A statement that the real property is occupied as the veteran's and/or a surviving spouse's principal place of residence. 
(b)  The veteran shall also provide documentation from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or its successor agency certifying that the veteran has a 100 percent service-connected, permanent and total disability. 
(c)  In the event that a surviving spouse of a veteran is claiming the exemption, the surviving spouse shall also provide documentation that the veteran's death occurred on or after January l, 2011. 
(d)  A veteran shall be required to refile for exemption from real estate taxes only if the veteran's principal place of residence changes. 
( Ord. No. 2011-20, § 1, 5-10-2011)  
Secs. 35-232—35-234. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - EXEMPTION FOR SURVIVING SPOUSES OF CERTAIN PERSONS KILLED IN THE LINE OF DUTY 
 
Sec. 35-235. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division, "covered person" means any person set forth in the definition of "deceased person" in Code of Virginia, § 9.1-400 whose beneficiary, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 9.1-400, is entitled to receive benefits under Code of Virginia, § 9.1-402, as determined by the Virginia State Comptroller prior to July 1, 2017, or as determined by the Virginia Retirement System on and after July 1, 2017. All references to provisions of the Code of Virginia in this division 8 refer to the provisions as the same may be amended, restated, or moved. 
(Ord. No. 2017-88 , § 1(exh. A), 9-26-17)  
Sec. 35-236. - Exemption. 
(a)  Pursuant to article X, section 6-B of the Constitution of Virginia, for tax years beginning on or after July 1, 2017, the city exempts from taxation the real property described in subsection (b) of the surviving spouse of any covered person who occupies the real property as his or her principal place of residence. If the covered person's death occurred on or prior to July 1, 2017, and the surviving spouse has a principal residence on July 1, 2017, eligible for the exemption under this section, then the exemption for the surviving spouse shall begin on July 1, 2017. If the covered person's death occurs after July 1, 2017, and the surviving spouse has a principal residence eligible for the exemption under this section on the date that such covered person dies, then the exemption for the surviving spouse shall begin on the date that such covered person dies. If the surviving spouse acquires the property after July 1, 2017, then the exemption shall begin on the date of acquisition. The city shall not be liable for any interest on any refund due to the surviving spouse for taxes paid prior to the surviving spouse's filing of the affidavit or written statement required by section 35-237. 
(b)  Those dwellings qualifying for an exemption hereunder with assessed values in the most recently ended tax year that are not in excess of the average assessed value for such year of single-family residential dwellings in the city shall qualify for a total exemption from real property taxes under this article. If the value of a qualifying dwelling is in excess of the average assessed value as described in this subsection, then only that portion of the assessed value in excess of the average assessed value shall be subject to real property taxes, and the portion of the assessed value that is not in excess of the average assessed value shall be exempt from real property taxes. Single-family homes, condominiums, town homes, manufactured homes as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 whether or not the wheels and other equipment previously used for mobility have been removed, and other types of dwellings of surviving spouses, whether or not the land on which the single-family home, condominium, town home, manufactured home, or other type of dwelling of a surviving spouse is located is owned by someone other than the surviving spouse, that (i) meet this requirement and (ii) are occupied by such persons as their principal place of residence shall qualify for the real property tax exemption. If the land on which the single-family home, condominium, town home, manufactured home, or other type of dwelling is located is not owned by the surviving spouse, then the land is not exempt. 
(c)  The surviving spouse shall qualify for the exemption so long as the surviving spouse does not remarry and continues to occupy the real property as his or her principal place of residence. The exemption applies without any restriction on the spouse's moving to a different principal place of residence. 
(d)  The exemption from real property taxes shall apply to (i) the qualifying dwelling, or that portion of the value of such dwelling and land that qualifies for the exemption pursuant to subsection (b), and (ii) with the exception of land not owned by the surviving spouse, the land, not exceeding one acre, upon which it is situated. A real property improvement other than a dwelling, including the land upon which such improvement is situated, shall also be exempt from taxation so long as the principal use of the improvement is (a) to house or cover motor vehicles or household goods and personal effects as classified in subdivision A 14 of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3503 and as listed in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3504 and (b) for other than a business purpose. 
(e)  For purposes of this exemption, real property of any surviving spouse of a covered person includes real property (i) held by a surviving spouse as a tenant for life, (ii) held in a revocable inter vivos trust over which the surviving spouse holds the power of revocation, or (iii) held in an irrevocable trust under which the surviving spouse possesses a life estate or enjoys a continuing right of use or support. Such real property does not include any interest held under a leasehold or term of years. 
(f)  In the event that (i) a surviving spouse is entitled to an exemption under this section by virtue of holding the property in any of the three ways set forth in subsection (e) and (ii) one or more other persons have an ownership interest in the property that permits them to occupy the property, then the tax exemption for the property that otherwise would have been provided shall be prorated by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction the numerator of which is 1 and the denominator of which equals the total number of people having an ownership interest that permits them to occupy the property. In the event that the principal residence is jointly owned by two or more individuals including the surviving spouse, and no person is entitled to the exemption under this section by virtue of holding the property in any of the three ways set forth in subsection (e), then the exemption shall be prorated by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction the numerator of which is the percentage of ownership interest in the dwelling held by the surviving spouse and the denominator of which is 100. 
(Ord. No. 2017-88 , § 1(exh. A), 9-26-17)  
Sec. 35-237. - Application for exemption. 
(a)  The surviving spouse claiming the exemption under this division shall file with the commissioner of the revenue of the city, on forms to be supplied by the city, an affidavit or written statement (i) setting forth the surviving spouse's name, (ii) indicating any other joint owners of the real property, (iii) certifying that the real property is occupied as the surviving spouse's principal place of residence, and (iv) including evidence of the determination of the Virginia State Comptroller or the Virginia Retirement System, as applicable, as referenced in section 35-235. The surviving spouse shall also provide documentation that he or she is the surviving spouse of a covered person and of the date that the covered person died. The surviving spouse shall be required to refile the information required by this section only if the surviving spouse's principal place of residence changes. 
(b)  The surviving spouse shall promptly notify the commissioner of the revenue of any remarriage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-88 , § 1(exh. A), 9-26-17)  
Sec. 35-238. - Absence from residence. 
The fact that surviving spouses who are otherwise qualified for tax exemption pursuant to this article are residing in hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes, or other facilities for physical or mental care for extended periods of time shall not be construed to mean that the real estate for which tax exemption is sought does not continue to be the sole dwelling of such persons during such extended periods of other residence, so long as such real estate is not used by or leased to others for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2017-88 , § 1(exh. A), 9-26-17)  
Secs. 35-239—35-245. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL SALES TAX 
 
Sec. 35-246. - Levied; to be added to rate of state sales tax, etc. 
There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, a general retail sales tax at the rate of one percent to provide revenue for the general fund of the city. The rate of such tax shall be added to the rate of the state retail sales tax imposed by the "Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act" (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq.) and shall be subject to all the provisions of such act, all amendments thereof and all rules and regulations published with respect thereto, except that the applicable brackets of prices shall be as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-628 for the combined tax and except that no discount under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-622 shall be allowed on the tax levied by this section. 
(Code 1973, § 35-74; Code 1988, § 35-246) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605.  
Sec. 35-247. - Exemption of certain energy sources. 
There is excluded from the tax imposed by section 35-246 the sale or use of artificial or propane gas, firewood, coal or home heating oil used for domestic consumption. The term "domestic consumption" means the use of artificial or propane gas, firewood, coal or home heating oil by an individual purchaser for other than business, commercial or industrial purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 35-75; Code 1988, § 35-247) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-609; exemptions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-609.10.  
Secs. 35-248—35-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CIGARETTE TAX[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to levy cigarette tax and permitted provisions of ordinance providing for the administration and enforcement of such tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3830, 58.1-3832. 
 
Sec. 35-271. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this article shall, for the purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means every dealer and other person who is authorized by the commissioner of the revenue to purchase and affix stamps to packages of cigarettes under the provisions of this article. 
Dealer means every manufacturer, jobber, wholesale dealer or other person who supplies a seller with cigarettes. 
Package means every package, box, can or other container of any cigarettes, irrespective of the material from which such container is made, in or from which retail sales of cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
Purchaser means every person to whom the title to any cigarettes is transferred by a seller within the corporate limits of the city. 
Sale means every act or transaction, irrespective of the method or means employed, including the use of vending machines or other mechanical devices, whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller to any other person within the corporate limits of the city, but shall not include any such act or transaction the taxation whereof by the city is precluded or prohibited under the constitution or the general laws of the state. 
Seller means every person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who transfers title or in whose place of business title to any cigarettes is transferred within the corporate limits of the city for any purpose other than resale. 
Stamp means any type of stamp which will effectuate the purpose of paying the taxes authorized under this article including, but not limited to, heat-applied stamps or decalcomania to be sold by the city treasurer and to be affixed by an agent to every package of cigarettes, but it shall also denote any insignia or symbol printed by a meter machine upon any such package under the authorization of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1973, § 35-90; Code 1988, § 35-271; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 35-272. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby levied and imposed by the city upon each and every sale of cigarettes a tax, to be paid by the seller, if not previously paid, in the manner prescribed in this article, which shall be 47.5 mills for each cigarette. 
(Code 1973, § 35-91; Code 1988, § 35-272; Ord. No. 1988-39, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1993-26, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 1995-55, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 2001-19, § 1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, 1-28-2003; Ord. No. 2009-38 , § 1, 5-12-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 2014-44, § 1, 5-27-2014 ; Ord. No. 2014-59, § 1, 7-8-2014 ; Ord. No. 2019-26 , § 1, 5-14-2019)  
Sec. 35-273. - Method of payment. 
The tax imposed by this article shall be paid by affixing or causing to be affixed a stamp, of the proper denominational or face value, to each and every package of cigarettes sold within the city, in the manner and at the time provided for in this article. Every dealer and every seller in the city shall have the right to buy such stamps from the city treasurer and to affix the same to packages of cigarettes as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-92; Code 1988, § 35-273; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-274. - Agents generally. 
Every dealer in the city shall have the right to buy and affix stamps as an agent, and the commissioner of the revenue may appoint, in addition to dealers, such other persons as agents for the purpose of buying and affixing stamps as he may deem necessary; provided, however, that a seller shall not be entitled to be appointed as an agent. Every agent shall at all times have the right to appoint a person in his employ to affix the stamps to any cigarettes under the agent's control. 
(Code 1973, § 35-92(a); Code 1988, § 35-274; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-275. - Preparation and sale of stamps generally; meter machines. 
(a)  For the purpose of making stamps available for use by dealers and other agents, the commissioner of the revenue shall prescribe, prepare, furnish and sell through the office of the city treasurer stamps of such design as may be necessary to evidence the payment of the tax imposed by this article. In the sale of such stamps to a dealer or other agent, the city treasurer shall allow a discount of eight percent of the value thereof to cover the cost which will be incurred by such dealer or agent in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. The commissioner of the revenue may, from time to time, and as often as he deems advisable provide for the issuance and exclusive use of stamps of a new design and forbid the use of stamps of any other design. The commissioner of the revenue is hereby empowered to make and carry into effect all such reasonable rules and regulations relating to the preparation, furnishing and sale of stamps as he may deem necessary, including the granting of refunds when deemed appropriate. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue is further authorized and empowered to prescribe the method to be employed and the conditions to be observed in the use of meter machines for printing upon packages of cigarettes insignia to represent the payment of such tax; and in case such machines are employed the discount allowed by the city treasurer shall be ten percent of the value of the tax so indicated. 
(Code 1973, § 35-92(a); Code 1988, § 35-275; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-276. - General duties of dealers and sellers with respect to stamps, imprints. 
(a)  Every dealer in cigarettes shall purchase the stamps required by section 35-273 at the office of the city treasurer and shall be necessary to pay the tax imposed by this article and shall affix a stamp evidencing payment of such tax, or cause such stamp to be affixed, to each package of cigarettes prior to delivering or furnishing such cigarettes to any seller. Nothing herein contained shall preclude any dealer from authorizing and employing any other agent to purchase and affix such stamps in his behalf or to have a stamp meter machine used in lieu of gummed stamps to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every seller shall examine every package of cigarettes prior to exposing it for sale for the purpose of ascertaining whether such package has the proper stamp affixed thereto in compliance with the provisions of this article. If, upon such examination, unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes are discovered, the seller shall immediately notify the dealer from whom such packages were obtained, and upon such notification, the dealer shall forthwith either affix to such unstamped or improperly stamped packages the proper amount of stamps or shall replace such packages with others to which stamps have been properly affixed or imprinted thereon. 
(c)  Should a seller obtain or acquire possession of unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes from any person other than a dealer, the seller shall forthwith notify the commissioner of the revenue of such fact and the commissioner of the revenue shall thereupon designate an agent to affix the proper stamps to such cigarettes, the funds required to purchase such stamps to be advanced to such agent by such seller. 
(d)  In the event that any packages of cigarettes are found in the possession of a seller without the proper stamps being affixed thereto, or without authorized printed markings of a meter machine thereon, and the seller shall be unable to submit evidence establishing that he received such packages within the immediately preceding 48 hours, the presumption shall be that such packages are being kept by the seller in violation of the provisions of this section and shall subject him to all the penalties provided for the violation of this article. 
(e)  In the event that the commissioner of the revenue shall promulgate rules and regulations so requiring, every dealer, agent or seller shall cancel all stamps upon packages of cigarettes in accordance with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 35-92(b); Code 1988, § 35-276; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-277. - Visibility of stamps or meter markings. 
Stamps or the printed markings of a meter machine shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such manner as to be readily visible to purchaser. 
(Code 1973, § 35-92(b); Code 1988, § 35-277)  
Sec. 35-278. - Seizure and sale of unstamped cigarettes. 
Whenever the commissioner of the revenue or designee shall discover any cigarettes which are subject to the tax imposed under the provisions of this article, but upon which such tax has not been paid, or upon which stamps have not been affixed or evidence of payment shown thereon by the printed markings of a meter machine in compliance with the provisions of this article, the commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to seize and take possession forthwith of any such cigarettes, which shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the city. Thereafter, the commissioner of the revenue, after providing notice of such seizure in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3832 to the known holders of property interests in such property, may sell such forfeited cigarettes. No credit from such sale shall be allowed toward any tax or penalties and interest owed. Such seizure and sale shall not be deemed to relieve any person from any of the penalties provided for the violation of this article. All monies collected under the provisions of this section shall be paid to the treasurer and treated as other taxes collected under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-97; Code 1988, § 35-278; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
State Law reference— Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3832; administer and enforce local taxes on sale or use of cigarettes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3832.  
Sec. 35-279. - Dealers' and sellers' records generally. 
It shall be the duty of every dealer and seller to maintain and to keep, for a period of two years, such records of cigarettes received and sold by him as may be required by the commissioner of the revenue, to make all of such records available for examination by the commissioner of the revenue upon demand, and to make available to the commissioner of the revenue the means, facilities and opportunity for making any such examination at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1973, § 35-93; Code 1988, § 35-279; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-280. - Disposition of revenue. 
All moneys derived by the city from the tax on the sale of cigarettes imposed by this article shall be deposited by the city treasurer to the credit of the general fund of the city for utilization for such legal purposes as the council may from time to time determine. 
(Code 1973, § 35-94; Code 1988, § 35-280)  
Sec. 35-281. - Administration of oaths; subpoena power. 
The commissioner of the revenue is authorized and empowered to administer oaths and to take affidavits in relation to any matter or proceedings in the exercise of his powers and duties relating to tax imposed by this article, and he shall have the power to subpoena and to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers or documents, and to examine such witnesses, books, papers and documents for the purpose of securing information pertinent to the performance of such duties. 
(Code 1973, § 35-96; Code 1988, § 35-281; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-282. - Rules and regulations for enforcement and administration of article; examination of books, records, etc. 
In addition to the powers granted to him elsewhere in this Code, the commissioner of the revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to: 
(1)  The method and means to be used in the cancellation of stamps. 
(2)  The delegation of any of his powers to his representative. 
(3)  The examination of books, records, invoices, papers and any and all cigarettes in and upon any premises where the same are placed, stored, sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale by seller. 
(4)  Any other matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, §§ 35-95, 35-97; Code 1988, § 35-282; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-283. - Prohibited acts enumerated. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person: 
(1)  To perform any act or to fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of the tax imposed by this article, or of any part thereof. 
(2)  To falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp or the printed markings of a meter machine, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp or printed markings of a meter machine, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamps or printed markings of a meter machine, or to use any stamp or marking more than once. 
(3)  To sell and dispense through a vending machine or other mechanical device any cigarettes upon which such tax has not been paid and upon which evidence of the payment thereof is not shown on each package of such cigarettes. 
(4)  To fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this article, or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which the commissioner of the revenue may issue under the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1973, §§ 35-98—35-101; Code 1988, § 35-283; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-284. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation and payment of a fine shall not relieve any person from the payment of any tax imposed under this article. 
(b)  In addition, any person who shall perform any fraudulent act or evade any tax imposed by this article shall be required to pay a penalty in the amount of 50 percent, and interest not to exceed three quarters of one percent per month, upon any tax found to be overdue and unpaid. 
(c)  Each violation of this article or noncompliance therewith shall be and constitute a separate offense and shall subject every person convicted thereof to the penalties prescribed herein. 
(Code 1973, § 35-102; Code 1988, § 35-284) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11. 
State Law reference— Authority to establish penalty, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3832.  
Secs. 35-285—35-295. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITY SERVICES TAX[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, adopted Oct. 10, 2000, amended Art. VI, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Authority to levy tax provided for in this article, § 2.02. 
Cross reference— License tax on heat, light and power companies, § 20-19; license tax on telephone companies, § 20-31. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 35-296—35-305. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASERS OF LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE, MOBILE LOCAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, AND WATER SERVICE[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Tax on telegraph and telephone companies authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812; tax on water or heat, light and power companies authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
 
Sec. 35-306. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this division, shall have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Purchaser means every person who purchases a utility service. 
Residential use means use by the owner or tenant of private residential property or the tenant of an apartment who is billed for and pays directly the charge for utility service in or for such property. 
Seller means every person, whether a public service corporation of the city or not, who sells or furnishes any utility service. 
Utility service means local exchange telephone service, mobile local telecommunications service, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812, and water service furnished in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 35-306; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812(M).  
Sec. 35-307. - Levied; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each purchaser of any utility service a tax upon the charge made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each purchase of utility service, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, in the amount of 20 percent of the first $2,000.00 of such charge made or incurred during any monthly period. 
(b)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each consumer of mobile local telecommunication service a tax at a rate equal to ten percent of the monthly gross charge, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812. However, the tax shall not be applicable to any amount charged in excess of $30.00 per month for each mobile service consumer. This tax shall not apply to any public safety answering point as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.1. 
(Code 1988, § 35-307; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000) 
State Law reference— Tax on telegraph and telephone companies authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812; exemption for public safety answering point authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813(E); public safety answering point defined, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.1.  
Sec. 35-308. - Application to telephone service. 
The tax imposed and levied by this division on purchasers with respect to local exchange telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local exchange telephone service, except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones; and the total amount of the guaranteed charge on each bill rendered for semipublic coin box telephone service shall be included in the basis for the tax with respect to the purchaser of such service. 
(Code 1988, § 35-308; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000) 
State Law reference— The tax on consumers of local mobile telecommunications service must also be imposed on the consumers of the other forms of local telecommunication services, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812(I).  
Sec. 35-309. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Political subdivisions. The United States of America, the Commonwealth of Virginia, its political subdivisions, and the boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempted from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this division with respect to the purchase of utility services used by such governmental agencies, except where any such governmental agency or body is engaged in an operation for profit. This exemption does not apply to a governmental agency engaged in low-rent public housing, where costs of utility services are paid in whole or in part by the tenant. 
(b)  Bottled water. The tax imposed and levied by this division shall not apply to the purchase of bottled water. 
(Code 1988, § 35-310; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-310. - Computation when seller collects charges periodically. 
In all cases where the seller collects the charges for utility services periodically, the tax imposed and levied by this division shall be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during each month; provided, that the amount of the tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1988, § 35-311; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-311. - Duty of seller to collect, report and remit. 
It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city, to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax hereby imposed and levied by this division at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the utility service. The taxes so collected during each calendar month shall be reported and remitted by each seller to the city treasurer on or before the last day of the following calendar month. The report shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the city's commissioner of the revenue and the city treasurer. 
(Code 1988, § 35-312; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-312. - Seller's records. 
Every seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases of utility services in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed hereunder. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1988, § 35-313; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-313. - Duty of treasurer generally. 
The city treasurer shall be charged with the duty of collecting the taxes levied and imposed under this division and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city, for the account of the general capital improvement fund, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 35-314; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-314. - Failure of purchaser to pay; violations of division by seller. 
Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed or levied by this division and any seller violating the provisions of this division, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this division, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 35-315; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-315. - Disposition of funds received under division. 
All funds received by the city treasurer pursuant to this division and all unappropriated funds in the utility tax fund at the effective date of this division or thereafter collected with respect to the tax on public utility services as heretofore effective, shall be transferred and paid over forthwith into a separate fund known as the "general debt service fund," to be applied as appropriated from time to time by the city council for debt on the cost of constructing or purchasing general capital improvements; provided, however, that priority of expenditure to the extent funds are available in any one year shall be as follows: 
(1)  The amount necessary for debt service on and retirement of outstanding bond issues. 
(2)  The amount of $250,000.00 for construction of curbs, gutters, and storm drains. 
(3)  All other general capital improvements. 
(Code 1988, § 35-316; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Secs. 35-316—35-319. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASERS OF GAS AND ELECTRIC SERVICE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference— Tax on water or heat, light and power companies authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
 
Sec. 35-320. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, when used in this division, shall have the following respective meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
CCF means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic feet. 
Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services in this jurisdiction. 
Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in Virginia. 
Kilowatt hours (kwh) delivered means 1,000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-594, it means kwh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kwh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity. 
Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
Service provider means a person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer. 
Used primarily means the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
(Code 1988, § 35-320; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-321. - Electric consumer utility tax levied; amount. 
In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. Such tax shall be $1.40 plus the rate of $0.015038 on each kwh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed $3.40 monthly. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers. Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers as set forth below: 
a.  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be $2.29 plus the rate of $0.013143 on each kwh delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $400.00 monthly. 
b.  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be $2.29 plus the rate of $0.015915 on each kwh delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $400.00 monthly. 
(Code 1988, § 35-321; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Code of Virginia, 58.1-3814(J).  
Sec. 35-322. - Natural gas consumer utility tax levied; amount. 
In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be $2.45 plus at the rate of $0.18 on each CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed $3.00 per month. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers. Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below: 
a.  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be $4.65 plus the rate of $0.10 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed $400.00 monthly. 
b.  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be $4.65 plus the rate of $0.10 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $400.00 monthly. 
(Code 1988, § 35-322; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-323. - Exemptions. 
The United States of America, the Commonwealth of Virginia, its political subdivisions, and the boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempted from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this division with respect to the purchase of electricity and natural gas utility services used by such governmental agencies, except where any such governmental agency or body is engaged in an operation for profit. This exemption does not apply to a governmental agency engaged in low-rent public housing, where costs of utility services are paid in whole or in part by the tenant. 
(Code 1988, § 35-323; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-324. - Billing, collection and remittance of tax. 
(a)  The service provider shall bill the electricity and natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to the city treasurer on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3814 and 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity or natural gas but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for the service and the tax and remit the tax portion to the city treasurer. 
(b)  The taxes so collected during each calendar month shall be reported and remitted by each service provider to the city treasurer on or before the last day of the following calendar month. The report shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the city's commissioner of the revenue and the city treasurer. 
(c)  Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1988, § 35-324; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-325. - Computation of bills not on monthly basis. 
Bills for electricity or natural gas service shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this division if submitted 12 times per year at intervals of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kwh will be divided by two; (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by subsection (ii) shall be multiplied by two; (iv) the tax in subsection (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax." 
(Code 1988, § 35-325; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-326. - Failure of purchaser to pay tax. 
Any consumer of electricity or natural gas failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this division, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 35-326; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-327. - Duty of treasurer generally. 
The city treasurer shall be charged with the duty of collecting the taxes levied and imposed under this division and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city, for the account of the general capital improvement fund, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 35-327; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-328. - Disposition of funds received under division. 
All funds received by the city treasurer pursuant to this division and all unappropriated funds in the utility tax fund at the effective date of this division or thereafter collected with respect to the tax on electricity and natural gas public utility services as heretofore effective, shall be transferred and paid over forthwith into a separate fund known as the "general debt service fund," to be applied as appropriated from time to time by the city council for debt on the cost of constructing or purchasing general capital improvements; provided, however, that priority of expenditure to the extent funds are available in any one year shall be as follows: 
(1)  The amount necessary for debt service on and retirement of outstanding bond issues. 
(2)  The amount of $250,000.00 for construction of curbs, gutters, and storm drains. 
(3)  All other general capital improvements. 
(Code 1988, § 35-328; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 35-329. - Failure of purchaser to pay; violations of division by seller. 
Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed or levied by this division, any seller violating the provisions of this division, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this division, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this division. 
(Code 1988, § 35-329; Ord. No. 2000-36, § 1, 10-10-2000)  
Secs. 35-330—35-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TAX FOR E-911 TELEPHONE SERVICE[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— The "whereas clause" of Ordinance No. 1988-43, from which this article is derived, recited the findings by the council required by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813, prior to the imposition of the tax provided for in this article. 
State Law reference— Enhanced 9-1-1 telephone service tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.1. 
 
Sec. 35-341. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following words shall have the following meanings except where the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
Enhanced 9-1-1 service or E-911 means a service consisting of telephone network features and public safety answering points (PSAP) provided for users of telephone systems enabling such users to reach a PSAP by dialing the digits "9-1-1." Such service automatically directs 9-1-1 emergency telephone calls to the appropriate PSAPs by selective routing based on the geographical location from which the emergency call originated and provides the capability for ANI and ALI features. 
Local telephone service means switched local exchange access service. 
Public safety agency means a functional division of a public agency which provides firefighting, police, medical or other emergency services or a private entity which provides such services on a voluntary basis. 
Public safety answering point or PSAP means a communications facility operated on a 24-hour basis which first receives E-911 calls from persons in an E-911 service area and which may, as appropriate, directly dispatch public safety service or extend, transfer, or relay E-912791 calls to appropriate public safety agencies. 
Seller means the seller of local telephone service. 
(Code 1988, § 35-341; Ord. No. 1988-43, 5-16-1988) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.1(A).  
Sec. 35-342. - Emergency (E-911) telephone system. 
There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchaser of local telephone service a tax in the amount of $3.00 per month. This tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller of local telephone service (hereinafter referred to as "seller") for the use of the city to pay the initial capital, installation and maintenance costs of its E-911 system. The city shall reduce such tax when capital and installation costs have been fully recovered, to the level necessary to offset recurring maintenance, repair, and system upgrade costs, and salaries or portion of salaries of dispatchers or call takers paid by the city which are directly attributable to the E-911 program only. The city treasurer shall notify the seller of changes in the tax rate authorized under this section. This notification will be sent by certified mail to the registered agent of the seller 60 days in advance of the date on which the tax is to be changed. 
(Code 1988, § 35-342; Ord. No. 1988-43, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1990-32, § 1, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1993-27, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 1994-30, § 1, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1997-29, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 1998-15, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 2000-12, § 1, 4-25-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax and requirement for the reduction provided for above, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.1.  
Sec. 35-343. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and political subdivisions, agencies, boards, commissions and authorities of the United States and the commonwealth are hereby exempt from payment of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to any local telephone service for which a periodic bill is not rendered. 
(Code 1988, § 35-344; Ord. No. 1988-43, 5-16-1988)  
Sec. 35-344. - Duty of seller to collect, report and remit. 
It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collecting agent for the city to add the amount of the tax imposed by this article to all periodic bills it renders to nonexempt purchasers of local telephone service. The seller shall accept remittances of the tax from purchasers at the time it collects the charges for local telephone service and shall report and pay over all taxes collected in any calendar month to the city treasurer on or before the last day of the first calendar month thereafter. At this time, the seller shall notify the city treasurer of the name and address of all purchasers who refuse to pay the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 35-345; Ord. No. 1988-43, 5-16-1988)  
Sec. 35-345. - Seller's compensation for collecting and remitting. 
Whenever the tax imposed by this article is collected by the seller acting as a tax-collecting agency for the city in accordance with this article, the seller shall be allowed, as compensation for the collection and remittance of the tax, three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for. The seller shall deduct this compensation from the payments made the city treasurer. 
(Code 1988, § 35-346; Ord. No. 1988-43, 5-16-1988) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.  
Sec. 35-346. - Seller's records. 
Every seller shall keep records showing all purchases of local telephone service in the city. These records must show the dates of bills for local telephone service and the amount of tax appearing on each bill. These records shall be kept at the office of the seller for a period of three years and shall be subject to inspection by the duly authorized agent of the city at reasonable times during normal business hours. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make copies of such records. 
(Code 1988, § 35-347; Ord. No. 1988-43, 5-16-1988)  
Sec. 35-347. - Failure of purchaser to pay; violations of article by seller. 
Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed or levied by this article and any seller violating the provisions of this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-123; Code 1988, § 35-348) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 35-348—35-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - AMUSEMENT ADMISSIONS TAX[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to levy tax provided for in this article, § 2.02. 
Cross reference— Amusements, ch. 3. 
State Law reference— Tax on admissions authorized, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1104, 58.1-3840, 58.1-3817; tax on admissions to charitable events authorized, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104.1. 
 
Sec. 35-371. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Admission charge means the charge made for admission to any amusement or entertainment, exclusive of any federal tax thereon, including a charge made for season tickets, whether obtained by contribution or subscription, a cover charge or a charge made for the use of seats or tables, reserved or otherwise, a charge made for the playing of bingo or the use of bingo cards, and similar accommodations in the city. 
Person means partnerships and bodies corporate as well as individuals, and for purposes of this article shall include officers, employees and members of any partnership and body corporate, who are under a duty to perform any act required by this article. 
Place of amusement or entertainment means any place in the city wherein or whereat any of the following are located, conducted, performed; exhibited and operated and for which an admission charge is made: Bingo games, circuses, carnivals, menageries, moving picture shows, fairs, shows and exhibitions of all kinds, dances, baseball, basketball, football, wrestling, boxing and sports of all kinds, swimming pools, concerts, theatrical, vaudeville, dramatic, operatic and musical performances and performances similar thereto, such attractions as merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, roller coasters, leap-the-dips and the like, and all other public amusements, performances and exhibitions not specifically named herein. 
(Code 1973, § 35-134; Code 1988, § 35-371; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 6, 7-9-1991) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 35-372. - Levied; amount; duty to pay. 
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected a tax of $0.01 for each $0.20 or fraction thereof in excess of $0.09 of the amount paid for the admission to any moving picture show and a tax of $0.01 for each $0.10 or fraction thereof in excess of $0.04 of the amount paid for the admission to any other place of amusement or entertainment to be paid by every person who pays an admission charge to such place. 
(Code 1973, § 35-135; Code 1988, § 35-372; Ord. No. 2005-111, § 1, 12-13-2005) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2005-111 states that this ordinance shall take effect prospectively on the date of adoption and shall not affect any accrued tax liability. 
State Law reference— Authority to impose tax on admissions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840.  
Sec. 35-373. - Collection. 
Every person receiving payment for admission to any place of amusement or entertainment on which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of tax hereby imposed from the persons making an admission payment, at the time of the payment of such admission, or from the person admitted free, at the time of such admission. If tickets or cards of admission are issued, the tax shall be collected at the time of the issuance of such tickets or cards. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until remitted as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-136; Code 1988, § 35-376)  
Sec. 35-374. - Reports and remittances generally. 
The person collecting any admission tax levied under this article shall make out a report upon such forms and setting forth such information as the chief financial officer may prescribe and require, showing the amount of admission charges collected, exclusive of the federal tax thereon, and the tax from the admission for which he is liable, and shall sign and deliver the same to the city treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the 20th of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(Code 1973, § 35-137; Code 1988, § 35-377; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 1995-120, § 1, 12-12-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-375. - Reports, remittances and deposits by temporary places of amusement or entertainment. 
(a)  Whenever any place of amusement or entertainment makes an admission charge which is subject to the tax levied by this article and the same is of a temporary or transitory nature, the commissioner of the revenue may require the report and remittance of the admission tax to be made on the day following its collection or on the day following the conclusion of a series of performances or exhibitions, or at such other reasonable time as he shall determine, and failure to comply with any such requirement of the commissioner of the revenue as to the report and remittance of the tax so required shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Before any temporary or transient amusement or entertainment shall begin operation, and before any license shall be issued therefor, if a license is required, the person operating the same shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum of money, to be estimated by the commissioner of the revenue, sufficient to cover the admission tax required to be collected by such person under the provisions of this article, as security for the collection of and payment to the city of such admission tax. At the conclusion of such transitory or transient operation in the city, such person shall file with the commissioner of the revenue the report required by this article and pay such tax collected to the city. Upon such reports being filed and payment being made, the city treasurer shall refund the deposit under this section. Should any person fail to file such report and pay such amount of tax collected within five days from the termination of the operation of such amusement or entertainment, the commissioner of the revenue may thereupon assess such person with such tax at the amount of such deposit and he shall retain such deposit in full payment of the tax collected by and due the city by such person. 
(Code 1973, § 35-142; Code 1988, § 35-378; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-376. - Collector's records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of two years, such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax he may have been liable for the collection of, and payment to the city. The chief financial officer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1973, § 35-140; Code 1988, § 35-379; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-377. - Duty of collector going-out-of-business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall quit business or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable hereunder to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1973, § 35-141; Code 1988, § 35-380)  
Sec. 35-378. - Penalty and interest for late remittance; fraudulent returns. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is to do so, shall fail or refuse to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax a penalty not to exceed ten percent of the amount of the tax for the first month the taxes are past due, and five percent for each month thereafter, not to exceed 25 percent of the amount of the taxes not remitted, or $10.00, whichever is greater. The penalty for failure to pay the tax shall be assessed on the day after any payment is due. Any penalty so assessed shall become part of the tax. 
(b)  Interest shall be added thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the first day following the day on which such taxes are due and payable. 
(c)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax shall be assessed against the person required to collect such tax. 
(Code 1973, § 35-139; Code 1988, § 35-381; Ord. No. 1994-74, § 1, 7-12-1994; Ord. No. 1995-120, § 2, 12-12-1995; Ord. No. 2005-55, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 35-379. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
If any person shall fail to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this article, any report and remittance required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such person by mail of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1973, § 35-138; Code 1988, § 35-382; Ord. No. 1995-81, § 1, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-13-2001)  
Sec. 35-380. - Violations; penalties. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each such violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of a violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of such tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-145; Code 1988, § 35-383) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 35-381. - Assessment of penalty. 
Any person, as defined in this article, who willfully fails to pay, collect or truthfully account for and pay over to the city any tax required by this article, or who willfully attempts any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or the payment thereof, or who had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt and had authority to prevent such failure or attempt and did not exercise that authority, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable for a penalty of the amount of the tax evaded or not paid, collected or accounted for and paid over, which said penalty shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as such taxes are assessed and collected. 
(Code 1988, § 35-384; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 7, 7-9-1991)  
Secs. 35-382—35-405. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESTAURANT FOOD TAX[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Cross reference— Food establishments, ch. 15. 
State Law reference— Authority to impose food and beverage tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1104, 58.1-3840. 
 
Sec. 35-406. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the following respective meanings: 
Collector means the city treasurer or his designee. 
Commissioner means the commissioner of the revenue and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspectors, other employees. 
Food means all food, beverages, or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
Food establishment means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, sold, or distributed in the city, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffeeshop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shop, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
Meal means any prepared food or drink that is ready for immediate consumption and that is offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time, or place of service. 
Person means partnerships and bodies corporate as well as individuals, and for purposes of this article shall include officers, employees and members of any partnership and body corporate, or who are under a duty to perform any act required by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-156; Code 1988, § 35-406; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 1, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 1998-33, § 1, 6-23-1998; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 6-27-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 35-407. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied on each person a tax, at the rate of 6½ percent on the amount paid for meals purchased, in or from any food establishment, whether prepared in such establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Code 1973, § 35-157; Code 1988, § 35-407; Ord. No. 1997-23, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 1998-25, § 1, 5-12-1998; Ord. No. 1998-33, § 1, 6-23-1998; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 6-27-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to impose tax on meals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840.  
Sec. 35-407.1. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on or off premises consumption. 
(b)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off premises consumption: 
(1)  Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory-prepackaged items of essentially the same nature; 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on-premises consumption, e.g., a whole cake, or a gallon of ice cream. A bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(3)  Alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages sold in factory-sealed containers. 
(4)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 USC 2012, as amended, except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. 
For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items, whether or not purchased for immediate consumption, are excluded from the said definition of food in the federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of vegetables and nonfactory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subsections (d)(3), (4) and (5) of this section. 
(c)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(d)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following purchases of food or beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption by and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm or handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, not exceeding three times per calendar year, by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Code 1988, § 35-407.1; Ord. No. 1998-33, § 2, 6-23-1998; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 35-407.2. - Exemptions; gratuities and service charges. 
(a)  Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account; provided, in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
(b)  An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, is a part of the selling price of the food and beverages and is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 35-407.2; Ord. No. 1998-33, § 2, 6-23-1998; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 35-408. - Exemption for meals furnished employees. 
Meals furnished employees in the course of, or in connection with, their employment in establishments serving food shall not be considered as sales of food under this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-159; Code 1988, § 35-408)  
Sec. 35-409. - Collection. 
(a)  Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect and remit the amount of tax imposed under this article from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the visually handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. 
(b)  The taxes to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-158; Code 1988, § 35-409; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 35-410. - Reports and remittances generally. 
It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the city the taxes imposed by this article to make a report thereof upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver such report to the city treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the 20th day of each month, covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(Code 1973, § 35-162; Code 1988, § 35-410; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 35-411. - Collector's records; preservation thereof. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve for a period of five years the records required by section 35-410. The commissioner or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 35-163; Code 1988, § 35-411; Ord. No. 1998-33, § 1, 6-23-1998; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 6-27-2000)  
Sec. 35-412. - Duty of collector upon going-out-of-business or disposing of business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and remit to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, all of such taxes shall be immediately reported and remitted and written notification must be provided to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1973, § 35-161; Code 1988, § 35-412)  
Sec. 35-413. - Interest penalty charges for delinquent taxes, fraudulent return. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is to do so, shall fail or refuse to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax a penalty not to exceed ten percent of the amount of the tax for the first month the taxes are past due, and five percent for each month thereafter, not to exceed 25 percent of the amount of the taxes not remitted, or $10.00, whichever is greater. The penalty for failure to pay the tax shall be assessed on the day after any payment is due. Any penalty so assessed shall become part of the tax. 
(b)  Interest shall be added thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum, which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the first day following the day on which such taxes are due and payable. 
(c)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax shall be assessed against the person required to collect such tax. 
(Code 1973, § 35-164; Code 1988, § 35-413; Ord. No. 1995-120, § 3, 12-12-1995; Ord. No. 2005-55, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 35-414. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such person by certified mail, sent to his last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1973, § 35-165; Code 1988, § 35-414)  
Sec. 35-415. - Food establishment operator not to advertise that he will pay or absorb tax. 
A person operating a food establishment shall not advertise in any manner, directly or indirectly, that he will absorb or pay all or any part of the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-160; Code 1988, § 35-415; Ord. No. 1998-33, § 1, 6-23-1998)  
Sec. 35-416. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax, or who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each such violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the reporting, payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-166; Code 1988, § 35-416; Ord. No. 1990-24, § 1, 4-24-1990; Ord. No. 1995-75, § 1, 6-13-1995; Ord. No. 1998-33, § 1, 6-23-1998; Ord. No. 2000-24, § 1, 6-27-2000) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 35-417. - Requirement of bond or letter of credit; authority of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall require all new food establishments, as defined in this article, to post annually a bond with corporate surety to ensure faithful performance of the establishment's duties to the city as to meal taxes collected and held by the restaurant. The bond, including the corporate surety thereon, shall be in a form deemed satisfactory by the city attorney. For such new food establishment, the amount of the bond shall be equal to the sum total of the meal taxes to be collected on estimated gross receipts for the first quarter of operation as shown on the application for business license. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no such bond shall be issued or accepted in an amount less than $1,000.00. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall require all existing food establishments, as defined in this article, with unsatisfactory reporting or remittance records to post annually a bond with corporate surety to ensure faithful performance of the establishment's duties to the city as to meal taxes collected and held by the restaurant. The bond, including corporate surety thereon, shall be in a form deemed satisfactory by the city attorney. The bond shall be in an amount not less than the sum total of the meal taxes collected by the establishment during the highest quarter of the previous tax year. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no such bonds shall be issued or accepted in an amount less than $1,000.00. 
(c)  The commissioner of the revenue is authorized to develop, implement and utilize such forms, regulations and procedures as may be useful and expedient in implementing this section. The commissioner may accept an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of the required bond; provided, that the letter of credit is reviewed and approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1988, § 35-417; Ord. No. 1990-28, § 1, 5-8-1990; Ord. No. 1998-33, § 1, 6-23-1998)  
Sec. 35-418. - Assessment of penalty. 
Any person, as defined in this article, who willfully fails to pay, collect or truthfully account for and pay over to the city any tax required by this article, or who willfully attempts any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or the payment thereof, or who had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt and had authority to prevent such failure or attempt and did not exercise that authority, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable for a penalty of the amount of the tax evaded or not paid, collected or accounted for and paid over, which said penalty shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as such taxes are assessed and collected. 
(Code 1988, § 35-418; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 8, 7-9-1991)  
Secs. 35-419—35-440. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - TRANSIENT RENTAL TAX[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to levy tax provided for in this article, § 2.02. 
State Law reference— Authority to impose tax on transient room rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 
 
Sec. 35-441. - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the following respective meanings: 
Day means any 24-hour period or portion thereof for which a room rental charge is made. 
Guest means any person who, for any period of not more than 60 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging in any hotel; provided, however, that a person enrolled in and attending full time in a school, college or university within the corporate limits of the city shall not be classified as a guest. 
Hotel means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse or other lodging place within the city offering lodging for compensation to any guest. 
Lodging means the services, meals, food, board, lodging or space furnished any guest. 
Person means partnerships and bodies corporate as well as individuals, and for purposes of this article shall include officers, employees and members of any partnership and body corporate who are under a duty to perform any act required by this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-177; Code 1988, § 35-441; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 9, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 1998-24, § 2, 5-12-1998; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 35-442. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied on each guest a tax equivalent to eight percent of the total amount paid for lodging by or for any such guest to any hotel plus a flat tax of $3.00 per room for each night of lodging at any hotel. 
(Code 1973, § 35-178; Code 1988, § 35-442; Ord. No. 1997-26, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 1998-24, § 2, 5-12-1998; Ord. No. 2001-19, § 1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2019) 
State Law reference— Authority to impose tax on transient room rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840.  
Sec. 35-443. - Collection. 
Every person receiving any payment for lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the guest on whom such tax is levied or from the person paying for such lodging at the time payment for such lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under this section shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-179; Code 1988, § 35-443; Ord. No. 1998-24, § 2, 5-12-1998)  
Sec. 35-444. - Reports and remittances generally. 
Every person collecting any tax levied by this article shall make out a report thereof, upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of lodging charges collected and the tax required to be collected and shall sign and deliver such report to the city treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the 20th day of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(Code 1973, § 35-180; Code 1988, § 35-444)  
Sec. 35-445. - Collector's records. 
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and to preserve for a period of two years such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax for which he may have been responsible, for collecting and paying to the city. The commissioner of the revenue may inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1973, § 35-181; Code 1988, § 35-445)  
Sec. 35-446. - Duty of collector going-out-of-business. 
Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1973, § 35-182; Code 1988, § 35-446)  
Sec. 35-447. - Penalty and interest for late remittance, fraudulent returns. 
(a)  If any person, whose duty it is to do so, shall fail or refuse to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax a penalty not to exceed ten percent of the amount of the tax for the first month the taxes are past due, and five percent for each month thereafter, not to exceed 25 percent of the amount of the taxes not remitted, or $10.00, whichever is greater. The penalty for failure to pay the tax shall be assessed on the day after any payment is due. Any penalty so assessed shall become part of the tax. 
(b)  Interest shall be added thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the first day following the day on which such taxes are due and payable. 
(c)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax shall be assessed against the person required to collect such tax. 
(Code 1973, § 35-183; Code 1988, § 35-447; Ord. No. 1995-120, § 4, 12-12-1995; Ord. No. 2005-55, § 1, 6-28-2005)  
Sec. 35-448. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
If any person, whose duty it is so to do, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make within the time provided in this article the reports and remittances required in this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such person by certified mail, sent to his last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1973, § 35-184; Code 1988, § 35-448)  
Sec. 35-449. - Violations of article. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Each violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 35-185; Code 1988, § 35-449) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 35-450. - Assessment of penalty. 
Any person, as defined in this article, who willfully fails to pay, collect or truthfully account for and pay over to the city any tax required by this article, or who willfully attempts any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or the payment thereof, or who had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt and had authority to prevent such failure or attempt and did not exercise that authority, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable for a penalty of the amount of the tax evaded or not paid, collected or accounted for and paid over, which said penalty shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as such taxes are assessed and collected. 
(Code 1988, § 35-450; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 10, 7-9-1991)  
Secs. 35-451—35-470. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RECORDATION TAX[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for recordation tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-814, 58.1-3800. 
 
Sec. 35-471. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied, pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-814, a tax on the first recordation in the city, of each instrument subject to the state recordation tax imposed by such chapter, except any instrument on which the state recordation tax is $0.50 specifically, in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state recordation tax. 
(Code 1973, § 35-196; Code 1988, § 35-471) 
State Law reference— Authority for above tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-814, 58.1-3800.  
Sec. 35-472. - Computation when portion of property covered by instrument located outside city. 
Where a deed or other instrument conveys, covers or relates to property located in this city and also to property located in another city, the tax imposed by this article shall be computed only with respect to the property located in this city. 
(Code 1973, § 35-196; Code 1988, § 35-472) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3801.  
Sec. 35-473. - Collection and remittance. 
The clerk of the circuit court of the city shall collect the tax imposed and levied by this article and, on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, shall remit the taxes collected during the preceding calendar month to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 35-197; Code 1988, § 35-473) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3803.  
Secs. 35-474—35-495. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TAX ON PROBATE OF WILL OR GRANT OF ADMINISTRATION[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to impose tax on probate and administration, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1718, 58.1-3805. 
 
Sec. 35-496. - Levied; amount. 
There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1718 and 58.1-3805, a tax on the probate of every will or grant of administration in the city, in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state tax as imposed by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1712 and 58.1-1713. 
(Code 1973, § 35-208; Code 1988, § 35-496)  
Sec. 35-497. - Collection and remittance. 
The clerk of the circuit court of the city shall collect the tax hereby imposed and levied and, on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, shall remit such taxes collected during the preceding calendar month to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 35-209; Code 1988, § 35-497) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3806.  
Secs. 35-498, 35-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - SHORT-TERM RENTAL TAX[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
State Law reference— Short-term rental business defined, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510; authority to impose tax on short-term rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.1. 
 
Sec. 35-500. - Short-term rental tax. 
(a)  Levied; amount. Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510, there is hereby assessed and imposed on every person engaged in the short-term rental business a tax of one percent of the gross proceeds of such business. Such tax shall be in addition to the tax levied pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605. For purposes of this section, "gross proceeds" means the total amount charged to each person for the rental of daily rental property, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510, excluding any state and local sales tax paid pursuant to the Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(b)  Short-term rental business defined. A person is engaged in the short-term rental business if not less than 80 percent of the gross rental receipts of such business in any year are from transactions involving rental periods of 92 consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessor. The term "affiliated," for the purposes of this subsection, shall mean any common ownership interest in excess of five percent of any officers or partners in common with the lessor and lessee. For purpose of this test, any rental to a person affiliated with the lessor shall be treated as rental receipts but shall not qualify for purposes of the 80 percent requirement, and any rental of personal property which also involves the provisions of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental. For purposes of this section, the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation. 
(c)  Taxation of rental property that is not daily rental property. Except for daily rental passenger cars, rental property that is not daily rental property shall be classified for taxation pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3503. The term "daily rental property" means all tangible personal property held for rental and owned by a person engaged in the short-term rental business, except trailers, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 and other tangible personal property required to be licensed or registered with the department of motor vehicles, department of game and inland fisheries or the department of aviation. 
(d)  Collection, return and remittance of tax. Every person engaged in the short-term rental business shall collect the rental tax from the lessee of the daily rental property at the time of the rental. The lessor of the daily rental property shall transmit a quarterly return to the commissioner of the revenue, indicating the gross proceeds derived from the short-term rental business to the commissioner of the revenue, and shall remit the payment of such tax as is due for the quarter to the city treasurer. The quarterly returns shall be filed and the tax shall be paid on or before the 20th day of each of the months of April, July, October and January, representing, respectively, the gross proceeds and taxes collected during the preceding quarters ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. The return shall be upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may require, showing the amount of gross receipts and the tax required to be collected. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(e)  Procedure upon failure to collect, report or remit taxes. If any person, whose duty it is to so do, shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the returns and remittances required in this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such person by certified mail, sent to his last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax and interest and penalties and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(f)  Penalty and interest. If any person, whose duty it is to so do, shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of the revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time specified in the article, there shall be added to such tax a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax passed due or the sum of $10.00, whichever is the greater amount. The assessment of such penalty shall not be deemed a defense to any criminal prosecution for failing to make any return or remittance as required in this article. Additionally, interest on late payments of all taxes due shall be added at the rate of ten percent per annum. Penalty and interest for failure to pay the tax assessed pursuant to this article shall be assessed on the first day following the day such quarterly installment payment is due. 
(g)  "Person" defined. The word "person" means partnerships and bodies corporate as well as individuals, and for purposes of this article shall include officers, employees and members of any partnership and body corporate who are under a duty to perform any act required by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 35-500; Ord. No. 1989-71, § 2, 7-11-1989; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 11, 7-9-1991; Ord. No. 1992-52, § 2, 6-23-1992)  
Sec. 35-501. - Exclusions and exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected or assessed on rentals by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth, or the United States of America, or any rental of durable medical equipment as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-608(22). Additionally, all exemptions applicable in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq. shall apply mutatis mutandis to the daily rental property tax. 
(Code 1988, § 35-501; Ord. No. 1989-71, § 2, 7-11-1989)  
Sec. 35-502. - Renters' certificate of registration. 
(a)  Every person engaging in the business of short-term rental of tangible personal property shall file an application for a certificate of registration with the commissioner of the revenue. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner of the revenue and shall set forth the name under which the applicant intends to operate the rental business, the location and such other information as the commissioner of the revenue may require. 
(b)  Each applicant shall sign the application as owner of the rental business. If the rental business is owned by an association, partnership or corporation, the application shall be signed by a member, partner, executive officer or other person specifically authorized by the association, partnership or corporation to sign. 
(c)  Upon approval of the application by the commissioner of the revenue, a certificate of registration shall be issued. The certificate shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the place of business for which it is issued. 
(d)  The certificate is not assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and the place of business designated. 
(Code 1988, § 35-502; Ord. No. 1989-71, § 2, 7-11-1989)  
Sec. 35-503. - Criminal penalties for violation of article. 
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor; provided, however, if the amount of tax due and unpaid for any quarterly installment exceeds $1,000.00, any person failing to remit payment when due shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 35-503; Ord. No. 1989-71, § 2, 7-11-1989)  
Sec. 35-504. - Assessment of penalty. 
Any person, as defined in this article, who willfully fails to pay, collect or truthfully account for and pay over to the city any tax required by this article, or who willfully attempts any manner to evade or defeat any such tax or the payment thereof, or who had actual knowledge of the failure or attempt and had authority to prevent such failure or attempt and did not exercise that authority, shall, in addition to other penalties provided by law, be liable for a penalty of the amount of the tax evaded or not paid, collected or accounted for and paid over, which said penalty shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as such taxes are assessed and collected. 
(Code 1988, § 35-504; Ord. No. 1991-76, § 12, 7-9-1991)  
Secs. 35-505—35-509. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - CABLE AND RADIO AND SATELLITE MASTER ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS (SMATV) SERVICES[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Charter reference— Power to levy taxes, § 2.02. 
 
Sec. 35-510. - Levies; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city, upon each and every purchaser of cable television and/or radio services (hereinafter referred to as cable services) and satellite master antenna television systems (SMATV) services, inside the corporate limits of the city, a tax in the amount of seven percent of the charge for cable and SMATV services made by the seller thereof against the purchaser. 
(b)  Cable television, cable radio and SMATV services furnished in the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed utility services. 
(Code 1988, § 35-510; Ord. No. 1992-31, § 1, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 35-511. - Applicability generally. 
The tax imposed and levied under this article on purchasers with respect to cable and SMATV services shall apply to all charges made for cable and SMATV services, except any charge made for a remote control tuning device. 
(Code 1988, § 35-511; Ord. No. 1992-31, § 1, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 35-512. - Exemptions. 
The United States of America, the State of Virginia and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of cable and SMATV services used by such governmental agencies. 
(Code 1988, § 35-512; Ord. No. 1992-31, § 1, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 35-513. - Duty of seller to collect and remit; seller's reports. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of cable and SMATV services, in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax imposed and levied by this article at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the service. The tax collected during such calendar month shall be reported and remitted by the seller to the city treasurer on or before the last day of the following calendar month. 
(Code 1988, § 35-513; Ord. No. 1992-31, § 1, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 35-514. - Seller's records. 
Each and every seller of cable and SMATV services shall keep complete records showing all purchases of such service in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this article. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1988, § 35-514; Ord. No. 1992-31, § 1, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 35-515. - Failure of purchaser to pay; violation of article by seller. 
Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed or levied by this article and any seller violating the provisions of this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any purchaser or seller from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this article and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1988, § 35-515; Ord. No. 1992-31, § 1, 5-12-1992)  
Sec. 35-516. - Duty of treasurer generally. 
The city treasurer shall be charged with the duty imposed under this article and shall cause the taxes collected to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 35-516; Ord. No. 1992-31, § 1, 5-12-1992)  
Secs. 35-517—35-539. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX[23] 

Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to levy bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208. 
 
Sec. 35-540. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Bank means any incorporated bank, banking association, savings bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve System, or trust company organized by or under the authority of the laws of the commonwealth and any bank or banking association organized by or under the authority of the laws of the United States, doing business or having an office in the commonwealth or having a charter which designates any place within the commonwealth as the place of its principal office, and any bank which establishes and maintains a branch in this commonwealth under Code of Virginia, § 6.1-44.1 et seq. or Code of Virginia, § 6.1-44.15 et seq., whether such bank or banking association is authorized to transact business as a trust company or not, and any joint stock land bank or any other bank organized by or under the authority of the laws of the United States upon which the commonwealth is authorized to impose a tax. The term shall exclude all corporations organized under the laws of other states and doing business in the commonwealth, corporations organized not as banks under the laws of the commonwealth and all natural persons and partnerships. 
Bank holding company means any corporation that is organized under the laws of Virginia, is doing business in the commonwealth, and is a bank holding company under the provisions of the Federal Bank Holding Company Act of 1956. 
Net capital means a bank's net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1205. 
(Code 1988, § 35-540; Ord. No. 1980-44, § 1, 5-13-1980) 
State Law reference— Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1201.  
Sec. 35-541. - Imposition of city bank franchise tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq., there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of this city, a tax on net capital equaling 80 percentum of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1204. 
(b)  In the event any bank located within the boundaries of this city is not the principal office but is a branch extension or affiliate of the principal office, the tax upon such branch shall be apportioned as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211. 
(Code 1988, § 35-541; Ord. No. 1980-44, § 1, 5-13-1980)  
Sec. 35-542. - Filing of return and payment of tax. 
(a)  On and after January 1 of each year, but not later than March 1 of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within this city shall prepare and file with the commissioner of the revenue a return as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207, in duplicate, which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, 58.1-1200 et seq. The commissioner of the revenue shall certify a copy of such filing of the bank's return and schedule and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the boundaries of this city, and such bank has branch offices located within the city, in addition to the following requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of the revenue of this city, a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1207, 58.1-1211 and 58.1-1212. 
(c)  Each bank, on or before June 1 of each year shall pay into the city treasurer's office all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1988, § 35-542; Ord. No. 1980-44, § 1, 5-13-1980) 
State Law reference— Similar provision regarding filing of return and payment of tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207.  
Sec. 35-543. - Penalty upon bank for failure to comply with article. 
Any bank which fails to file a return or pay the tax required by this article or fails to comply with any other provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the tax due. If the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that such failure is due to providential or other good cause, such return and payment of tax shall be accepted exclusive of such penalty, but with interest determined in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-15. 
(Code 1988, § 35-544; Ord. No. 1980-44, § 1, 5-13-1980) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1216.  
Secs. 35-544—35-560. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION BY CLASSIFICATION[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
State Law reference— Exemptions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3606 and 58.1-3609—58.1-3622. 
 
Sec. 35-561. - Tax exemption by classification and designation. 
(a)  Exemptions by classification. The exemptions by classification set out in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3606 and 58.1-3609—58.1-3622 are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. The city assessor is authorized to administratively approve exemptions by classification for qualified real and personal property. All requests for exemption by classification shall be initiated by application of the property owner. The application shall be on forms provided by the city assessor and shall contain all information and documents necessary to evaluate whether the property qualifies for the exemption. The city assessor may waive the requirement of a formal application for property owned directly by the United States, the Commonwealth of Virginia, or any political subdivision thereof. The city assessor shall evaluate the application in strict conformance with applicable statutory criteria and shall provide a final written determination to the applicant, the city treasurer, and the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  Exemptions by designation. In the interest of sound fiscal policy, no requests for exemption by designation shall be accepted or considered by city council; nor shall any such request be granted administratively. The city assessor is authorized to recognize only those tax exemptions by designation granted by the general assembly up until January 1, 2003, which designations shall apply to existing and newly acquired property used for qualifying purposes. 
(c)  Strict construction. All requests for tax exemption shall be strictly construed, with any doubt resolved against the grant of exemption. 
(d)  Effective date. Unless otherwise directed by city council, the grant of tax exemption under this section shall be effective from the date that the non-profit owner began using the property for the purposes specified in the statutes referenced in subsection (a) of this section, as applicable. An exemption granted under this section may be deemed effective retroactively, but in any case, no earlier than January 1, 2003. Where retroactive application on or after January 1, 2003, is approved, the city assessor shall adjust the land book accordingly, and the city treasurer shall refund any tax, including penalty and interest, paid for the period of retroactive application. 
(e)  Revocation. In the event a property no longer qualifies for a tax exemption granted by classification or general assembly designation, the city assessor may revoke the exemption, without further action by city council being necessary. Revocation shall be required where: 
(1)  The property is no longer used for the purpose by which it qualified for exemption by classification or general assembly designation; 
(2)  The property is conveyed to another person or entity; 
(3)  The nature or function of the nonprofit organization changes such that it no longer falls within the exempt classifications or designations in the Code of Virginia. 
Upon receiving information that a property no longer qualifies for an exemption, the city assessor shall notify the owner that the exemption may be revoked and giving the reasons for said revocation. The notice shall provide the owner a reasonable time to respond in writing. Upon failure of the nonprofit organization to file a timely response or to provide convincing evidence that the property continues to qualify for the exemption, the city assessor shall revoke the exemption and provide the owner with a final written determination. Nothing herein shall preclude city council from exercising independent revocation authority or from requesting revocation by the general assembly if required by state law. Additionally, nothing herein shall prevent an applicant from requesting reinstatement of the grant of exemption should circumstances warrant. 
(f)  Validation of prior grants of exemption. All exemptions granted prior to January 1, 2003, by the general assembly or by the city under prior state law are hereby affirmed and validated. Such affirmations and validations shall not preclude revocation in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  Appeal of city assessor's determination. An applicant for exemption under this article may appeal the city assessor's determination to the city council within 30 days of the date of the city assessor's written determination. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the grounds for appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk. The decision of the city council shall be by recorded vote in open meeting. The decision shall specify whether any exemption granted shall apply to real or personal property or both and the extent of any such application. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Code 1988, § 35-561; Ord. No. 2005-28, § 1, 4-26-2005)  
Sec. 35-562. - Triennial application for exempt property. 
Any entity, except the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth, or the United States, which owns property exempt under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3606 et seq., after having received 60 days' written notice from the city assessor, must triennially file an application with the city assessor as a requirement for retention of the exempt status of the property. Such application shall show the ownership and usage of such property and shall be filed within the next 60 days preceding the tax year for which such exemption or the retention thereof is sought. 
(Code 1988, § 35-562; Ord. No. 2005-28, § 1, 4-26-2005; Ord. No. 2008-38, § 1, 5-27-2008)  
Chapter 36 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Weeds constituting nuisances, § 23-26 et seq.; wetlands, ch. 39. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Violations of chapter. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 36-1) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 36-2. - Trimming of trees or other plants overhanging right-of-way. 
It shall be the duty of any person who owns or occupies any property on which are situated any bushes, shrubs, trees or other plants that overhang any public right-of-way to keep such bushes, shrubs, trees and other plants trimmed so that such overhanging projections shall in no way impede or interfere with the free public passage along such right-of-way. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, in addition to any penalty imposed for the violation, be liable to the city for any expense incurred by the city in having such bushes, shrubs, trees and other plants trimmed in conformity herewith. 
(Code 1973, § 32-13; Code 1988, § 36-2)  
Sec. 36-3. - Sale of flowers, plants, etc., on streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or have in his possession for the purpose of sale, at any stand or from any box, basket or other container on the streets of the city any flowers, bulbs, plants, trees or shrubs. This section shall not apply to a person or his agent selling in the residential portions of the city who does not remain stationary at some point for more than five minutes and who either raises on his premises the flowers, bulbs, plants, trees and shrubs offered for sale or pays the necessary license tax for the sale thereof. 
(b)  This section shall also not apply to any sidewalk vendor who obtains a permit under chapter 32, article VI of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 36-9; Code 1988, § 36-3; Ord. No. 1994-64, § 1, 6-28-1994) 
Cross reference— License taxes, ch. 20; sales, solicitations, etc., on streets and sidewalks in congested areas, § 32-23; sidewalk vendors in downtown district, § 32-171 et seq.  
Secs. 36-4—36-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS ON CITY PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Requirements of plat, § 33-73; landscaping, § 40-73. 
 
Sec. 36-26. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "director" shall mean the city's director of parks, recreation and leisure services. 
(Code 1988, § 36-26; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 36-27. - Permit for planting. 
No person shall plant any tree or shrub on city property without first having obtained a permit from the director showing the variety, size and location of such tree or shrub. The director shall have authority to trim, prune or remove any tree or shrub planted in violation of this section without serving notice upon the owner of the abutting property. 
(Code 1973, § 36-1; Code 1988, § 36-27)  
Sec. 36-28. - Pruning, removing, damaging, etc., generally. 
No person shall, without a permit from the director, prune, spray, remove, destroy, cut, girdle or deface any tree or shrub located on city property or injure the same by root cutting or exposure or by placing any chemical or substance on the ground around such tree or shrub, and no person shall, without such a permit, injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect such tree or shrub. 
(Code 1973, § 36-2; Code 1988, § 36-28) 
Cross reference— Authority of city manager to offer reward in cases involving damage to city property, § 2-167; removing or damaging trees or shrubs in parks, § 25-99.  
Sec. 36-29. - Trimming by utility companies. 
No electric light, telephone or telegraph company shall trim any tree or shrub located on city property without a permit from the director. 
(Code 1973, § 36-3; Code 1988, § 36-29)  
Sec. 36-30. - Unauthorized attachments. 
No person shall, without a permit from the director, attach or keep attached to a tree or shrub located on city property, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such tree or shrub, a sign, rope, wire or any other device. 
(Code 1973, § 36-4; Code 1988, § 36-30)  
Sec. 36-31. - Impeding entrance of air and water to roots. 
No person shall, without a permit from the director, place or maintain upon city property any stone, cement or other substance which might impede the free entrance of water and air to the roots of any tree or shrub on such property, without leaving an open space of ground outside the trunk of such tree or shrub. Such open space shall be not less than four square feet in area. 
(Code 1973, § 36-5; Code 1988, § 36-31)  
Sec. 36-32. - Protection from electrical wires. 
Every person having any wires charged with electricity running through or over a public street or park or other city property shall securely fasten or protect such wires so that they will not come in contact with any tree or shrub or such street or property, and shall so locate and affix such wires as not to cause damage to any such tree or shrub. 
(Code 1973, § 36-7; Code 1988, § 36-32)  
Sec. 36-33. - Protection during building operations. 
In the erection or repair of a building or structure, the owner thereof shall place such guards around all nearby trees and shrubs on the streets as shall effectually prevent injury to them. 
(Code 1973, § 36-6; Code 1988, § 36-33) 
Cross reference— Building regulations, ch. 7.  
Sec. 36-34. - Protection from animals. 
No person shall fasten an animal to a tree or shrub located on city property or cause an animal to stand so that it can damage such tree or shrub. 
(Code 1973, § 36-8; Code 1988, § 36-34) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, ch. 4.  
Secs. 36-35—36-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TREE PLANTING AND REPLACEMENT 
 
Sec. 36-50. - Purpose. 
(a)  The regulations set forth in this article have been made in order to assure the maintenance of an appropriate canopy of trees in the city and in accordance with findings that: 
(1)  Trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for human survival; 
(2)  Trees appreciably reduce the level of environmentally dangerous carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and play a vital role in purifying the air; 
(3)  Trees have an important role in neutralizing wastewater passing from the surface of the ground to the groundwater aquifers; 
(4)  Trees, through their root systems, stabilize the groundwater table and the soil, thereby playing an important role in erosion control and flood control; 
(5)  Trees are an invaluable physical, aesthetic and psychological counterpoint to the urban setting, providing shade and cooling the air and land, reducing noise levels and glare, and introducing visual variety into the urban landscape; and 
(6)  Trees, for the reasons listed above, have an important impact on the desirability of land and on property values. 
(b)  The regulations in this article are established pursuant to authority granted under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-961, and reflect a determination that the planting and preservation of trees is essential for the present and future health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 36-50; Ord. No. 1990-50, § 1, 6-11-1990)  
Sec. 36-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Caliper means the diameter of a tree measured six inches above existing grade. 
Canopy cover means the crown "branch" area of either a single tree or several combined trees. 
Construction footprints means the area of all impervious surfaces including, but not limited to, buildings, roads and drives, parking areas, sidewalks, and the area necessary for construction of such improvements. 
Critical protection zone (CPZ) means the area of undisturbed natural soil around a tree defined by a concentric circle with a diameter in feet equal to the number of inches of trunk diameter. 
Drip line means an imaginary line that extends downward from the outermost tips of a tree's branches to the ground. 
Multistem tree means a tree having more than one trunk emerging from the root system. 
Street tree means any tree planted within a developed public right-of-way between the curbline of the street and the property line of the site. 
Tree means any self-supporting, woody plant of a species which normally grows in the city at maturity to an overall height of a minimum of five feet. 
(Code 1988, § 36-51; Ord. No. 1990-50, § 1, 6-11-1990; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 1, 4-8-1991)  
Sec. 36-52. - Standards for planting and replacement of trees. 
The following standards shall apply to the planting and replacement of trees: 
(1)  Any preliminary or final subdivision plat submitted in accordance with the subdivision ordinance (chapter 33.1 of the city Code), which creates a lot any site development plan submitted in accordance with the zoning ordinance (chapter 40.1 of the city Code), and any application for a building permit for a principal residential structure shall include a landscape plan. The landscape plan must be drawn to the same scale as the plat or site development plan and shall clearly indicate trees to be retained or planted to meet the requirements of this article. Trees to be retained on the site shall be clearly indicated by common and botanical names; their actual location on the site; and the extent of the site covered by the canopy of each tree. Stands of five or more trees may be grouped together and shall indicate the overall area to be encompassed by their canopies. Critical protection zones for all trees to be retained, as well as a description of any protective devices proposed to comply with subsection (10) of this section, shall be indicated. Trees to be planted on the site shall be clearly indicated by botanical and common names, their proposed locations on the site; and caliper and height. The plan shall include a note indicating that trees shall be planted in conformance with subsections (9)a and (9)b of this section. When a landscape plan for a site has already been approved as part of a subdivision or site development plan for a larger development, no new landscape plan shall be required, provided that the development of the site shall comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(2)  a.  The landscape plan shall provide for the planting or replacement of trees on the site to the extent that, after 20 years, minimum tree canopy cover percentages will be provided as specified in the Table 36.1, which table has been printed at the end of this article. 
b.  Canopy cover calculations shall be made based upon data provided in "Trees and Shrubs for Virginia Landscapes," Volume 1, 1989, by Bonnie Lee Appleton and Terri Chappell for the Virginia Nurserymen's Association; "Handbook of Landscape Tree Cultivars," 1989, by Willet N. Waddell; and "Landscape Plants in Design," 1983, by E. C. Martin, Jr. If a range of distance is provided for the width of a tree, the average of the range shall be used. In cases of conflict among the references, the larger width specification shall be used. The determined width shall then be divided by two to determine the radius of the tree canopy. This radius shall be multiplied by two-thirds to obtain the 20-year radius. The area of the canopy cover of the tree shall be calculated using the 20-year radius. If no data is provided in the references for a tree proposed to be used, canopy cover of the proposed tree and the reference source used to calculate that canopy cover shall be indicated on the landscape plan. To encourage the planting of a variety of tree species, the following credit will be given for each tree: 
Calculated 20-Year Tree Canopy (Square Feet) 	Allowed Credit (Square Feet) 
0—300 	300 
300—1,000 	1,000 
1,001 + 	2,000 
 
(3)  The area of a site to be used in calculating canopy cover shall be the area of the zone lot or the actual size of the lot at the time of plan submittal, as defined in chapter 40.1. 
(4)  a.  Trees shall be selected from those listed on the City of Portsmouth's approved lists which shall be maintained by the environmental manager or the city manager's designee and which may be amended as necessary by the city manager or his designee. Substitutions using trees not on the list may be made with the approval of the director or the director's designee. No tree from the list of nonacceptable trees may be used. 
b.  Small trees with single stems must have a caliper of 1½ inches at the time of planting. Multistem trees must be a minimum of five feet in height at time of planting. Medium trees must have a minimum caliper of 1½ inches and large trees must have a minimum caliper of two inches at time of planting. All trees must be planted in accordance with the planting specifications of subsection (9) of this section. 
(5)  Trees existing on the site may be used to satisfy the canopy coverage requirements of subsection (2) of this section. The landscape plan must identify such trees. Trees must be physically and structurally in good condition. All such trees on the site during construction must be protected in accordance with the provisions of subsection (10) of this section. Stands of five or more trees shall be credited canopy area equal to that covered at the time of application for approval of the landscape plan. 
(6)  Existing or proposed street trees planted or to be planted along the street in the public right-of-way may be used to satisfy the canopy coverage requirements. All trees must be approved by the director or the director's designee as required in subsection (7) of this section. 
(7)  No landscape plan shall be approved unless the director or the director's designee makes the following certifications: 
a.  All existing trees to be retained in compliance with the requirements of this article are physically and structurally sound; 
b.  Where street trees are proposed, the landscape plan provides for acceptable spacing, lawn area and species selection in relation to streets, sidewalks, utilities, traffic sight lines and parking areas. 
(8)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any part of the development until the trees required by subsection (1) of this section for that part have been planted and all such trees have been determined to be physically and structurally sound by the director or by the director's designee. In lieu of actual planting, an applicant for a certificate of occupancy may post a bond or other form of security acceptable to the city attorney to ensure the timely completion of the approval tree planting plan. 
(9)  All trees to be planted shall be installed in conformance with the following criteria: 
a.  All trees to be planted in accordance with "American Standards for Nursery Stock," published by the American Association of Nurserymen. All trees shall be balled and burlapped or container-grown. 
b.  All trees shall be installed in accordance with the road and bridge specifications of the Virginia Department of Transportation and "Landscape Planting and Protection Manual, Portsmouth, Virginia." 
c.  The owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all trees located on the property. Where trees are installed in accordance with the provisions of this article, it shall be the responsibility of the lot owner to maintain the trees. The trees must be maintained, alive, for a period of one year. If any of the trees dies during the first year after planting, it must be replaced by the owner. 
(10)  Trees to be retained on the lot in accordance with the approved landscape plan shall be protected utilizing methods prescribed in "Landscape Planting and Protection Manual, Portsmouth, Virginia." 
a.  Trees or tree areas that are to be retained shall be marked visibly in the field prior to clearing or construction by use of one of the methods specified in the "Landscape Planting and Protection Manual, Portsmouth, Virginia." 
b.  Protection devices shall be installed prior to clearing or construction and shall be shown on the submitted landscape plan. Such devices shall be evident and effective and shall be maintained at all times. Failure to maintain such devices shall be cause for the issuance of a stop work order. Construction personnel shall be notified of the purpose and presence of the protection devices. 
c.  If it becomes necessary subsequent to clearing to remove additional trees which were shown on the approved plan to be retained, such trees may be removed if compliance with the required canopy coverage and all other requirements of this article are maintained and a revised landscape plan is approved. 
(Code 1988, § 36-52; Ord. No. 1990-50, § 1, 6-11-1990; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 2, 4-8-1991; Ord. No. 1993-13, § 1, 2-8-1993; Ord. No. 1997-15, § 2, 3-11-1997; Ord. No. 2016-94 , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
Sec. 36-53. - Exceptions. 
The planning director may grant a partial exception to the requirements of this article under the circumstances listed in this section: 
(1)  Such exception shall reduce the required tree canopy by the minimum extent necessary to provide a reasonable buildable area. 
(2)  Exceptions may be granted under the following conditions: 
a.  Where the planning director finds that the combined requirements of this article, the zoning ordinance, any ordinances adopted in compliance with the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, or the requirements of chapter 39 of the city Code for the protection of tidal wetlands would result in the elimination of a reasonably developable area on the site. 
b.  Where the proposed use of the property is agriculture, outdoor recreation, or aviation and the planning director finds that full compliance with this article would unreasonably reduce the unwooded area of the site necessary for such use. 
c.  Where the proposed development is an expansion of an existing development on the same zone lot, the procedure for calculating required tree canopy coverage shall be modified by substituting the term "construction footprint" for the term "zone lot" in section 36-52(3). 
(Code 1988, § 36-53; Ord. No. 1990-50, § 1, 6-11-1990; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 2, 4-8-1991; Ord. No. 1993-13, § 1, 2-8-1993)  
Sec. 36-54. - Exemptions. 
A lot that is dedicated as a school site or a playing field or similar nonwooded recreation area is exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 36-54; Ord. No. 1990-50, § 1, 6-11-1990)  
Sec. 36-55. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $250.00. Each day's continuance of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1988, § 36-55; Ord. No. 1990-50, § 1, 6-11-1990)  
Sec. 36-56. - Appeals. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals may also hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by any city official in the enforcement or interpretation of this article. The appeal shall be limited to the correctness of the city official's application of the article and shall not be used to grant an exception or variance thereto. 
(b)  Applications for appeals shall be made in writing to the planning director and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code to cover this cost of reviewing and processing the application. 
(Code 1988, § 36-56; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 4, 4-8-1991; Ord. No. 2016-94 , § 2, 12-13-2016 
_____
TABLE 36.1 
CANOPY COVER REQUIREMENTS 
Zoning District 	Not 
Applicable 	10% Canopy 	15% Canopy 	20% Canopy 
IN, Industrial 		X 		
IL, Light Industrial 		X 		
GMU, General Mixed Use 		X 		
WF, Waterfront 		X 		
UR-H, High Density Urban Residential 		X 		
UR, Urban Residential 				X 
GR, General Residential 				X 
PG, Preservation/Government 	X 			
HR, Historic Residential 		X 		
HLB, Historic Limited Business 		X 		
HLO, Historic Limited Office 		X 		
D-1: T4, T5, T6 and SD subdistricts 	X 			
Downtown D-2 subdistricts and Downtown D-1 T3 subdistrict 		X 		
MU-H, High Density Multi-Use 		X 		
NAC, Neighborhood Activity Center 	X 			
CAC, Community Activity Center 	X 			
RAC, Regional Activity Center 	X 			
 
(Code 1988, Table 36.1; Ord. No. 1991-31, § 3, 4-8-1991; Ord. No. 2000-35, § 1, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 2009-115, § 8, 11-24-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; Ord. No. 2016-94 , § 2, 12-13-2016)  
Chapter 37 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1998-13, § 1, adopted April 14, 1998, repealed chapter 37 and added a new chapter 37 to read as herein set out. Formerly, such chapter pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 37-1, 37-2, 37-17—37-32, 37-34—37-42, 37-48—37-52, 37-54—37-59, 37-65—37-73, 37-79—37-85, 37-92—37-107, 37-171—37-176, 37-178, 37-179, 37-190—37-193 of the 1973 Code; Ord. No. 1989-49, 5-23-1989; Ord. No. 1990-127, § 1, 12-11-1990; Ord. No. 1991-82, § 1, 8-27-1991; Ord. No. 1993-63, §§ 1—3, 8-10-1993; Ord. No. 1994-8, § 1, 2-22-1994; Ord. No. 1994-61, § 1, 6-28-1994. 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 22; operation of commercial vehicles in parks, § 25-96; railroads, ch. 29. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Use of offensive language by operator. 
It shall be unlawful and a class 3 misdemeanor for the driver or operator of any automobile or other vehicle transporting passengers for pay to use any insulting, offensive, obscene, profane or threatening language toward or in the presence of any passenger in such vehicle. Upon conviction of such offense, the court or jury trying the case may, in addition to imposing the penalty provided for the offense, declare the license or permit of such person revoked. 
(Code 1988, § 37-1; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 37-2—37-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS AND OTHER PUBLIC VEHICLES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicle license tax on taxicabs, § 22-74(6); operation of taxicabs in parks, § 25-96. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate vehicles for hire, use of streets, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2015; authority of city to regulate taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310; lights on taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1021; regulation of number of taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2067. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his designee. 
Crime of violence means any misdemeanor or felony involving the use of a weapon or an object employed as a weapon. The term "crime of violence" shall also include the violent touching of or injury to another person, regardless of whether a weapon or other object is used in the commission of the crime. Simple verbal assault, unaccompanied by a touching or injury, shall not constitute a "crime of violence." 
Driver means the person who drives a taxicab or other vehicle for hire. 
Operator means the person in charge of the drivers of a taxicab or other vehicle for hire. 
Owner means the purchaser of any vehicle under a reserved title contract. 
Public vehicle means any public motor-driven vehicle, including a taxicab, regulated by this chapter and used for the transportation of passengers for compensation. For the purposes of this chapter, an employee hauler, as defined in section 37-216, is not a public vehicle. 
Taxicab means a public motor-driven vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for compensation, equipped with a taximeter. 
Taximeter means any mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated and on which such charge is plainly indicated and displayed by figures visible to passengers. 
(Code 1988, § 37-21; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2000-19, § 1, 4-25-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 37-22. - Compliance with article. 
The operation of public vehicles upon the streets of the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this article. It shall be unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated within the city any public vehicle unless such conditions, regulations and restrictions are complied with by owners, operators and drivers. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit a public vehicle duly licensed in another city or county from delivering a passenger picked up outside the limits of the city to some location in this city. Additionally, nothing contained in this article shall prohibit such public vehicle licensed in another city or county after delivering a passenger to some location in this city, from picking up a passenger in the city and delivering such passenger to the city or county wherein such public vehicle is duly licensed; provided, however, that the city wherein such public vehicle is duly licensed allows public vehicles duly licensed in the city equal or greater rights and privileges to operate within its boundaries as are contained in this section in regard to public vehicles duly licensed in other jurisdictions. 
(Code 1988, § 37-22; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-23. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 37-23; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 37-24. - Rules and regulations of city manager. 
The city manager is authorized and directed to make and enforce such rules and regulations not in conflict with the provisions of this article as he may deem proper to regulate the licensing and the operation of public vehicles in this city. Notice of rules and regulations so adopted shall be promulgated in writing to the owners of public vehicles. 
(Code 1988, § 37-24; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-25. - Duty of owner to pay license tax and other fees and charges. 
The owner of a public vehicle shall pay the license tax prescribed by chapter 20 of this Code and other fees or charges imposed by the city and all fees and license taxes imposed upon such owner by state law. 
(Code 1988, § 37-25; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-26. - Sale or transfer of license. 
Licenses issued under chapter 20 of this Code for operating public vehicles within the city shall be sold or transferred only with the consent and approval of the chief of police. The person making such sale or transfer shall state under oath, if the chief of police requires it, the selling price of the license, the certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this article and the public vehicle. If the chief of police finds that the proposed sale or transfer is other than bona fide, he shall refuse his consent to such sale or transfer. 
(Code 1988, § 37-26; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-27. - Interfering with operation. 
The operation of taxicabs and the furnishing of transportation thereby shall not be interfered with, hindered, or retarded. Improper, misleading or unauthorized calls, shall be prima facie evidence of the intention to interfere with, hinder, or retard the proper operation of taxicabs and the furnishing of transportation by taxicabs. 
(Code 1988, § 37-27; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-28. - Liability insurance. 
No public vehicle shall be operated on the streets of the city unless the owner and driver are protected at all times by liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the state in such amounts as are required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2053. Both the owner and the driver shall furnish proof deemed sufficient to the chief of police prior to the issuance of any license, charter, certificate or permit required by the city code and at such times and places as the chief of police may require and on an annual basis at the time of the renewal of such insurance. 
(Code 1988, § 37-28; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2012-06 , § 1, 2-14-2012) 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle liability insurance policies Code of Virginia, § 46.2-472 et seq.  
Sec. 37-29. - General vehicle requirements. 
(a)  Public vehicles shall be of the enclosed or sedan type or station wagon with at least four doors and not less than five-passenger capacity. 
(b)  Every public vehicle operated within the city shall meet all requirements of state law and this Code and other ordinances of the city as to equipment and inspection. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make random inspections of public vehicles for compliance with this subsection and report his findings to the city manager. Any random inspections so conducted shall not take the place of annual or bi-annual required by subsection 37-44(b) of this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 37-29; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2012-06 , § 1, 2-14-2012)  
Sec. 37-30. - Identification of taxicabs. 
All taxicabs operating in the city under this chapter, except those being operated pursuant to subsection 37-61(b), shall have the word "taxicab" or "taxi" or "cab," the name of the owner, and the number of the certificate of public convenience and necessity pursuant to which the taxicab is operated plainly and permanently lettered thereon. 
(Code 1988, § 37-30; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2012-06 , § 1, 2-14-2012)  
Sec. 37-31. - Refusal to respond to phone call or transport passenger. 
No driver or owner of a taxicab shall refuse to respond to any phone call or refuse to transport an orderly passenger to any place within the city or one mile of the limits thereof, provided he is not otherwise engaged. 
(Code 1988, § 37-31; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-32. - Number of passengers. 
(a)  No taxicab shall be used to transport more than one passenger at one time without the consent of the person first engaging the vehicle. If the hirer of a taxicab consents to another passenger occupying the vehicle with him, the passenger first arriving at his destination shall pay in accordance with the meter charge, whereupon the driver shall immediately clear the taximeter and set the same for immediate operation for the next passenger who shall pay the meter charge upon arrival at his destination. The same method shall be followed for each succeeding passenger. When two or more passengers are bona fide traveling together to the same destination, the charge shall be made as if the taxicab had been hired by one passenger. 
(b)  Paying passengers shall not be transported with nonpaying passengers without consent of the person first engaging the vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 37-32; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-33. - Transferring passengers. 
After a passenger has been seated in a taxicab, he shall not be transferred to another taxicab to be carried to his destination except in an emergency. 
(Code 1988, § 37-33; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-34. - Transporting nonpaying passenger. 
No driver shall haul or transport any nonpaying passenger while on duty; provided that any employee of a holder of a certificate of public necessity and convenience may be so transported to and from work. 
(Code 1988, § 37-34; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-35. - Transportation of alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public vehicle operated pursuant to this article to transport alcoholic beverages, except when carried in the possession of a passenger who is being transported for compensation at the regular rate charged other passengers. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 37-35; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 37-36. - Drivers bearing evidence of intoxicating beverages. 
No driver of a public vehicle shall operate a vehicle for hire with any evidence of intoxicating beverages on his person or upon his breath. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 37-36; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 37-37. - Driver's manifest. 
(a)  Each taxicab owner or operator shall furnish the driver with a driver's manifest on a form approved by the chief of police, which form shall have spaces provided for a record of the following: 
(1)  Owner's and operator's name. 
(2)  Driver's name. 
(3)  Date and time driver begins duty. 
(4)  Number of trips on the taximeter at the start of the day. 
(5)  Starting point, finishing point and time of each trip. 
(6)  Additional fees and total amount charged to the passenger, including toll. 
(b)  No owner shall permit a taxicab driver who comes on duty to drive unless he has the manifest in the vehicle. At the beginning of a shift or when he comes on duty, the driver shall record in the manifest the time of beginning the shift or going on duty and the odometer reading of the taxicab, before any passenger is transported as a fare. At the conclusion of a shift or upon going off duty, the driver shall record the shift end time, units, and trips, as shown on the taximeter at that time. 
(c)  At the beginning of each call or trip made, the driver shall record on the manifest the time of beginning the call or trip and the place where the fare is picked up. At the end of the call or trip, the driver shall record the time of ending and the place where the fare is discharged. The fare collected for each call or trip shall be recorded immediately after collection. The manifest shall be delivered to the owner at the termination of each driver's assignment. 
(d)  The manifest shall be retained by the owner for a period of 30 days. The manifest shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times by the chief of police or his designee. Any manifest taken from the possession of the driver before it has been turned in to the owner of the public vehicle shall be made available to the owner for copying, if requested, before being used in any proceeding, civil or criminal. All information recorded on the manifest shall be recorded legibly in ink. 
(Code 1988, § 37-37; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-38. - Disposition of money, property left in cab. 
The driver or operator of a taxicab shall carefully preserve any money or other property left in the vehicle by any passenger and shall promptly deposit the money or property with the owner of the vehicle who shall deliver a receipt for same and file in writing a report to police headquarters within 24 hours. The owner shall keep the money or property at some convenient point within the city where it may be called for by its owner. When the money or other property has been identified and ownership properly established, it shall be promptly delivered to its owner. Any property, whether money or other thing, which is not called for within 60 days, shall be disposed of according to law. 
(Code 1988, § 37-38; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-39. - Use of vehicle other than as a taxicab. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate a taxicab in the city for compensation other than as permitted under this chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 37-39; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-40. - Use of shortest practicable route required. 
The driver of every taxicab shall operate the vehicle over the shortest practicable route from the place of the beginning of the trip to the place of destination. 
(Code 1988, § 37-40; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-41. - Driver not to permit passengers to enter or leave on traffic side of taxicab. 
No taxicab driver shall permit any passenger to enter or leave the public vehicle on a public roadway by the left rear door, except on one-way streets when the vehicle is lawfully stopped on the left side of the street for the purpose of taking on or discharging a passenger; nor shall such driver permit any passenger to enter or leave the vehicle on a public roadway by the right rear door, except when the vehicle is lawfully stopped on the right side of the street for the purpose of taking on or discharging a passenger. 
(Code 1988, § 37-41; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-42. - Drivers not to remain on duty longer than 13 hours within any 24-hour period. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver of a public vehicle, while on duty, to drive a public vehicle in the city for more than 13 hours in any 24-hour period, which when added to the time the driver has driven a public vehicle in any other city, would make an aggregate of more than 13 hours in any 24-hour period. For the purposes of this section, the term "drive" shall not be limited to such time as the vehicle is in motion or such time as it is engaged by a customer, but shall include the entire time that such vehicle is checked out to such driver. 
(Code 1988, § 37-42; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-43. - Color scheme of vehicles. 
No vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab with the same color scheme as the taxicabs of another holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this chapter. All such color schemes shall be approved in advance of operation by the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 37-43; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-44. - Maintenance and inspections of public vehicles. 
(a)  Every vehicle for hire operated in the city shall be kept in good, clean, neat and safe condition and appearance. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to make inspections of vehicles for hire operated in the city and to maintain records of any findings. 
(b)  Vehicles acquired for use as taxicabs and other public vehicles shall be inspected annually by the city, if they are no more than seven years old, nor have more than 100,000 actual vehicle miles. Taxicabs and other public vehicles shall be inspected every six months if they are more than seven years old or have more than 100,000 actual vehicle miles. An inspection fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be paid shall be charged for each annual or semi-annual inspection. Each vehicle shall be inspected to ensure that it has current state inspection and state corporation commission decals. With respect to taxicabs, the vehicle shall also be inspected to ensure that there is a working certified taximeter, that rates are conspicuously posted, and that the exterior dome and meter flag lights are operational. No taxicab or other public vehicle shall be placed into service or allowed to remain in service until any defect or violation has been corrected. Upon correction of any defect or violation, the vehicle shall be reinspected by the city prior to placing the vehicle into service. A reinspection fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged for each reinspection until the vehicle is placed into service. 
(c)  All taxicabs and other public vehicles shall have interiors of either vinyl or leather in passenger seating areas, excluding the driver's seat only in instances of bucket seats. 
(d)  All interior or exterior body damage in excess of $300.00 or any window damage shall be reported to the chief of police within 48 hours of the occurrence. No public vehicle shall be placed into service or allowed to remain in service, if it has body or window damage which creates a safety hazard or which detracts from its appearance. Determination of what damage constitutes a safety hazard or detracts from the appearance of a vehicle shall be made by the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 37-44; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 2005-61, § 1, 7-26-2005)  
Sec. 37-45. - Central dispatch records. 
Every owner of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall keep and maintain, at the place of his central dispatch location, a permanent dispatcher's log, written legibly in ink, and in a form approved by the chief of police, showing for each day the number of vehicles operated, the driver of each vehicle, the origin and destination of each trip made by each vehicle, the time of each such trip and the amount charged for each such trip. The dispatcher's log shall be delivered to the police department, upon demand by the chief of police, for inspection by the chief of police. All such dispatcher's logs shall be preserved for at least 12 months from the date of final entry and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 37-45; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Secs. 37-46—37-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to restrict number of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2067. 
 
Sec. 37-61. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful to operate, or cause to be operated, within the city any public vehicle unless: 
(1)  A certificate of public convenience and necessity therefor has been issued pursuant to this division; or 
(2)  The public vehicle is being operated pursuant to a contract or sub-contract to provide para-transit services to certified passengers authorized by Hampton Roads Transit or the Virginia Department of Medical Assistance Services. A copy of the contract or trip order shall be kept in the vehicle at all times, either in paper format or displayed by a wireless text dispatching device. The owner of the vehicle or the driver shall furnish proof of insurance to the chief of police annually or upon request. 
(Code 1988, § 37-61; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2012-06 , § 1, 2-14-2012)  
Sec. 37-62. - Applications. 
All applications for certificates of public convenience and necessity required by this division shall be made in writing to the chief of police upon forms prescribed and to be provided by the chief of police. The application shall contain the name, date of birth, social security number, sex and residence of the applicant. A processing fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall accompany each application. 
(Code 1988, § 37-62; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2002-44, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Sec. 37-63. - Examination; furnishing of information. 
Each applicant for a certificate shall undergo an examination satisfactory to the chief of police as to his qualifications and knowledge of traffic laws and ordinances, shall furnish such information as may be required concerning the make, description and condition of the vehicle proposed to be operated, shall make such vehicle available for inspection and approval for use by the chief of police, and shall furnish information as to financial ability, character and responsibility. 
(Code 1988, § 37-63; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-64. - Ineligible persons. 
(a)  No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be granted or renewed for any person under the age of 18 years or for a person who is not morally or mentally fit to receive the same or who has been a repeated and persistent violator of the criminal, traffic or safety laws and ordinances of the city or any state. The chief of police shall not issue or renew any certificate of public convenience and necessity if the applicant meets the following denial criteria: 
(1)  Conviction of any felony involving a crime against the person or conviction of any crime of violence or any offense involving the possession or use of a weapon. 
(2)  Conviction of any felony involving an illegal controlled substance. 
(3)  Conviction of any felony involving a crime against property within the previous ten years. 
(4)  Conviction of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the previous five years. 
(5)  Conviction of any felony or of two or more class 1 or class 2 misdemeanors or any within the previous 18 months. 
(b)  The chief of police, when he deems it to be in the best interest of the public health, safety or general welfare, may deny an application for a new certificate or for a renewal. The applicant shall be notified in writing whenever it is deemed necessary to deny an application for a new certificate or for renewal of a certificate previously issued. 
(Code 1988, § 37-64; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-65. - Limitation on number. 
The number of taxicabs to be authorized and for which certificates of public convenience and necessity may be granted shall not be more than 62; provided, however, that in cases of emergency and on special occasions when convenience and necessity require, the holder of a certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this division who operates duly licensed taxicabs in other cities may bring into the city taxicabs from such other city during such emergency or special occasions when so authorized by the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 37-65; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-66. - Expiration; renewal. 
All certificates of public convenience and necessity issued under this division shall expire on December 30 following the date of issuance and shall be renewable annually thereafter. Failure to renew the certificate of public convenience and necessity by the date of expiration shall render that certificate available for issuance to another vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 37-66; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-67. - Personal nature of certificate. 
Each certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued subject to the conditions that the public vehicle be operated only by the person to whom such certificate is issued or his bona fide employee, and that such public vehicle not be loaned, rented, assigned or transferred to any other person. In the event such certificate is used contrary to any such condition, or in the event of nonuse of the certificate for a period of 30 days, the chief of police may revoke such certificate. 
(Code 1988, § 37-67; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-68. - Suspension generally. 
(a)  Any certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this division may be suspended by the chief of police for a period of up to 90 days for any of the following grounds occurring in connection with the certificate: 
(1)  Failure to operate a public vehicle as specified in the certificate. 
(2)  Failure to maintain any vehicle utilized under the certificate in good working condition, appearance and repair. 
(3)  Failure to pay the personal property taxes, license taxes or other fees or taxes due to the city or to the state. 
(4)  Failure to maintain any liability or other insurance required by law. 
(5)  Failure to report any accident required by state law. 
(6)  Continued failure to comply with the provisions of this article or any other law or ordinance regulating the operation of public vehicles and public vehicles within the city. 
(b)  The chief of police, where he deems it to be in the best interest of the public health, safety or general welfare, may also suspend a certificate. The holder of a certificate shall be notified in writing whenever it is deemed necessary to suspend a certificate. Upon failure of the owner or operator to rectify any condition described in subsection (a) of this section or to comply with any administrative requirements of this division within 90 days from the date of the suspension, the certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be revoked.  
Sec. 37-69. - Revocation by repeal of this division. 
Certificates issued under this division may be revoked at any time by the repeal of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 37-69; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-70. - Records. 
There shall be kept in the office of the chief of police or such other place that the chief of police may designate a complete record of all certificates of public convenience and necessity issued under this division and all renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 37-70; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-71. - Revocation—Generally. 
(a)  Any certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under this division shall be revoked by the chief of police for any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Employment by the holder of any driver whose public vehicle driver's permit or state driver's license is revoked or suspended. 
(2)  Using or knowingly permitting the use of a public vehicle for the illegal sale or purchase of alcoholic beverages or any controlled substance. 
(3)  Permitting the use of a public vehicle, which is covered by a certificate, for prostitution, soliciting or pandering or knowingly permitting a public vehicle to transport persons to houses of ill fame. 
(4)  Continued failure to comply with the provisions of this article or any other law or ordinance regulating the operation of public vehicles within the city. 
(5)  Conviction of any felony involving a crime against the person or conviction of any crime of violence or any offense involving the use or possession of a weapon. 
(6)  Conviction of any felony involving an illegal controlled substance. 
(7)  Conviction of any felony involving a crime against property within the previous ten years. 
(8)  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude within the previous five years. 
(9)  Conviction of reckless driving or of driving under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug or any other self-administered intoxicant or drug. 
(10)  Conviction of any felony or two or more class 1 or class 2 misdemeanors within the previous 18 months. 
(11)  Failure to have each public vehicle in operation a period of 90 consecutive days with the certificate year. 
(b)  The chief of police, when he deems it to be in the best interest of the public health, safety or general welfare, may revoke a certificate. The owner or holder of a certificate shall be notified in writing whenever it is deemed necessary to suspend a certificate. Whenever a certificate is revoked, the offending vehicle shall be ineligible for further issuance of a new certificate of public convenience and necessity. 
(Code 1988, § 37-71; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-72. - Same—Return of certificate. 
After revocation of a certificate of public convenience and necessity, and notice of the revocation, the certificate shall be returned to the chief of police within 24 hours. 
(Code 1988, § 37-72; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-73. - Issuance or refusal; fee. 
If the chief of police shall determine that any applicant is of the age of 18 years or older, morally fit and having knowledge of the traffic laws of the state and city, the chief of police, upon the applicant's payment of a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall issue to such applicant a certificate of public convenience and necessity. If the chief of police is not satisfied as to the qualifications and fitness of the applicant to possess a public vehicle, he shall refuse to issue such certificate. 
(Code 1988, § 37-73; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 10-23-2001)  
Secs. 37-74—37-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to license taxicab drivers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310. 
 
Sec. 37-91. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall drive a public vehicle in the city unless that person has a current permit to do so issued pursuant to this division. Such permit shall be known as a "public vehicle driver's permit" and shall be in addition to any other license required by this Code or state law. 
(b)  No public vehicle owner shall permit such vehicle to be driven by any person who does not possess the permit required by this section. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punished as a class 3 misdemeanor. Every subsequent conviction of a violation thereof within five years of a previous conviction shall be punished as a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 37-91; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 2 or 3 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 37-92. - Application. 
Application for a permit required by this division shall be in writing, sworn to and presented to the chief of police and shall state the full name, current residence, place of residence for the previous ten years prior to moving to the applicant's present address, age, height, color, color of eyes and hair, sex, place of birth, public vehicle employer for which the applicant will be driving, name and address of any other place of employment at time of application, length of residence in the city, whether or not the applicant is a citizen of the United States, whether or not the applicant has been previously employed or licensed as a public vehicle driver, and if so, whether the applicant's driver's license or public vehicle driver's permit has ever been suspended, revoked, or refused in this or any other state, whether or not the applicant is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs, and such other information as may be required. The application shall be endorsed by the prospective employer of the applicant. A processing fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall accompany each application. Any false statement made in any such affidavit shall be promptly reported by the chief of police to the commonwealth's attorney. 
(Code 1988, § 37-92; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2002-44, § 1, 7-9-2002)  
Sec. 37-93. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon the filing of an application for a public vehicle driver's permit under this division, the chief of police shall cause to be made such examination as he may deem proper relating to the qualifications and fitness of the applicant to operate a public vehicle in accordance with the provisions of section 37-101. 
(Code 1988, § 37-93; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-94. - Photographs of applicant. 
The applicant shall provide two color passport-size photographs of the applicant at the time of application. One photograph shall be filed with the chief of police and the other shall be made a part of the permit in such manner that it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted without detection. 
(Code 1988, § 37-94; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-95. - Issuance or refusal; fee. 
If the chief of police shall determine that any applicant is of the age of 18 years or older, not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs, morally fit and having knowledge of the traffic laws of the state and city, the chief of police, upon the applicant's payment of a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall issue to such applicant a public vehicle driver's permit. If the chief of police is not satisfied as to the qualifications and fitness of the applicant to operate a public vehicle, he shall refuse to issue such permit. 
(Code 1988, § 37-95; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 10-23-2001)  
Sec. 37-96. - Form. 
All permits issued under the provisions of this division shall be in such form as the chief of police may prescribe and shall contain the photograph and signature of the permittee and such other information as the chief of police may prescribe. 
(Code 1988, § 37-96; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-97. - Term. 
A public vehicle driver's permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be effective for one year from the date of issuance unless sooner suspended, revoked or canceled. 
(Code 1988, § 37-97; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-98. - Display. 
Each driver holding a public vehicle driver's permit issued under this division shall keep posted such permit and photograph in the public vehicle operated by him so as to be plainly visible to the occupants of such vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 37-98; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-99. - Renewal. 
A public vehicle driver's permit issued under this provision may be renewed by the chief of police by appropriate endorsement thereon upon the payment of a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code; provided, however, that the applicant for such renewal shall, at the time thereof, be qualified under the provisions of this division to have issued to him an original public vehicle driver's permit. 
(Code 1988, § 37-99; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-100. - Replacement when lost, stolen or destroyed. 
Any public vehicle driver's permit issued under this division which has been lost, stolen or destroyed may be replaced by the chief of police upon application by the permittee for a replacement permit in the same manner as is required under section 37-92, and upon the payment of a replacement fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code. In addition to the information required by section 37-92, the application shall include a sworn statement setting forth the facts surrounding the loss, theft or destruction. Any such replacement permit shall be issued only for the remainder of the term of the lost permit. Upon the issuance of a replacement permit, the lost, stolen or destroyed permit shall be deemed canceled, and a notation of such cancellation shall be entered on the appropriate records. 
(Code 1988, § 37-100; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2004-25, § 1, 6-15-2004)  
Sec. 37-101. - Ineligible persons. 
(a)  The chief of police shall not issue a public vehicle driver's permit to an applicant who meets any of the following denial criteria: 
(1)  Conviction of any felony involving a crime against the person or conviction of any crime of violence or any offense involving the possession or use of a weapon. 
(2)  Conviction of any felony involving an illegal controlled substance. 
(3)  Conviction of any felony involving a crime against property within the previous ten years. 
(4)  Conviction of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the previous five years. 
(5)  Conviction of any felony or of two or more class 1 or class 2 misdemeanors within the previous 18 months. 
(6)  Conviction of an offense of hit and run involving a motor vehicle. 
(7)  Conviction of a first offense of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug or any other self-administered intoxicant or drug within the previous five years or conviction of a second or subsequent such offense. 
(8)  Two convictions of reckless driving or three convictions of speeding within the preceding 24 months. 
(9)  Suspension or revocation of the driver's state driver's license. 
(10)  Conviction of any law or ordinance relating to prostitution, sexual intercourse, pandering, or soliciting for immoral purposes. 
(11)  Accumulation of 12 or more department of motor vehicles demerit points against the applicant's state driver's license. 
(12)  Conviction of any law or ordinance relating to the sale or handling of intoxicating beverages. 
(b)  The chief of police, when he deems it to be in the best interest of the public health, safety or general welfare, may deny an application for a public vehicle driver's permit. 
(c)  Upon denial of the public vehicle driver's permit, the applicant shall wait 60 days before reapplying. 
(Code 1988, § 37-101; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-101.1. - Appeals by certain ineligible persons from denial of certificate of public convenience or public vehicle driver's permit. 
(a)  An applicant who is ineligible for a certificate of public convenience (herein, a "certificate") or for a public vehicle driver's permit (herein, a "permit") because of a conviction of a crime against the person or involving the possession or use of a weapon, as referred to in section 37-64(a)(1) and section 37-101(a)(1); or because of conviction of a felony involving an illegal substance, as referred to in section 37-64(a)(2) and section 37-101(a)(2), shall be eligible to appeal the denial, but only if the conviction occurred at least ten years prior to the application and if the applicant has been of good behavior since the conviction. The appeal shall be made to the chief of police or his designee. 
(b)  In considering the appeal, the chief of police shall consider the following matters: 
(1)  The seriousness of the crime for which the applicant was convicted. 
(2)  The seriousness of the criminal conduct of the applicant which resulted in the conviction. 
(3)  The amount of sentence imposed. 
(4)  Any other relevant evidence, of any type, bearing in any way on the applicant's fitness to hold a certificate or a permit and to transport passengers in the city. 
(c)  After considering the matter, the chief of police may award the certificate or the permit only if he makes an affirmative finding that applicant would not pose a public safety risk and is otherwise qualified, and is not disqualified in any way, from holding a certificate or a permit. If the chief of police is unable to make this finding, based on the evidence presented, he may not award a certificate or a permit. 
(Code 1988, § 37-101.1; Ord. No. 2002-06, 2-26-2002)  
Sec. 37-102. - Revocation—Generally. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a public vehicle driver's permit upon receiving a record of the conviction of a permittee of any of the following: 
(1)  Conviction of any felony involving a crime against the person or conviction of any crime of violence or involving the possession or use of a weapon. 
(2)  Conviction of any felony involving an illegal controlled substance. 
(3)  Conviction of any felony involving a crime against property within the previous ten years. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude within the previous five years. 
(5)  Conviction of any felony or of two or more class 1 or class 2 misdemeanors within the previous 18 months. 
(6)  Conviction of driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, any narcotic drug, or any self-administered intoxicant or drug. 
(7)  Two convictions of reckless driving or three convictions of speeding within the preceding 24 months. 
(8)  Conviction of hit and run involving a motor vehicle. 
(9)  Conviction of violating any law or ordinance relating to prostitution, sexual intercourse, pandering, soliciting for immoral purposes or permitting the occupants of a public vehicle to engage in such practices or to the transporting of passengers to houses of ill fame, assignation or prostitution. 
(10)  Willfully charging and collecting fares in excess of the lawful rates prescribed by this article. 
(11)  Accumulation of 12 or more department of motor vehicles demerit points against the state driver's license of the permit holder. 
(12)  Continued failure to comply with the provisions of this article or any other laws or ordinances. 
(13)  Violation of any law or ordinance relating to the sale or handling of intoxicating beverages. 
(14)  Suspension or revocation of the driver's state driver's license. 
(b)  The chief of police, when he deems it to be in the best interest of the public health, safety or general welfare, may revoke a public vehicle driver's permit. 
(Code 1988, § 37-102; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-103. - Same—Notice. 
Upon the revocation of a public vehicle driver's permit, the chief of police shall cause a notice in writing of such revocation to be given to the permittee. The notice shall be sent to the address shown on his application for the permit and a copy of the notice shall also be sent to the public vehicle owner employing the permittee. Compliance with this section shall constitute good and sufficient notice of the revocation. 
(Code 1988, § 37-103; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-104. - Same—Return of permit. 
After the revocation of a public vehicle driver's permit, and notice of the revocation, the permit shall be returned to the chief of police within 24 hours of receipt of the notice. 
(Code 1988, § 37-104; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-105. - Issuance of new permit to person whose permit has been revoked. 
No person whose public vehicle driver's permit has been revoked under the provisions of this chapter shall again be issued such a permit unless, upon the written presentation of reasons satisfactory to the chief of police, the chief of police may order such new permit to be issued. 
(Code 1988, § 37-105; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-106. - Records. 
There shall be kept in the office of the chief of police or such other place as the chief of police may designate, a complete record of all public vehicle driver's permits issued under this division and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 37-106; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-107. - Collection and disposition of fees prescribed by division. 
The fees prescribed by this division shall be collected by the chief of police and paid over to the city treasurer to be used as provided by law. 
(Code 1988, § 37-107; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-108. - Board of appeal for hearing appeals from revocation or suspension of public vehicle driver's permit—Established; composition; appointment of members; etc. 
(a)  For the purpose of hearing appeals as provided for in section 37-109, there is hereby established a board to be called the "public vehicle board of appeals." The public vehicle board of appeals shall consist of five members and shall be composed of one member from the city convention and visitors bureau, one from the city commissioner of revenue office, one from the city traffic engineering office, one from the city personnel office, and one member who shall be a representative of those persons holding a public vehicle driver's permit, hereinafter referred to as the taxicab drivers. 
(b)  Each member of the public vehicle board of appeals shall be appointed at random by the city manager. The members of the public vehicle board of appeals shall be appointed for terms of 12 months. No member of the public vehicle board of appeals shall serve more than one term in any five-year period. Vacancies shall be filled for any unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are made. The member from the city convention and visitors bureau shall serve as chairperson of the public vehicle board of appeals. 
(c)  The board shall abide by the guidelines established in the public vehicle board of appeals operational manual. Three concurring votes shall be necessary for a decision by the board of appeal at any meeting of the board. Three members shall constitute a quorum of the board of appeal. 
(Code 1988, § 37-108; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-109. - Same—Appeals to public vehicle board of appeals. 
(a)  Whenever it is the decision of the chief of police that the public vehicle driver's permit or a certificate of public convenience and necessity should be suspended or revoked for good cause shown, the person whose permit or certificate has been suspended or revoked may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the public vehicle board of appeals. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with the chief of police within ten days after the initial decision of the chief of police. The chief of police shall forward the notice of appeal, along with a copy of his decision and all papers pertaining thereto to the public vehicle board of appeals within five business days after receiving the notice of appeal. 
(b)  The public vehicle board of appeals shall hear the appeal and render its decision within 30 days of its receipt of a notice of appeal. The public vehicle board of appeals shall conduct its hearing in a closed forum and shall allow only material witnesses directly involved in the process to appear before it. 
(c)  The public vehicle board of appeals shall consider only whether the decision of the chief of police complied with the requirements of this article. The public vehicle board of appeals shall not consider nor shall any decision be based upon sympathy for any of the parties or upon any hardship which may be created as a result of the application of the requirements of this article. The public vehicle board of appeals may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the chief of police only in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Any decision of the public vehicle board of appeals shall not have the effect of amending or waiving any of the requirements of this chapter. Every decision of the public vehicle board of appeals shall be final; subject, however, to such remedy as either party might have at law or in equity. The decision of the public vehicle board of appeals shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote on the decision. Every decision shall be filed in the office of the chief of police or at another location designated by the chief of police and shall be open to inspection. A copy thereof shall be delivered to the appellant. 
(d)  In the event the public vehicle board of appeals modifies or reverses the decision of the chief of police and recommends issuance of a public vehicle driver's permit or a certificate of public convenience and necessity, the permit or certificate shall be signed by the deputy city manager responsible for oversight of the police department. 
(e)  Unless otherwise provided by law, it shall be a class 2 misdemeanor for any person to attempt to influence, coerce, intimidate or communicate a threat in any fashion to any member of the public vehicle board of appeals. 
(Code 1988, § 37-109; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-110. - Appeal of denial of issuance of permit or certificate. 
(a)  An applicant for a public vehicle driver's permit or a certificate of public convenience and necessity who is denied such permit or certificate by action of the chief of police shall have the same right of appeal to the public vehicle board of appeals as one whose permit or certificate is suspended or revoked by the chief of police. The applicant shall file written notice of appeal with the chief of police within ten days after notice of a decision denying a permit or certificate. The chief of police shall forward all papers and documents to the public vehicle board of appeals within five business days after such appeal is filed. 
(b)  The right of appeal granted by subsection shall not be available to an applicant who is denied a public vehicle operator's permit or a certificate of public convenience and necessity where such denial is a mandatory denial within the provisions of section 37-64, 37-71, 37-101 or 37-102. 
(Code 1988, § 37-110; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Secs. 37-111—37-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FARES 
 
Sec. 37-131. - "Waiting time" defined. 
As used in this division, the term "waiting time" shall include the time consumed while the taxicab is stopped or moving at a speed less than 12 miles per hour at the request of the passenger. "Waiting time" shall also include the time when a taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the time of arrival at the place to which it is called but excluding time consumed by the premature response to calls. 
(Code 1988, § 37-131; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-132. - Rates established. 
(a)  No person owning, operating, driving or controlling a taxicab within the limits of the city shall charge an amount to exceed the following rates of fare: 
(1)  For the first one-sixth mile or fraction thereof: $2.15. 
(2)  For each one-sixth mile or fraction thereof in addition to the first one-sixth mile: $0.40. 
(3)  For each piece of baggage other than one handbag per passenger: $0.25. 
(4)  For each package unless passenger transports package to and from cabs and holds package on lap in transit: $0.10. 
(5)  For each footlocker or trunk: $0.50. 
(6)  For each one minute of waiting time or fraction thereof: $0.30. 
(7)  For use of a tolled facility, a round trip fee per vehicle of two times the one-way EZ Pass rate established by the Virginia Department of Transportation or other tolling entity for the trip's time of day. 
(b)  If hired on an hourly basis, the rate of $18.00 per hour or fraction thereof shall apply. 
(c)  Taxicabs licensed in another city or county bringing passengers into the city or picking up passengers in the city and delivering such passengers to the city wherein such taxicab is duly licensed shall charge the rates prescribed by the city or county in which they are licensed. The rates are per vehicle charges and shall not be multiplied by the number of passengers carried. 
(Code 1988, § 37-132; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 2001-48, § 1, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 2002-44, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 1-24-2006; Ord. No. 2008-436, § 1, 10-14-2008; Ord. No. 2014-16, § 1, 2-11-2014 )  
Sec. 37-133. - Rates binding upon owners, operators; overcharging. 
The rates and charges set forth in this division shall be binding upon all owners and operators of taxicabs and the collection of fares in excess of such rates shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1988, § 37-133; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-134. - Display of rates. 
The rates of fare established by this division shall be conspicuously posted in each taxicab. 
(Code 1988, § 37-134; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-135. - Advance payment. 
Owners, operators and drivers of taxicabs may require the lawful fare to be paid in advance before undertaking the transportation of any person. 
(Code 1988, § 37-135; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-136. - Multiple passengers. 
When two or more passengers engage a taxicab to the same destination, the charge shall be made as if the vehicle were hired by one passenger. 
(Code 1988, § 37-136; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-137. - Returning charge. 
No returning charge shall be made by the owner or driver of a taxicab where the taxicab was engaged in the city or the naval shipyard and the passenger discharged in the city or naval shipyard. 
(Code 1988, § 37-137; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-138. - Receipts. 
The driver of any taxicab shall, upon request, deliver to the person paying the fare a receipt in legible type or writing showing the date, amount of fare paid, the names of the owner and of the driver and the taxicab's certificate of public convenience and necessity number. 
(Code 1988, § 37-138; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-139. - Refusal to pay. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the lawful fare required to be paid for the use of a taxicab. 
(Code 1988, § 37-139; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Secs. 37-140—37-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - TAXIMETERS 
 
Sec. 37-161. - Required. 
No motor vehicle shall be operated as a taxicab without a taximeter. 
(Code 1988, § 37-161; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-162. - Use. 
Taximeters shall be in use at all times within the city limits when passengers are being transported except when the taxicab is hired on an hourly basis or when the taxicab is engaged within the city for a trip to a destination outside of the city. Such exceptions shall be entered on the driver's manifest. 
(Code 1988, § 37-162; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-163. - Condition. 
All taximeters shall be kept in accurate and proper condition and repair and sufficiently lighted when in use so that the figures thereon shall be plainly visible to the passengers therein. 
(Code 1988, § 37-163; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-164. - Identification light. 
Whenever a taxicab is engaged there is to be conspicuously displayed an identification light connected to the taximeter, operated mechanically by throwing the meter flag and which shall show light when the meter is in operation. Such light shall be located, and in such form, color and size as shall be prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 37-164; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-165. - Operating broken meter. 
It shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab with a broken taximeter. 
(Code 1988, § 37-165; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-166. - Police to be notified when meter broken; withdrawal of taxicab from service. 
If any taximeter shall break down or get out of repair, notice of such breakdown shall be given immediately to the police department, and such taxicab shall be immediately withdrawn from service. 
(Code 1988, § 37-166; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-167. - Police to be notified when meter repaired; return of taxicab to service. 
When any taximeter has been repaired, notice thereof shall be given to the police department. The taxicab shall not be returned to service until the police have approved the repairs to the taximeter and authorized its return to service. 
(Code 1988, § 37-167; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Secs. 37-168—37-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMPLOYEE HAULERS 
 
Sec. 37-216. - Defined. 
For the purposes of this article the term "employee hauler" shall mean any person operating a passenger bus for transportation of persons employed by one common employer from various points within the city to their place of employment within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 37-216; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 37-217. - Compliance with article. 
The operation of passenger buses by employee haulers upon the streets of the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated within the city any such bus unless such conditions, regulations and restrictions are complied with by the owner, operator and driver of such bus. 
(Code 1988, § 37-217; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-218. - Violations of article. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 37-218; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 37-219. - Certificate required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an employee hauler bus within the city without having obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the chief of police. The provisions of division 2 of article II of this chapter pertaining to certificates of public convenience and necessity for taxicabs shall apply to employee haulers, except where in conflict with provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 37-219; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-220. - Expiration, renewal of certificate. 
Certificates of public convenience and necessity except temporary certificates issued under this article shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance and all certificates shall be renewed annually thereafter. 
(Code 1988, § 37-220; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-221. - Sale or transfer of certificate. 
Certificates of public convenience and necessity issued under this article shall be sold or transferred only with the consent and approval of the chief of police. The person making the sale or transfer shall state under oath, if the city manager requires it, the selling price of the certificate of public convenience and necessity and the bus operated thereunder. If the chief of police shall find that the proposed sale or transfer is other than bona fide, he shall refuse his consent to such sale or transfer. 
(Code 1988, § 37-221; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-222. - Revocation of certificate. 
Certificates of public convenience and necessity issued under this article may be revoked at any time for good cause shown or by repeal of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 37-222; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-223. - Liability insurance. 
No employee hauler bus shall be operated on the streets of the city unless the owner and driver are protected by liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in this state in such amounts as are required by the state corporation commission and the Virginia Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act. 
(Code 1988, § 37-223; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Secs. 37-224—37-245. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TOW TRUCKS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate certain tow services, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1217. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-246. - Violations of article. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 37-246; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 37-247. - Identification. 
Any person engaged in the business of providing the services of one or more wreckers for hire or used to tow, transport or move motor vehicles on public streets or on or from private property by way of streets, shall display the name and address or telephone number of the business on both sides of the tow truck in letters large enough to be readily legible, but in no case, less than one inch in height. 
(Code 1988, § 37-247; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-248. - Duty to notify police of removal of vehicle. 
(a)  Prior to or simultaneously with the removal of any vehicle by a tow truck operator or any person or entity repossessing any vehicle as allowed by law, the operator of the tow truck or the person or entity repossessing the vehicle shall notify the police dispatcher of such removal. Such notification shall include the following information: 
(1)  The complete license number and state of issue; 
(2)  The year of expiration of such license; 
(3)  The complete vehicle identification number; 
(4)  The make, model and color of the vehicle; 
(5)  The person or entity requesting the removal; and 
(6)  Any other information that may be required by the police. 
(b)  If any of the information provided is found to be incorrect, the tow truck operator, or person or entity responsible for the removal of the vehicle, upon notification by the police, shall provide the correct information. This provision shall not apply to disabled vehicles towed at the request of the vehicle's owner. 
(c)  In all matters where vehicles are towed or removed at the request or direction of any person or entity other than an agency of the city, the city shall have no liability for any cost associated with such removal. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the reporting or notification requirement as described in subsection (a) of this section constitutes a traffic infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. Such failure to report shall limit the amount which may be charged for the storage and safekeeping of the towed vehicle to an amount no greater than that charged for one day of storage and safekeeping. 
(Code 1988, § 37-248; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-249. - Assistance of police in obtaining tow truck service. 
Whenever it shall be necessary to procure a tow truck to render services at the scene of any traffic accident or traffic hazard, any police officer present shall assist the operator or owner of a distressed motor vehicle in obtaining tow truck services. Police communications facilities may be used as necessary to contact tow truck operators. If the owner or operator concerned requests that a specific tow truck service be called, such request shall be honored unless the officer in charge determines, in his discretion, that the operator requested is located at too great a distance or is otherwise actually unavailable to furnish the required services in a timely manner. 
(Code 1988, § 37-249; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998)  
Sec. 37-250. - Tow book to be maintained by chief of police; additional fees. 
(a)  The chief of police shall maintain a register of tow operators who shall be called in sequence to provide services at the scene of accidents or traffic hazards. The book shall be utilized only in those cases where the owner or operator of a distressed motor vehicle does not, for any reason, provide the police officer in charge with the name of a tow operator available to perform the required service in a timely manner. A tow operator desiring to be included in the tow book shall make application to the chief of police. A processing fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall accompany each such application. 
(b)  The tow book shall be maintained and administered by the chief of police. The chief of police may prescribe conditions for tow operators who apply to be included in the tow book, and he may also establish rules and regulations which must be obeyed by tow operators who are listed in the tow book. An application processing fee of $20.00 shall be charged to each applicant for inclusion in the tow book. In promulgating such conditions, rules and regulations, the chief of police may provide for the following matters: 
(1)  Compliance with minimum safety standards. 
(2)  Ownership or possession of all equipment and facilities deemed necessary by the chief of police to provide essential towing services. 
(3)  A fee schedule promulgated by the chief of police providing for the maximum fees to be charged by a tow truck operator for services rendered. Such fee schedule shall include a charge of not less than $22.50 for basic towing services and additional charges for necessary services in particular cases. 
The chief of police shall determine whether additional services were necessary in each particular case and approve all fees charged therefor as follows: 
A $105.00 maximum towing fee may be charged for all tows. 
If a call requires more than one wrecker, the fee per wrecker shall not exceed the single wrecker fees set out herein. 
A storage fee of $20.00 per day may be charged commencing 24 hours after the tow and any fraction of a day thereafter. 
Additional charges may be assessed for tows involving unusual circumstances and written on an approved tow bill. Unusual circumstances include, but are not necessarily limited to: 
Use of dollies. 
Vehicles that have driven completely or partially off a bridge or overpass. 
Vehicles stuck in mud or water. 
Vehicles requiring extrication from a tree, utility pole or other comparable object. 
Vehicles that are on their sides or roofs and which require being righted. 
Additional charges shall not exceed $85.00 per hour plus the initial fee. 
These fees shall only apply to tows within the City of Portsmouth. 
(4)  Maintaining of a business office accessible to patrons during reasonable business hours. 
(5)  Keeping accurate and complete records of all transactions governed by this section. 
(6)  Maintaining proper custody of towed vehicles and their contents. 
(c)  Separate listings for those tow operators who will perform services only during daytime hours on regular weekdays and for those tow operators who are willing to perform services during night hours, weekends and holidays. 
(d)  Reasonable sanctions against operators who violate the rules and regulations, including suspension and removal from the tow book; provided, that the operator in question shall receive notice of his delinquencies and shall have an opportunity to respond before any remedial action is taken. 
(e)  All other rules, regulations or conditions which are incidental to the guidelines promulgated herein or which are necessary and proper to implement these guidelines. 
(f)  Tow operators called pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be called in sequence; after performing their services or being unable to respond for any reason, they shall go to the bottom of the list. When a tow operator registers with the chief of police for the first time, he shall be placed at the bottom of the list. 
(g)  The chief of police shall have the authority to remove any tow operators or tow companies from the wrecker service list for violation of any provisions of this chapter, or any rules, regulations, or conditions established by the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 37-250; Ord. No. 1998-13, § 1, 4-14-1998; Ord. No. 2001-42, § 1, 10-23-2001; Ord. No. 2002-44, § 1, 7-9-2002; Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1, 4-25-2006)  
DIVISION 2. - TOWING ADVISORY BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to appoint an advisory board, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1217. 
 
Sec. 37-251. - Creation; composition. 
(a)  There is hereby established an advisory board to be known as the "towing advisory board." 
(b)  The towing advisory board shall derive its authority from and be administered by the city council. 
(c)  The towing advisory board shall be appointed by the council and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The chief of police or his designee; 
(2)  The director of general services or his designee; 
(3)  The director of planning and inspections or his designee; 
(4)  Two representatives from the towing and recovery operator community; and 
(5)  Two residents of the city. 
(d)  The members of the towing advisory board shall be appointed for terms of three years. However, the first appointed members shall have staggered terms with one member from subsection (c)(4) of this section and one member from subsection (c)(5) of this section being appointed for two-year terms and the balance of the membership being appointed for three-year terms. All subsequent appointments shall be for three-year terms. The council shall fill all vacancies on the towing advisory board for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the towing advisory board shall serve until their resignation or their replacement by the council. 
(e)  The members of the towing advisory board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1988, § 37-251; Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 6-11-2002)  
Sec. 37-252. - Removal of members. 
The city council may remove any member of the towing advisory board at any time if it finds that the best interest of the towing advisory board would be served by such action. 
(Code 1988, § 37-252; Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 6-11-2002)  
Sec. 37-253. - Election of officers; adoption of bylaws and rules of procedure. 
(a)  The towing advisory board shall elect annually a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and secretary from among its members. 
(b)  The towing advisory board shall establish its own set of bylaws and rules of procedure. 
(Code 1988, § 37-253; Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 6-11-2002)  
Sec. 37-254. - Date of meetings. 
The towing advisory board shall hold regular meetings on such days and at such hours as may be fixed by the towing advisory board. Special meetings may be held at such other times as may be fixed by the towing advisory board or upon the call of the chairperson or, in the chairperson's absence, the vice-chairperson, or upon the call of a majority of the members of the towing advisory board. 
(Code 1988, § 37-254; Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 6-11-2002)  
Sec. 37-255. - Duties and purpose. 
The towing advisory board shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council with regard to issues affecting the towing or storage of vehicles. The city council shall not adopt any ordinance or enter into a contract involving the towing or storage of vehicles until it has been advised by the towing advisory board concerning such matters. The city council may assign such other related duties to the towing advisory board as the council shall deem fit. 
(Code 1988, § 37-255; Ord. No. 2002-27, § 1, 6-11-2002)  
Chapter 38 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city as to waterworks, § 2.10. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 7; erosion and sediment control, ch. 11; fire prevention and protection, ch. 13; flood protection, ch. 14; water supply and toilet facilities for restaurants and other food establishments, §§ 15-62, 15-63; housing and community development, ch. 17; mobile homes, ch. 21; water supply and sewer connections in mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, §§ 21-29, 21-30; special assessments for local improvements, § 32-251 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 33.1; swimming pools, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 40.1. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to acquire, establish, maintain and operate waterworks, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2109—15.2-2114, 15.2-2143, 15.2-2146; authority of city to establish, maintain and operate sewage disposal systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122; authority to regulate sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157; sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 32.1-163—32.1-166; water supplies generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 32.1-167—32.1-176. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the word "director" shall mean the director of public utilities unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "city sewage disposal service" or "sewage system" means any appurtenance of that integrated regional system of sewage collection, transmission or treatment, whether located within or without the boundaries of the city, which has been, or is intended to be, installed, operated or maintained by the city, or in the installation, operation or maintenance of which the city has participated, is participating or intends to participate financially. 
(Code 1988, § 38-1; Ord. No. 1988-87, § 2, 9-13-1988) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-2. - Violations of chapter. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor and shall constitute cause for termination of both water and sewer service. Each day of violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to criminal penalties and other specific relief set forth in this chapter, the city may seek injunctive or other appropriate relief, in addition to any nonjudicial relief set forth in this chapter. In any judicial action of a civil nature, the city may recover any actual damages sustained, including any expense, incurred by the city in the investigation, correction or preventative action taken for the purposes of protecting or restoring the integrity and/or the quality of the public water or sewer system and the environment. 
(c)  The city may recover reasonable administrative costs, attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses of litigation from any person found to be in violation of, or in noncompliance with this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations or permits issued hereunder. 
(Code 1988, § 38-2) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 38-3. - Depositing filth, etc., on property of department of public utilities. 
No person shall deposit, directly or indirectly, any debris, yard waste, rubbish, garbage or filth of any nature on the property, in the waters, into the sewers or upon the facilities of the department of public utilities. No person shall deposit, directly or indirectly, any contaminant, including microbial substances, oils, greases, nitrates, nitrites, synthetic organic compounds, volatile organic compounds, radioactive compounds and inorganic compounds, regulated by the state department of health, state department of environmental quality, Hampton Roads Sanitation District or the United States Environmental Protection Agency on the property, in the waters, into the sewers or upon the facilities of the department of public utilities. 
(Code 1973, § 38-51; Code 1988, § 38-4)  
Sec. 38-4. - Damage to property and unauthorized use prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall damage in any manner, remove, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any pipe, apparatus, appurtenance, meter, meter box, tool, fixture, facility, structure or property of the department of public utilities. 
(b)  No person, except the duly authorized agent of the city, shall open any public fire hydrant. 
(c)  No person, except those properly authorized by the director shall tap or make any connection with the water and sewer mains and pipes of the department of public utilities. 
(d)  No person, except a licensed plumber or those properly employed by the city to engage in this type of work, shall be permitted to do any work in connection with the water or sewer service to any premises. 
(e)  No person shall obstruct or cover any fire hydrant, meter, valve box or sampling station or commit any act tending to obstruct the use and access thereof. 
(f)  No person shall break, remove, move, destroy, deface or tamper with any safety light, barricade, signage or other safety, warning or delineation device placed either for the public or workers' protection or notification during the construction, repair or maintenance of any public water or sewer facility. 
(g)  No person shall tamper with or attempt to tamper with or attempt to or bypass the meter or meter box of the department of public utilities. Failure to conform to this standard shall constitute cause for the immediate discontinuance of service. When such failure necessitates shutting off the water service at the tap cut-off valve, the owner of the premises shall pay the cost thereof and the cost of restoring service before the department of public utilities shall restore service. Such cost shall be set by the director to reasonably cover the average cost of the shut-off and restoration including any street, curb or other repairs involved. 
(Code 1973, § 38-15; Code 1988, § 38-5) 
Cross reference— Authority of city manager to offer reward in cases involving damage to city property, § 2-167; damaging city property generally, § 24-318.  
Sec. 38-5. - Pollution of wells or springs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to willfully or negligently pollute any well or spring belonging to another. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9; Code 1988, § 38-6)  
Sec. 38-6. - Requirement for approval method of disposal of human excrement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any house used as a place of human habitation, any warehouse, any public building or other place where human beings congregate or are employed in the city to use, occupy, rent or lease the same for the use or occupancy by any person or for any person to use or occupy the same unless such house or building is equipped or supplied with an approved method of disposal of human excrement of such construction as will comply with the requirements of this chapter, the building code and other applicable ordinances. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, an approved method of disposal of human excrement shall be one that does not allow untreated human excrement or septic tank effluent to be deposited upon the surface of the ground or, by means of any public or private sewer, into any stream or body of water, unless such public or private sewer is being maintained and operated in accordance with a valid certification issued under the provisions of the State Water Control Law (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq.), or otherwise disposed of in a manner that it may endanger a source of drinking water, or which allows flies to have access to human excrement; and, shall be deemed to be either a flush toilet connected to a public or private sewer meeting the above requirements or a flush toilet connected to a septic tank system meeting the requirements of article VII of this chapter. If a public sewer is available to the property, the owner will be required to connect to the public sewer as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-87, 38-88; Code 1988, § 38-7) 
Cross reference— Building code, § 7-96 et seq.  
Sec. 38-7. - Devices for disposal of human excrement to be kept sanitary. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or lessee of any premises supplied with a flush toilet or other approved device for the disposal of human excrement to misuse or neglect the same, so as to allow or cause it to be unsanitary. 
(Code 1973, § 38-93; Code 1988, § 38-8)  
Sec. 38-8. - Applicability of rules and regulations. 
All applicable rules and regulations of the state department of health, state department of environmental quality and the Hampton Roads Sanitation District (HRSD) shall apply to water and sewer service. 
(Code 1988, § 38-9)  
Sec. 38-9. - Fee for review of plans of development. 
In addition to any charges imposed pursuant to section 40.1-2.2(c) of this Code, the department of public utilities is authorized to assess a fee for site plan (plan of development) review of water and sewer components. The amount of the fee for a specific review shall be determined by the director based on the size and scope of the development and the impact of the development on the city water and sewer systems, but shall in no event exceed the amount specified in appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 21, 5-12-2020)  
Secs. 38-10—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS AND SERVICE GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Definition. 
The word "premises," as used in this article, shall mean a building under one roof by one party and occupied as one residence or business, or a combination of buildings owned by one party in one common enclosure and occupied by one family or business, or each division of a double or tenement house having a vertical partition or wall, or a building of more than one apartment and having one or more entrances, or a building having a number of apartments or offices or both and having one or more entrances. 
(Code 1973, § 38-18; Code 1988, § 38-31) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-32. - Mandatory connections generally. 
(a)  The water distribution and drainage system of any building in which plumbing fixtures are installed shall be connected to a public water supply and sewer system, respectively, if available. Where either a public water supply or sewer system or both, are not available, an individual water supply or individual sewage disposal system, or both, shall be provided. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, a public water supply system or public sewer system shall be deemed available to premises used for human occupancy if such premises are within 200 feet, measured along a street, alley or easement, of the public water supply or sewer system and a connection conforming with the standards set forth in this chapter, the building code and other applicable ordinances. 
(Code 1973, § 6-11; Code 1988, § 38-32)  
Sec. 38-33. - Mandatory water connection for premises connected with sewer system. 
All premises connected with the city sewer system shall be connected with a city water main and supplied with water through such connection when the premises are occupied. 
(Code 1973, § 38-16; Code 1988, § 38-33)  
Sec. 38-34. - Mandatory sewer connection for premises on public sewer line. 
(a)  The owner of every building occupied or to be occupied for any purpose whatsoever shall cause the same to be connected with the city sewer system, if the building or premises is on the line of a public sewer, unless it can be shown to the satisfaction of the director of public health that there is no necessity for such connection. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, all buildings and premises, whether situated on public lanes or courts or on such lanes and courts as have not been accepted by the council as public, when the same open into a street on which the city sewers are laid, shall be considered on the line of the city sewer system. The owner of buildings and premises on such lanes and courts not accepted as public shall run, at his expense, a lateral to connect with the city sewer and shall be subject to this chapter and regulations made in pursuance thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 6-14; Code 1988, § 38-34)  
Sec. 38-35. - Abatement of nuisance resulting from failure to connect to public sewer. 
(a)  In the event the director of public health determines that a public nuisance exists as a result of a building not being connected to a public sewer which is operated and maintained in accordance with a certificate of compliance issued under the provisions of the State Water Control Law (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq.), he shall cause such public nuisance to be abated. If the occupant or owner of the building fails to abate the nuisance, the director of public health shall authorize the director to do whatever is necessary to abate the same. 
(b)  All costs incurred by the city in abating a nuisance under this section shall be transmitted to the city treasurer who shall docket the same as a lien against the real estate in the nuisance abatement lien docket book kept in the office of the city treasurer, which lien shall exist until removed by payment of such costs. 
(Code 1973, § 38-96; Code 1988, § 38-35) 
Cross reference— Nuisance abatement lien docket book, § 23-5.  
Sec. 38-35.1. - Removal of obstructions from or repair of damage to wastewater facilities caused by drainage or discharges. 
If the drainage or discharge from any establishment or premises, whether residential, commercial or industrial, causes a deposit, obstruction or damage, or contains characteristics which add unduly to the cost of maintenance and operation to any of the city's wastewater facilities, which includes but is not limited to manholes, and water and sewer lines, and the surfaces including streets and rights-of-way above, below and around such facilities, the city may commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief to assure the abatement of such drainage or discharge. In addition thereto, the director shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost of such work, including materials, labor, overhead and supervision, whether such work is performed by the city or by an outside contractor, shall be borne by the person causing or contributing to such deposit, obstruction or damage, or by the owner of the premises which causes such deposit, obstruction or damage. Payment of such actual costs does not relieve that person from criminal prosecution or other liability that may be imposed by other applicable law. 
(Code 1973, § 38-83; Code 1988, § 38-35.1; Ord. No. 1988-87, § 3, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 38-36. - Separate water tap and service pipe for each premises. 
Where more than one premises having different owners are supplied with water by means of a single tap, this condition shall be remedied promptly and each premises shall be connected with a separate tap and service pipe by the owner. 
(Code 1973, § 38-38; Code 1988, § 38-36)  
Sec. 38-37. - Separate sewer connection required for each building; exceptions. 
(a)  The plumbing and draining system of each new building and of new work installed in an existing building shall be separate from and independent of that of any other building, except as herein provided, and every building shall have an independent connection with a public or private sewer when available. 
(b)  When one building stands in the rear of another building on an interior lot and no sewer is available, the house drain from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole will be considered as one building sewer; and where a building is a combination of several occupancies, there may be one connection with the public sewer, provided all of such property is under one ownership; and when there is more than one unit of occupancy, the owner shall, in making application for a sewer connection permit, agree to supervise and at all times maintain the premises in a sanitary condition; and provided further the number of fixtures on each such connection shall not exceed the number permitted by the building code. 
(c)  In any case where, in the opinion of the city manager, it is impractical to carry out the above provisions of this section or deemed to be to the interest of the city to change it, or that an unnecessary hardship would result to the property owner if carried out, it may be lawful, with the written consent of the city manager, to connect a block of houses to one lateral sewer line in a lane in the rear of such houses, provided such lane is dedicated to the joint use of all houses in the block. Such dedication shall be recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 6-14; Code 1988, § 38-37)  
Sec. 38-38. - Contract for water connection—Required. 
Whenever a service connection with a city water main is requested, the owner of the property to be connected with such water main, before such service connection is made, shall be required to sign a contract prepared for the purpose and kept in the office of the department of public utilities containing the provisions as set forth in section 38-39. A separate contract shall be required for each premises. 
(Code 1973, § 38-19; Code 1988, § 38-38)  
Sec. 38-39. - Same—Form. 
The contract to be signed by the owner for a service connection in the street main for the purpose of supplying water to the premises shall be substantially in the following form: 
Contract by Owner 
for Service Connection. 
Form No. _______ Account No. _______ 
Service No. _______ 
_______ Va. _______, 20_______ 
I hereby apply for a service connection between the street main and the meter for the purpose of supplying water to premises No. _______ Street, between _______ Street and _______ Street, and agree to be bound by the rules, regulations and ordinances now or hereafter established by the Council of the City of Portsmouth governing conditions of water supply. 
It is understood and agreed that the City of Portsmouth shall not be liable in the event of the stoppage of the supply of water or if water is wasted on account of leaky pipes or fixtures or any cause. It is also understood and agreed that the City of Portsmouth shall not be liable for any water discoloration or any damage resulting therefrom. 
If public service bills are not paid at the proper time or if any violation of any city ordinance or other rules or regulations of the department of public utilities occurs pertaining to public services, the department shall have the right to cut off the water at anytime. 
I agree to give prompt notice in writing to the department of public utilities of all changes in occupants. 
PORTSMOUTH DEPARTMENT OF 
PUBLIC UTILITIES 
_______Director of Public Utilities 
_______Owner 
_______Plumber_______Witness 
(Code 1973, § 38-20; Code 1988, § 38-39)  
Sec. 38-40. - Charges for ownership and maintenance of water connections. 
(a)  Whenever application is made pursuant to section 38-39 for the installation of a new water service connection within the city or within the Suffolk service area, the applicant shall make the payment hereinafter specified. The size and location of any such water service connection shall be determined by the director. Such payment or deposit shall cover the following services, materials and labor: installing the water service connection between the water main and meter, shutoff valve at the meter, outlet fitting on the meter or master meter, meter box and meter, and restoration of city right-of-way area disturbed by the installation, all of which shall be owned and thereafter maintained by the department of public utilities. Except that in a new residential development requiring the installation of three-quarter-inch services, upon the approval of the director and incorporation of the work into the development's bond and warranty, the developer may perform, provide and install the following services, materials and labor in accordance with departmental and city standards: Install the water service connection between the water main and meter, shutoff valve at the meter, outlet fitting on the meter, meter box (meter to be furnished/installed by the department), and roadway subbase, base and pavement installation/restoration all of which shall be maintained by the developer until acceptance of the development by the city and then shall be owned and thereafter maintained by the department of public utilities. 
(1)  For the various sizes of service connection, the charge set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be paid in advance. 
(2)  The director shall estimate the charge and the applicant will deposit such amount before the work is done. An accounting shall be made of the cost of such installation. If the deposit is less than such charge, the applicant shall pay the difference within 30 days, and if the deposit is more than such charge, the difference shall be refunded promptly. Failure of the applicant to pay any difference between the deposit and the actual charge shall cause the applicant to be denied water service as provided for in section 38-88. 
(b)  Whenever application is made pursuant to section 38-39 for the installation of a new water service connection outside the city and the Suffolk service area, the charges shall be 1½ times those specified in subsection (a) of this section and set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  Any existing water service connection, between the water main and the meter, which was installed prior to July 1, 1962, shall be owned by the owner of the premises served thereby and maintained by the owner or tenant of the premises, until such water service connection lying between the main and the meter shall require repair or replacement as evidence by leakage or failure of the meter cut-off valve. At such time that leakage or failure of the meter cut-off valve occurs, permission for the department of public utilities to repair or replace the water service connection, between the main and the meter, shall be presumed and ownership and maintenance of the water service connection, between the main and the meter, shall pass to the department of public utilities upon completion of their actual repair or replacement of the water service connection, between the main and the meter. There shall be no charge to either the owner or tenant of the premises for the department of public utilities' repair or replacement of the water service connection, between the main and the meter. 
(d)  As provided in section 38-5, no person, except the duly authorized agent of the city shall damage in any manner any pipe, apparatus, tool or fixture of the department of public utilities nor shall any person tamper with or attempt to or actually bypass the water meter or meter box of the department of public utilities. Failure to conform to this standard shall constitute cause for the discontinuance of service. When such failure necessitates shutting off the water service at the tap cut-off valve, the owner of the premises shall pay the cost thereof and the cost of restoring service before service shall be restored by the department of public utilities. Such cost shall be set by the director to reasonably cover the average cost of the shut off and restoration including any street, curb or other repair involved. 
(e)  Whenever the owner or developer of any subdivision, not to include minor subdivisions, desires to have new water service connections installed to facilitate the paving of said subdivision streets, he may pay in advance in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, or may elect to furnish the department of public utilities a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount equal to the total water service connection charges, plus an additional ten percent of the amount of the total water service connection charges, guaranteeing payment of the total charges within a time period prescribed by the director not to exceed two years. This surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit must be furnished prior to the execution of a water service connection agreement and must be in a form deemed satisfactory by the city attorney. 
(f)  When water connections are not performed by the city, inspection fees shall be charged at the rates set forth in appendix A. 
(Code 1973, § 38-48; Code 1988, § 38-40; Ord. No. 1989-37, § 1, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 1990-85, § 1, 7-24-1990; Ord. No. 1994-36, § 1, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1995-89, § 1, 7-25-1995; Ord. No. 1997-60, § 1, 10-28-1997; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 16, 5-12-2020)  
Sec. 38-41. - Permit for and inspection of sewer connections. 
The plumbing inspector shall issue permits for and make inspections of connections to the city sewers. A record shall be kept of all sewer connections and inspections. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 38-41)  
Sec. 38-42. - Sewer connection charges—Generally. 
(a)  When connection is made with the city sewer, the following charges shall be made for each connection: 
(1)  Residential; trailer parks: 
a.  An availability fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be made for each dwelling unit and each common laundry room or like common facility which generates sewage in the case of apartments, condominiums or other multifamily structures. 
b.  When the city performs the installation and connection, a connection fee equal to the greater of the actual cost of such connection plus 25 percent or as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be made for each point of connection. The director shall estimate the connection fee including any applicable survey, design and restoration components, and the applicant shall deposit with the city the estimated connection fee before the work is done. An accounting shall be made of the cost of such installation. If the deposit is less than the actual connection fee, the applicant shall pay the difference within 30 days or have service denied until payment of any balance due is made. If the deposit is more than such charge, the difference shall be promptly refunded. 
(2)  Commercial, office and institutional: 
a.  The availability fee for commercial, office or institutional developments shall be computed by dividing the estimated rate of flow as calculated pursuant to criteria for such development as set forth by the state sewage regulations by 280 gallons per day. The result thereof shall be multiplied by an amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code to determine the total fee for the development. 
b.  The connection fee for commercial, office and institutional applicants shall be the same as set forth in subsection (a)(1)b. of this section. 
(3)  Industrial: 
a.  All industrial connections shall be in accordance with applicable state or federal pretreatment and categorical standards for the particular type of industry. 
b.  The availability fee and connection fee for industrial applicants shall be as set forth in subsections (a)(2)a. and (a)(2)b. of this section. 
(b)  Where an existing lateral is available to the property, the applicant shall pay an inspection fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code to have the director determine if the existing lateral is of adequate size, material and condition in accordance with city standards. The inspection fee shall be credited toward the payment of the availability fee. If the existing lateral is found to be inadequate in accordance with city standards, the connection fee set forth in subsection (a)(1)b. of this section shall be applicable. 
(c)  When a building has been removed from a site, the appropriate charge will be made under this section whenever the new connection is made. This will apply to any connection whether or not it has been in use before. 
(d)  When one or more connections in addition to existing connections or standard connections as specified in this section are made to a residential, commercial or industrial building, the cost for each such additional connection installed by the city will be the actual cost, as computed by the department of public utilities, plus an additional 20 percent thereof, or the minimum charge applicable to the type of building served, whichever is greater. 
(e)  When a sewer does not exist in the street adjacent to a building site, sewer lines may be installed by the city to serve such site, for which the owner of such site shall pay the actual cost plus 20 percent. 
(f)  When in the ordinary course of business a portion of a sewer collection system is replaced, as part of routine maintenance and there occurs no improvement to the sewer collection system, no sewer connection fees shall be charged. 
(g)  When a substandard sewer collection system connected to a treatment facility is taken out of service and a new collection system connected to a treatment facility replaces such substandard collection system, a sewer connection fee shall be charged in the appropriate sum at the time improved service is made available, but not to be less than the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(h)  When sewer connections are not performed by the city, inspection fees shall be charged at the rates set forth in appendix A. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 38-42; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 18, 5-12-2020)  
Sec. 38-43. - Same—Notice of availability of service and payment of charges. 
(a)  Where the city installs sanitary sewer improvements, the director shall give notice to affected homeowners of the availability of sewer line service upon completion of the lines. Homeowners shall then have 30 days from the date of the giving of such notice to apply for a sewer connection and pay the sewer connection fees established by section 38-42. 
(b)  Any homeowner who fails to apply for a sewer connection and pay the requisite fee within the time limits established by subsection (a) of this section shall, if he thereafter seeks to obtain a sewer line connection, pay a sewer line fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code. Such sewer line fee shall be in addition to the sewer connection fee established by section 38-42. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, the sewer line fee established by subsection (b) of this section shall not be charged where a new home is constructed. 
(d)  All notices required by this section shall be deemed sufficient if published one time in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 38-82; Code 1988, § 38-43)  
Sec. 38-44. - Persons permitted to make water connection or perform work in connection with water service. 
(a)  No person, except those properly authorized by the department of public utilities, shall tap or make any connection with the mains or distributing pipes of the department of public utilities. 
(b)  No person, except a licensed plumber or an employee of the city, shall be permitted to do any work in connection with the water service to any premises supplied by the department of public utilities. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-44, 38-47; Code 1988, § 38-44)  
Sec. 38-45. - Point of connections. 
Building sewers and water service pipes shall connect to the public sewer and water main at a point designated by the director. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 38-45)  
Sec. 38-46. - Sewer connection cleanout. 
All sewer connections shall be provided with a cleanout at the curb or edge of the pavement or as near thereto as is practicable. 
(Code 1973, § 6-8; Code 1988, § 38-46)  
Sec. 38-47. - Installation, maintenance, etc., of water meters. 
(a)  The department of public utilities will furnish, install and maintain, at its expense all water meters except those installed for fire protection. 
(b)  Only one meter shall be allowed for each premises and only one premises can be supplied through one meter, unless, in the judgment of the director, multiple meters will afford better service. 
(c)  All water meters must be approved, tested and sealed by the department of public utilities before being available for service. After being installed, no meter shall be removed or tampered with by any consumer or other person, and all meters shall be under the exclusive regulation of the department of public utilities. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-36, 38-39, 38-40; Code 1988, § 38-47)  
Sec. 38-48. - Application for water service; fee for establishing or transferring account. 
(a)  Any person desiring to secure water service shall file a signed application therefor at the office of the department of public utilities on the prescribed form, stating the location and character of the premises for which service is desired. 
(b)  When a person applies for initial water service, there shall be a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code charged for establishing a new account and turning on water at the new residence. When an existing customer moves from one residence to another, there shall be a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code for transferring the account and turning on the water at the new residence. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-17, 38-43; Code 1988, § 38-48; Ord. No. 1994-36, § 2, 5-10-1994)  
Sec. 38-49. - Service contracts generally. 
(a)  The owner of any premises desiring water to be supplied to such premises shall be required to sign a contract prepared for the purpose, containing the provisions and in the form as set forth in section 38-50 or 38-51. A separate contract shall be required for each premises. 
(b)  Whenever a tenant shall make a deposit pursuant to section 38-86, he shall be required to sign a contract substantially similar to the form as set forth in section 38-50. Such contract and deposit may be transferred by the director to cover any other premises to which the tenant may move. 
(c)  If the same service pipe supplies more than one premises, or if one premises is occupied by more than one tenant, the charges for water supplied such premises shall be contracted for and paid for by the owner. 
(d)  The owner of a premises occupied or to be occupied by a tenant may sign a contract for water to be supplied such premises, and by so doing he assumes responsibility for the payment of charges for water supplied the tenant. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-22, 38-24, 38-27, 38-28; Code 1988, § 38-49)  
Sec. 38-50. - Service contract form—When owner not responsible for water used by occupant. 
The contract for water and sewer services for particular premises, when the owner is not responsible for water used by the occupant, shall be substantially in the following form: 
Contract for Water and Sewer Service 
by Nonowner Occupant of Premises 
Form No. _______ Account No. _______ 
Service No. _______ 
_______ Va. _______, 20_______ 
I hereby apply to the Portsmouth Department of Public Utilities for a supply of water for Premises No. _______ Street, between _______ Street and _______ Street. 
I agree to pay for all water furnished on said premises at the rate now or hereafter established, and all sewage disposal charges assessed against the said premises in accordance with the ordinances governing sewage disposal charges, and that the water shall be used on the premises only, and without waste, and to be bound in all things by the stipulation and conditions of water supply now or hereafter embraced in the city Code, and the rules which may be from time to time adopted; and to permit the agents of the department of public utilities, at all reasonable times to visit and inspect the described premises. 
It is understood and agreed that the City of Portsmouth shall not be liable in the event of the stoppage of the water supply or if water is wasted on account of leaky pipes or fixtures or any other cause. It is also understood and agreed the City of Portsmouth shall not be liable for any water discoloration or any damage resulting therefrom. 
If public service bills are not paid at the proper time or if a violation of any city ordinance or other rules or regulations of the department of public utilities occurs pertaining to public services, the department shall have the right to cut off the water at any time. Otherwise this contract shall continue in force until cancelled in writing by me. 
PORTSMOUTH DEPARTMENT OF 
PUBLIC UTILITIES 
_______Director of Public Utilities 
Consumer Witness 
___Consumer 
___Witness 
(Code 1973, § 38-30; Code 1988, § 38-50)  
Sec. 38-51. - Same—When owner responsible for water used. 
The contract for water and sewer services for particular premises when the owner is responsible for water used shall be substantially in the following form: 
Contract for Water and Sewer Service 
When Owner Responsible for Water Used 
Form No. _______ Account No. _______ 
Service No. _______ 
_______ Va. _______, 20_______ 
I hereby apply to the Portsmouth Department of Public Utilities for a supply of water for Premises No. _______ Street, between _______ Street and _______ Street. 
Being the owner of the premises, I agree to be responsible for payment of all water furnished said premises at the rate now or hereafter established, and all sewage disposal charges assessed against the said premises in accordance with the ordinances governing sewage disposal charges, and that the water shall be used on the premises only, and without waste; and to be bound in all things by these stipulations and conditions of water supply now or hereafter embraced in the city Code, and the rules which may be from time to time adopted; and to permit the agents of the department of public utilities at all reasonable times to visit and inspect the described premises. 
It is understood and agreed that the City of Portsmouth shall not be liable in the event of the stoppage of the supply of water or if water is wasted on account of leaky pipes or fixtures or any other cause. It is also understood and agreed the City of Portsmouth shall not be liable for any water discoloration or any damage resulting therefrom. 
If public service bills are not paid at the proper time or if a violation of any city ordinance or other rules or regulations of the department of public utilities occurs pertaining to public services, the department shall have the right to cut off the water at any time. Otherwise this contract shall continue in force until cancelled in writing by me. 
PORTSMOUTH DEPARTMENT OF 
PUBLIC UTILITIES 
_______Director of Public Utilities 
_______Owner 
_______Witness 
(Code 1973, § 38-31; Code 1988, § 38-51)  
Sec. 38-52. - Notice as to changes in tenants when water furnished on application of tenant. 
If water is supplied a premises on the application of a tenant, the owner of the premises or his agent shall give prompt notice in writing to the department of public utilities as to changes in tenants. 
(Code 1973, § 38-29; Code 1988, § 38-52)  
Sec. 38-53. - Right of entry and access to premises. 
All premises connected to the water and sewer facilities of the city shall at all reasonable hours be open and accessible to the duly authorized agents and employees of the departments of public utilities, permits and inspections and public health for the purpose of installing, removing, repairing, maintaining, measuring or sampling the facilities of the city or for inspecting the premises, fixtures and appurtenances thereto, which are connected to the facilities of the city. If the owner, occupant or agent refuses to allow access to the premises; or if the director is not able to contact the owner, occupant or agent for the purpose of obtaining access, the director may after ten days' written notice to the owner, occupant or agent, terminate the water and sewer service. In cases where the director has reasonable cause to believe that a hazard exists in the premises that may jeopardize the integrity of the quality of the city water or sewer system, the director shall immediately terminate the water and sewer service to the premises and provide written notification to the owner, occupant or agent. 
(Code 1973, § 38-45; Code 1988, § 38-53)  
Sec. 38-54. - Unauthorized persons not to turn on water after shut off by city. 
When water service to a premises has been shut off by the department of public utilities for any reason, no person except a representative of such department may turn the water on again. 
(Code 1973, § 38-43; Code 1988, § 38-54)  
Sec. 38-55. - Water service for fire protection. 
The following provisions shall apply to water service for fire protection other than public fire hydrants: 
(1)  There shall be no connection with any other service from city mains or with any other water supply. 
(2)  The owner of the property to be protected shall sign in the office of the department of public utilities the contract for fire protection service. 
(3)  For a supply of water for sprinkler system, where there is no opening through which water may be taken except through sprinkler heads, a horizontal swing check valve with bronze working parts, bypass and meter and also a shutoff gate valve shall be installed between the curb and the building, all to be accessible for examination and repair. The check valve, bypass meter, connection with the city main and service pipe from the main to the check valve will be installed by the department of public utilities and paid for in advance by the owner of the property to be protected. 
(4)  There will be no charge for water used to extinguish a fire or for sprinkler heads, nor ready to serve charge for bypass meter. 
(5)  The use of water from such connection for any purpose, except through the sprinkler system to extinguish a fire, the attachment to the service pipe of any connection or fixture, except the usual sprinkler control valves and heads will operate to render void the contract for the connection, and the water will be shut off at the main by the department of public utilities. 
(6)  For a supply of water for private fire hydrants or hose connections, or both, with or without a sprinkler system, such connection shall be supplied through a fire protection meter to register all water used, the size of connection and type of meter to be determined by the director. 
(7)  For fire protection meter, gate and check valves, connection with the city main and service pipe from the main to the meter will be installed by the department of public utilities and paid for in advance by the owner of property to be protected. There shall be no ready-to-serve charge or minimum applied to meters used exclusively for fire protection services, nor any charge for water used through such meters to extinguish a fire. Water registered by such meters, not used to extinguish a fire, will be paid for at the rates prescribed in article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 38-65; Code 1988, § 38-55) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 13.  
Sec. 38-56. - Use of public fire hydrants; annual charge. 
(a)  Public fire hydrants shall be used for the extinguishment of fires. Such hydrants may also be used for other municipal uses with the approval of the city manager. Prior to use for other than the extinguishment of fires, an agreement covering conditions of use, including provisions for payment for water and other costs where applicable, shall be executed. 
(b)  Public fire hydrants within the corporate limits of the city shall be paid for at the rate as set forth in appendix A to this Code each per annum. Public fire hydrants located in a city or town other than this city, shall be subject to contract, or if no contract is entered into for such fire hydrants, they shall be paid for at the rate as set forth in appendix A to this Code each per annum. Rates for public fire hydrants shall be payable quarterly. In addition, a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged for the observation of fire hydrant flow tests. Bills for public fire hydrants shall not be subject to discount. 
(Code 1973, § 38-66; Code 1988, § 38-56; Ord. No. 1988-45, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 14, 5-12-2020)  
Sec. 38-57. - City not liable for damages caused by bursting of water mains or pipes, shutting off the water or failure of water supply. 
The city shall not be liable for any damage, including water discoloration or any damage resulting therefrom, resulting from the bursting of any water main, service pipe or cock, from the shutting off of water for repairs, extensions or connection or from the accidental failure of the water supply from any cause whatsoever. 
(Code 1973, § 38-49; Code 1988, § 38-57; Ord. No. 1991-57, § 1, 6-11-1991)  
Sec. 38-58. - Right to restrict use of water in emergencies. 
In cases of emergency, the city shall have the right to restrict the use of water in any reasonable manner for the protection of the city and its water supply. 
(Code 1973, 38-49; Code 1988, § 38-58)  
Secs. 38-59—38-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to charge and collect compensation for water furnished, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2143, 15.2-2604, 15.2-2605. 
 
Sec. 38-81. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the word "premises" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 38-31. 
(Code 1988, § 38-81) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-82. - Meter charges. 
The meter charges as set forth in appendix A to this Code, based on meter size, shall be paid by water consumers for each premises the occupants of which take water from the service pipe. 
(Code 1973, § 38-33; Code 1988, § 38-82; Ord. No. 1988-45, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1993-28, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 1996-27, § 1, 4-23-1996; Ord. No. 1998-16, § 1, 4-28-1998)  
Sec. 38-83. - Meter rates for water supplied. 
The rates for all water that passes through meters to customers within the corporate limits of the city and to customers in the Cities of Chesapeake and Suffolk shall be as set forth in appendix A of this Code, and any amendments thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 38-34; Code 1988, § 38-83; Ord. No. 1988-45, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1989-35, § 1, 5-15-1989; Ord. No. 1990-34, § 1, 5-15-1990; Ord. No. 1991-38, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1992-29, § 1, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1993-28, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 1994-36, § 3, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1995-50, § 1, 4-25-1995; Ord. No. 1996-27, § 1, 4-23-1996; Ord. No. 1997-30, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 1999-10, § 1, 4-27-1999; Ord. No. 2000-10, § 1, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-20, § 1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2002-55, § 2, 8-27-2002; Ord. No. 2003-30, § 1, 4-22-2003; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 2006-36, § 1, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-52, § 1, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 1, 5-13-2008; Ord. No. 2009-40 , § 1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 1, 5-4-2011) 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2009-40 states that this ordinance shall take effect July 1, 2009, and shall be applicable to all bills rendered after July 1, 2009. 
Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2011-21 states that this ordinance shall take effect July 1, 2011, and shall be applicable to all bills rendered after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 38-84. - Charges when consumer supplied by more than one meter. 
If any water consumer is supplied by more than one meter, each meter shall be considered as a separate service both as to the meter rates prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 38-37; Code 1988, § 38-84)  
Sec. 38-85. - All metered water to be paid for. 
Subject to the provisions of section 38-92, all water passing through a meter shall be paid for by the consumer at the prescribed rates, whether used, consumed or wasted. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-32, 38-35; Code 1988, § 38-85)  
Sec. 38-86. - Deposit to assure payment. 
(a)  Whenever the owner of a premises elects not to sign the contract described in section 38-50 or repudiates or cancels a contract previously signed by him, no water shall be supplied at the premises until the owner or tenant applying for the water shall deposit with the director a cash deposit equal in amount to the estimated bill commensurate with the size of the service and the normal billing period for the premises, including charges for water service and utility taxes based thereon, if any. 
(b)  A deposit made under this section shall be held by the department of public utilities until the occupant of the premises moves from the same, at which time any portion of the deposit due shall be returned without interest to the person by whom it was made, provided the meter has been read and the balance of charges or fees to date deducted from the amount of the deposit. If the deposit is not sufficient to pay all charges and fees up to the date on which the tenant vacates the premises in question, the tenant shall pay the balance due. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-23, 38-26; Code 1988, § 38-86)  
Sec. 38-87. - Permit and deposit for water for building purposes. 
Permits for water for building purposes will be issued on application and the payment of a deposit of not less than the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code. This water shall be supplied through a meter to be furnished by the department of public utilities. The owner or contractor shall pay in accordance with bills submitted. When the work is completed and water service for building purposes shut off, and all payments have been made for water supplied, the deposit will be returned to the person who made it. 
(Code 1973, § 38-41; Code 1988, § 38-87)  
Sec. 38-88. - Balance due for prior service to be paid prior to acceptance of deposit or furnishing of service. 
If an owner or tenant fails or refuses to pay for water service supplied such owner or tenant as shown by the balance due on the books of the department of public utilities for a premises, no deposit will be accepted from and no water supplied such owner or tenant for the same or any other premises for his own use until such balance is paid. 
(Code 1973, § 38-25; Code 1988, § 38-88)  
Sec. 38-89. - Owners not required to pay for water furnished tenant; exception. 
An owner shall not be required to pay for water furnished to a tenant, unless the owner has signed a contract agreeing to pay for such water. 
(Code 1973, § 38-22; Code 1988, § 38-89)  
Sec. 38-90. - Unauthorized use of water to avoid payment of charges. 
No consumer shall permit others, not members of his family, to use water from his pipes to avoid the payment of charges for water service, and no person shall thus obtain water. 
(Code 1973, § 38-46; Code 1988, § 38-90)  
Sec. 38-91. - Estimate of charges when meter fails; testing meter upon complaint of consumer. 
(a)  In the event of a meter failing to register properly or being removed for testing or repairs, public service bills will be rendered for an estimated amount based on the average consumption of the previous three periods when the meter was registering properly. 
(b)  In the event of a complaint by a consumer as to the accuracy of a meter, it shall be removed and tested by the department of public utilities. If it is found to be correct, the consumer shall pay the cost of removing, testing and replacing the same. If found incorrect, such cost shall be borne by the department of public utilities. Such complaint shall not justify or be used as an excuse for delay in the payment of bills rendered for water supplied the same consumer through any other meter. In determining the accuracy of a meter, two percent slow or fast shall be the maximum allowance for over or under registration. 
(Code 1973, § 38-40; Code 1988, § 38-91)  
Sec. 38-92. - Rebate of charges in case of leaks. 
If underground or inside leaks occur in water pipes on premises receiving metered water, and if the owner or occupant of the premises or the water consumer: 
(1)  Has all necessary repairs made promptly; and 
(2)  Furnishes the director with documentation certifying that the repairs have been made and giving the date of completion of the work; 
the director may make rebate to such owner, occupant or consumer of the water charges in excess of the average consumption for the premises during the last six months. A maximum of 50 percent credit on excess water charges over the average will be allowed. In unusual circumstances, the director may make additional adjustments. Only one adjustment credit may be allowed for leaks within 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 1973, § 38-35; Code 1988, § 38-92)  
Sec. 38-93. - Billing and payment generally. 
(a)  All bimonthly water accounts shall be billed on a cycle of approximately 60 days. All monthly accounts shall be billed on a cycle of approximately 30 days. Bills for public services supplied in each division, including charges for water service, sewage disposal service, refuse disposal service and utility taxes based thereon, if any, are due and payable upon presentation. If the payment is not received by the due date set forth on the bill, a late charge of 1½ percent per month will be added to the bill. 
(b)  Payment of bills rendered under this section shall be made at the office of the department of public utilities on the days and during the hours the office is open for business, or such payment may be made at any collection agency established by the director for that purpose on the days and during the hours such collection agencies are open for business. The method of payment of such bills at collection agencies and regulations and accounting procedures pertaining thereto shall be prescribed by the director. Each collection agency shall be bonded in the amount of $2,000.00 and the bond and contract of appointment shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1973, § 38-42; Code 1988, § 38-93)  
Sec. 38-94. - Discontinuing service for failure to pay and other remedies. 
(a)  If a bill rendered pursuant to section 38-93 is not paid within 15 days from the due date set forth on the bill, services to the premises may be discontinued without further notice, and in addition any and all past due bills, charges and interest thereon may be recovered by the city by action at law or suit in equity, and shall, in those cases where the unpaid bill or charge was incurred by the owner of the premises and not a tenant, constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid real estate. Additionally, the city may recover its administrative costs and reasonable attorney's or collection agency's fees associated with any collection action at law or suit in equity, in accordance with section 35-3. Such administrative costs shall be in addition to all penalties and interest. Attorney's fees shall be added only if such delinquency is collected by action at law or suit in equity. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the city's use of the office and the powers of the city treasurer in the collection of unpaid utility bills. 
(b)  If water service to a premises is shut off pursuant to this section at the meter cutoff valve, the amount due and a field service fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be paid before the service will be restored; provided that, in the event water service to the premises has been turned on by an unauthorized person, there shall be an inspection fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code to cover the cost of the requisite inspection. Such fees shall not apply to shutting off water service at the tap cutoff valve, but the provisions of section 38-40(d) shall govern. 
(c)  When water or sewer use without execution of a contract for service or without payment of applicable rates, fees and other charges is discovered at a premises, a charge for the use together with an additional charge for detection shall be levied against the owner, occupant, or tenant occupying the premises. The owner of the property shall be responsible for payment of such charges for use and the additional charges for any period of time when a tenant does not occupy the property. For purposes of this section, evidence of occupancy by a tenant shall be a valid, dated, and properly executed lease between the owner and tenant provided to the department of public utilities. The charge for water and sewer use shall be set by the department of public utilities based upon the actual metered water usage at the premises. Should no metered water usage be available at the premises, the charge for water and sewer use shall be set by the department of public utilities at a level equal to recover the estimated use for the time period in question. An additional charge as set forth in appendix A to this Code shall be charged to recover the cost of detection. Additionally, should the water or sewer use involve the use of an unauthorized meter, the unauthorized use of a city-owned meter, or any type of unauthorized connection to the city water or sewer system, then the inspection fee in subsection (b) of this section shall be applied. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-42, 38-43; Code 1988, § 38-94; Ord. No. 1991-57, § 2, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 1994-36, § 4, 5-10-1994; Ord. No. 1994-58, § 1, 6-28-1994; Ord. No. 1998-6, § 1, 2-24-1998; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2003-44, § 1, 7-22-2003)  
Secs. 38-95—38-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES 
 
Sec. 38-116. - Imposed. 
Any person contracting with the city for sewage disposal service or the owner, lessee or tenant who uses or occupies any real estate which directly or indirectly is or has been connected with the sewer system of the city, or from or on which originates or has originated sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes which directly or indirectly enter or will enter the sewer system, shall pay to the city for the use and services of such system the charges prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 38-77; Code 1988, § 38-116)  
Sec. 38-117. - Rates. 
(a)  Charges for the disposal of sewage discharged into the city system will be based upon the water delivered to the premises as measured by meters used for this purpose at the rate set forth in appendix A of this Code, and any amendments thereto. 
(b)  The minimum charge for a premises or groups of premises containing two or more dwelling units served through a single water meter or connection will be determined by multiplying the minimum charge set out in subsection (a) of this section by the number of dwelling units so served. 
(c)  Charges for sewer service for dwelling units in premises with unmetered water connections shall be $15.44 per month. 
(Code 1973, § 38-77; Code 1988, § 38-117; Ord. No. 1988-45, § 1, 5-16-1988; Ord. No. 1991-39, § 1, 5-14-1991; Ord. No. 1992-30, § 1, 5-12-1992; Ord. No. 1993-29, § 1, 5-11-1993; Ord. No. 1996-28, § 1, 4-23-1996; Ord. No. 1997-30, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 1998-16, § 1, 4-28-1998; Ord. No. 1999-10, § 2, 4-27-1999; Ord. No. 2000-10, § 1, 4-25-2000; Ord. No. 2001-20, § 1, 5-22-2001; Ord. No. 2002-26, § 1, 5-14-2002; Ord. No. 2003-30, § 1, 4-22-2003; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 1, 6-15-2004; Ord. No. 2006-36, § 1, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 2007-52, § 1, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 1, 5-13-2008; Ord. No. 2009-40 , § 1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 1, 5-4-2011) 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2008-30 states that this ordinance shall take effect July 1, 2008, and shall be applicable to all bills rendered after July 1, 2008. 
Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 2011-21 states that this ordinance shall take effect July 1, 2011, and shall be applicable to all bills rendered after July 1, 2011.  
Sec. 38-118. - Charge where service available but not used. 
The owner, lessee, tenant or other occupant of any dwelling or other structure fronting on any street in which sewer mains have been laid and to whom the sewage disposal system of the city is available for use, although the premises in question are not connected with the city sewer, shall pay to the city the rates and charges as set forth in section 38-117. 
(Code 1973, § 38-78; Code 1988, § 38-118; Ord. No. 1998-16, § 1, 4-28-1998)  
Sec. 38-119. - Reduction when all water not discharged into sewer. 
Premises not discharging the entire volume of water into the city sewers will be allowed a reduction in the sewer service charge, provided the customer installs facilities satisfactory to the director for measuring the volume either discharged or not discharged into the sewers. 
(Code 1973, § 38-77; Code 1988, § 38-119; Ord. No. 1988-45, §§ 1, 2, 5-16-1988)  
Sec. 38-120. - Rebate in case of water leaks. 
Where the charges for sewer service are based on metered water consumption, the director may make rebates of such charges in the case of underground or inside leaks in water pipes in the same amount and subject to the same conditions as rebates are granted under section 38-92 for water service charges, except that a 100 percent credit will be allowed for excess sewer charges where it can be proven that the leaking water did not enter the sewer system. 
(Code 1973, § 38-35; Code 1988, § 38-120)  
Sec. 38-121. - Billing and payment. 
Charges prescribed by this article shall be included on the public services bill rendered pursuant to section 38-93 and shall be paid in accord with, and shall be subject to, the provisions of such section. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-80, 38-81; Code 1988, § 38-121)  
Secs. 38-122—38-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FLUORIDATION OF WATER SUPPLY 
 
Sec. 38-141. - Required. 
The department of public utilities shall introduce sodium fluoride into the city water supply in such quantities as are required to maintain throughout the pipe distribution system a fluoride ion concentration of approximately one part per million. Water containing natural fluoride may be used in lieu of sodium fluoride. 
(Code 1973, § 38-57; Code 1988, § 38-141)  
Sec. 38-142. - Records. 
The department of public utilities shall keep an accurate daily record showing, for each supply of sodium fluoride, the number of gallons treated and the fluoride ion concentration of the water before and after treatment. 
(Code 1973, § 38-58; Code 1988, § 38-142)  
Sec. 38-143. - Determination of fluoride ion concentration. 
The department of public utilities shall determine the fluoride ion concentration in the water distribution system at such points and at such intervals as may be deemed necessary or as directed by the state department of health. 
(Code 1973, § 38-59; Code 1988, § 38-143)  
Secs. 38-144—38-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WATER BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 38-166. - Purpose and definitions. 
(a)  The purpose of this article shall be to establish a cross connection control and backflow prevention program as required by the Virginia Department of Health's Waterworks Regulations, article 3. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air gap means the unobstructed distance through a free atmosphere between the lowest perimeter of a water outlet and the flood-level rim of any receptacle. This distance shall be minimum of two times the diameter of the outlet. (In case of near-walls, this distance shall be three times the diameter of the outlet.) 
Approved means the term as herein used in reference to air-gap separation, a double check valve assembly, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or other backflow prevention devices or methods shall mean an approval by the director. 
Auxiliary supply means any water source or system other than the public water supply that may be available. 
Backflow means the reversal of flow from its intended direction as a result of backsiphonage or backpressure. 
Backflow prevention means an approved assembly or device that prohibits the backflow of water. 
Backpressure means a pressure, higher than supply pressure, caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, air/stream pressure, or any other means, which may cause backflow. 
Backsiphonage means a type of backflow caused by a negative or reduced pressure in the supply piping. 
Contamination means any introduction into potable water of chemicals that are not part of the water treatment process, gases, microorganisms, wastes or wastewater. 
Cross connection means any connection or structural arrangement, direct or indirect, to the waterworks whereby backflow can occur. 
Director means the director of the department of public utilities or the director's designee. 
Division means the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Health, Division of Water Supply Engineering. 
Double-gate/double-check valve assembly means an approved assembly of two internally spring-loaded, specially designed and independently operating check valves, together with a tightly closing resilient seating shutoff valve on the upstream and the downstream side of the check valves, equipped with four properly placed female-threaded test cocks. 
Existing ground level means the level above which surface water will not accumulate under normal conditions. 
Flood-level rim means the top edge of the receptacle over which water could overflow. 
Hazard means any condition, device or practice in the water usage system and its operation which creates or reasonably tends to create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
Owner means the person having legal title to the property or who is in charge, care and control of the property where the facilities in question are located; also, the tenant of such property; also, the customer who signed the water service agreement for such property. 
Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer means an approved assembly of two independently operating spring-loaded check valves with a pressure differential relief valve and tightly closing resilient seating shutoff valves on the upstream and the downstream side of the assembly with four properly placed female-threaded test cocks. 
Service connection means the terminal end of a service line from the waterworks. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. 
Service line means that portion of the water line from the consumer's side of the water meter to the first water outlet. 
Toxin means any substance of solids, or liquids or gases harmful for human consumption. 
Vacuum breaker, atmospheric, means a device that consists of a float check, a check seat and an air inlet port. This unit may never be subjected to a backpressure condition or have a downstream shutoff valve, or be installed where it will be in continuous operation for more than 12 hours. 
Vacuum breaker, pressure type, means an assembly consisting of an independently operating internally loaded check valve, an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve, with two properly located test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.2; Code 1988, § 38-166; Ord. No. 1990-111, § 1, 10-9-1990; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 1, 1-11-1994) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-167. - Inspections generally; notice to correct defects. 
The director shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises in the city as frequently as may be necessary to ensure that such plumbing has been installed and is maintained in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution or contamination of the public water supply. The director shall notify or cause to be notified in writing the owner, occupant or authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises to correct within a reasonable time, set by the director, any plumbing installed or existing contrary to or in violation of this article and which may create the risk of pollution of the city water supply or otherwise adversely affect the public health. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67; Code 1988, § 38-167)  
Sec. 38-168. - Inspection to be at reasonable hours, etc.; warrant to enable inspection; termination of service to uninspected premises. 
(a)  The director shall inspect all premises or buildings during reasonable hours and under such circumstances as to minimize the inconvenience to the owner or occupant of the premises or their agents. Should any owner, occupant or agent refuse to allow the director access to the premises for the purpose of conducting an inspection; or should the director not be able to contact the owner, occupant or agent for purposes of obtaining permission to inspect; the director shall have the right to apply immediately to a magistrate or other judicial officer for a proper warrant to carry out the necessary inspection. The provisions of this section shall apply to all initial inspections and to such follow-up inspections as may be necessary. 
(b)  In addition to the warrant procedure set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the director may commence administrative proceedings to discontinue water service to uninspected premises. Except in emergency cases involving the imminent risk of pollution of the city water supply, the director shall give ten working days' written notice to the owner or occupant of the affected premises or to a responsible agent of the intention to terminate the water service. The director shall afford to the owner, occupant or agent a hearing on the question of whether water service shall be terminated. This hearing shall be scheduled and conducted in a manner so that, to the maximum extent feasible, the inconvenience and burden on the owner, occupant or agent shall be minimized. The hearing shall take place before the director or a designated principal assistant. The director shall not terminate the water service to the premises in question if it is determined that: 
(1)  The owner, occupant or agent has presented clear, convincing and credible evidence that there are no actual or potential cross connection hazards within the subject premises; and 
(2)  No purpose of this article would be served by conducting an on-site inspection of the premises. 
In all cases, the hearing provided by this subsection shall be scheduled within the ten-day period immediately following the giving of written notice to the owner, occupant or agent. Upon a showing of good cause, the director may grant a reasonable continuance of the hearing so scheduled; but the director, nevertheless, shall retain the right to terminate the water service at the expiration of the ten-day notice period if, public health considerations require such action. The director shall, in all cases, render a decision immediately after taking of all evidence at the hearing or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, but in no case later than 24 hours following the termination of the taking of evidence. The director shall cause the findings of fact and disposition of the case to be reduced to writing and shall preserve the same for a period of one year. The hearing itself before the director shall be tape recorded or preserved by other appropriate means. Should the owner, occupant or agent desire a copy of the tape, the director shall cooperate in undertaking to reproduce the same at the expense of the owner, occupant or agent. In all cases, the director shall exercise the utmost care to preserve the integrity of the original tape. 
(c)  In emergency circumstances where the director has reasonable cause to believe that a cross connection hazard exists in the subject premises and such hazard jeopardizes the integrity or the purity of the city water supply, the director shall forthwith terminate the water service to the subject premises. The director shall thereafter immediately afford the owner, occupant or agent the notice and opportunity to be heard pursuant to the procedures set forth in subsection (b) of this section. In all cases where the director shall summarily terminate water service as provided under this subsection, the director shall act with dispatch in notifying the owner, occupant or agent and shall exercise the utmost diligence in scheduling a prompt hearing on the matter. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the director shall not terminate any water service in cases where there is reliable information indicating that actual or potential cross connection hazards do not exist in the premises to which access for inspection cannot be gained. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.1; Code 1988, § 38-168; Ord. No. 1990-111, § 2, 10-9-1990; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 2, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 38-169. - General design, installation and maintenance standards for potable water supply system. 
A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such manner as to prevent contamination from nonpotable liquids, solids or gases, either harmful or benign, from being introduced into the potable water supply through cross connections or any other piping connections to the system. This shall be accomplished by protecting every water outlet from the potable water system which poses a possible cross connection. Wherever such outlets cannot be protected in accordance with the minimum air gap, a mechanical device shall be utilized to prevent backflow from backsiphonage or backpressure as appropriate according to the degree of hazard. In cases where water usage is sufficiently complex or the severity of the hazard warrants, the director may require an air gap or backflow preventer device immediately downstream from the service connection or at a point approved by the director and the division. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.3; Code 1988, § 38-169; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992)  
Sec. 38-170. - Unusual or extraordinary hazards. 
Where investigation discloses that unusual or extraordinary hazards require more stringent means of protection, the director shall have the authority to require the installation of the same. The director shall in all cases specify the facts constituting the greater hazard found to require more stringent protective measures. The more stringent protective measures shall be related to such unusual or extraordinary hazards and shall be no more burdensome than is necessary to alleviate or guard against such hazards. The director shall specify in writing to the owner the manner in which the more stringent protective measures alleviate or guard against the unusual or extraordinary hazards. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.4; Code 1988, § 38-170; Ord. No. 1990-111, § 2, 10-9-1990; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 3, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 38-171. - General prohibition against cross connections. 
No person shall interconnect a privately owned water system to the city's water system. Direct connections to toxic or nontoxic substances subject to backpressure shall be protected by approved backflow preventers. Low inlet connections, except those connected to domestic water tanks, shall be protected by approved backflow preventers. Potable water connections to flush valve toilets and urinals shall be protected by approved backflow preventers. Toilet tanks shall be protected by approved anti-siphon devices. 
(Code 1973, § 38-50; Code 1988, § 38-171; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 4, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 38-172. - Potable connection to boilers. 
Potable water connections to boilers shall be made through an air gap or provided with an approved backflow preventer. Potable water bypass arrangements on boilers shall be protected by a backflow preventer. If continuous service is required, two backflow preventers of the same type may be installed in parallel. Systems containing chemicals shall be protected with an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.5; Code 1988, § 38-172; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 5, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 38-173. - Potable connections to refrigerating units, etc. 
Potable water inlet connections to refrigerating unit condensers, cooling jackets, heat exchangers and air conditioning cooling systems will be air gapped or provided with an approved backflow preventer. Systems containing chemicals shall be protected with an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.6; Code 1988, § 38-173; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 6, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 38-174. - Protective devices for fire service systems. 
(a)  Fire service systems having direct connections from waterworks with no pumps or storage facilities, no fire department pumper connections, no connections to other water supplies, no antifreeze or chemicals added to the fire system, and all sprinkler heads discharging to the atmosphere are not required to have positive protective devices. 
(b)  In systems such as those listed in subsection (a) of this section which have booster pumps installed in the connection from the waterworks, provision shall be made to avoid lowering the pressure at the connection to the waterworks below ten psi. 
(c)  Systems with direct connections to the waterworks, which have an auxiliary supply within 1,700 feet of the pumper connection, must provide an air gap, a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer or a double-gate/double-check valve assembly, depending on the quality of the auxiliary supply. 
(d)  Systems having direct connections to the waterworks and interconnections with auxiliary supplies such as pumps taking suction from raw water sources, exposed storage tanks, industrial water supplies, connections to unapproved groundwaters, or where antifreeze or other chemicals are added must provide an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(e)  Systems having direct connections to the waterworks from buildings having combined industrial and fire systems either with or without storage tanks or pump connections must provide an air gap or an approved backflow prevention device. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.7; Code 1988, § 38-174; Ord. No. 1990-111, § 2, 10-9-1990; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 7, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 37-175. - Vacuum breaker for hose outlets. 
Where hose outlets are concerned, vacuum breakers are required. The director may waive this requirement if, upon examination of all facts, the hose outlets are designed and constructed so as to substantially eliminate the risk of pollution or contamination. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.7.1; Code 1988, § 38-175)  
Sec. 38-176. - Backflow preventer between hydrant and hose used to flush new water mains, storm drains and sewers. 
A backflow preventer device between hydrant and hose shall be installed before using a hose for flushing new water mains, storm drains and sewers. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.8; Code 1988, § 38-176; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992)  
Sec. 38-177. - Backflow preventer for irrigation and sprinkler systems. 
(a)  A backflow prevention device shall be installed on all irrigation and sprinkler systems. 
(b)  Systems having direct connections to waterworks serving lawn sprinkler or irrigation systems must provide an approved air gap, pressure vacuum breaker or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. If the sprinkler or irrigation system is also connected to an auxiliary source, an approved air gap or reduced pressure principle backflow preventer must be provided to prevent backflow. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-67.7, 38-67.9; Code 1988, § 38-177; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992)  
Sec. 38-178. - Low-pressure cutoff for booster pumps. 
A low-pressure cutoff shall be installed on all booster pumps on water pressure booster systems in such a manner as to maintain a minimum pressure of ten psi on the suction side of the pump. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.10; Code 1988, § 38-178)  
Sec. 38-179. - Containment policy. 
(a)  Service line protection. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to a consumer's water system where, in the judgment of the director or the division, a health, pollution or system hazard to the waterworks exists. 
(b)  Special conditions. When, as a matter of practicality, the backflow preventer device cannot be installed at the service connection, the device may be located downstream of the service connection but prior to any unprotected takeoffs. 
(c)  Conditions requiring backflow prevention devices. A backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to a consumer's water system serving premises where any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Premises on which any substance is handled in such a manner as to create an actual or potential hazard to a waterworks. This shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from a waterworks which are no longer under the control of the director. 
(2)  Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of the director or the division, may not be easily correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to determine whether or not cross connections exist. 
(3)  Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross connection survey. 
(4)  Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or re-established. 
(5)  Whenever continuous service is imperative, a pair of backflow preventers may be installed in parallel. 
(d)  Facilities requiring backflow prevention devices. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed at each service connection to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, any of the following types of facilities: 
(1)  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, veterinary establishments, nursing homes, and medical buildings; 
(2)  Laboratories; 
(3)  Piers, docks, waterfront facilities; 
(4)  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater pumping stations; 
(5)  Food and beverage processing plants; 
(6)  Chemical plants, dyeing plants and pharmaceutical plants; 
(7)  Metal plating industries; 
(8)  Petroleum or natural gas processing or storage plants; 
(9)  Radioactive materials processing plants or nuclear reactors; 
(10)  Car washes and laundries; 
(11)  Lawn sprinkler systems, irrigation systems; 
(12)  Fire service systems; 
(13)  Slaughterhouses and poultry processing plants; 
(14)  Farms where the water is used for other than household purposes; 
(15)  Commercial greenhouses and nurseries; 
(16)  Health clubs with swimming pools, therapeutic baths, hot tubs or saunas; 
(17)  Paper and paper products plants and printing plants; 
(18)  Pesticide or exterminating companies and their vehicles with storage or mixing tanks; 
(19)  Schools or colleges with laboratory facilities; 
(20)  High-rise buildings (four or more stories); 
(21)  Multi-use commercial, office or warehouse facilities; 
(22)  Others specified by the director and/or the division when reasonable cause can be shown for a potential backflow or cross connection hazard. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.11; Code 1988, § 38-179; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 8, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 38-180. - Determination of degree of hazard. 
Premises with one or more of the following conditions shall be rated at the corresponding degree of hazard: 
(1)  High hazard: 
a.  The contaminant would be toxic, poisonous, noxious or unhealthy. 
b.  A health hazard would exist. 
c.  A high probability exists of a backflow occurrence either by backpressure or by backsiphonage. 
d.  The contaminant would disrupt the service of piped water for drinking or domestic use. 
Examples: Sewage, used water, nonpotable water, auxiliary water systems, toxic or hazardous chemicals, etc. 
(2)  Moderate hazard: 
a.  The contaminant would only degrade the quality of the water aesthetically or impair the usefulness of the water. 
b.  A health hazard would not exist. 
c.  A moderate probability exists of a backflow occurrence either by backpressure or by backsiphonage. 
d.  The contaminant would not seriously disrupt service of piped water for drinking or domestic use. 
Examples: Food stuff, nontoxic chemicals, nonhazardous chemicals, etc. 
(3)  Low hazard: 
a.  The contaminant would only degrade the quality of the water aesthetically. 
b.  A health hazard would not exist. 
c.  A low probability exists of the occurrence of backflow primarily by backsiphonage. 
d.  The contaminant would not disrupt service of piped water. 
Examples: Food stuff, nontoxic chemicals, nonhazardous chemicals, etc. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.12; Code 1988, § 38-180; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992)  
Sec. 38-181. - Backflow protection where minimum air gap cannot be provided. 
Devices to protect against backpressure and backsiphonage shall be installed at all fixtures and equipment where backflow may occur and where a minimum air gap cannot be provided between the water outlet to the fixture or equipment and its flood-level rim. For connections not subject to backpressure, a vacuum breaker shall be installed on the discharge side of the last valve on the line serving the fixture or equipment. For connections subject to backpressure, an approved backflow preventer shall be installed on the line serving the fixture or equipment. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.13; Code 1988, § 38-181; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 9, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 38-182. - When double-gate/double-check valve assemblies permitted. 
The director may authorize the installation of approved double-gate/double-check valve assemblies with test cocks as protective devices against backflow in connections between a potable water system and other fluids which, in the judgment of the director, present no significant health hazards. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.14; Code 1988, § 38-182)  
Sec. 38-183. - Standards for backflow prevention devices. 
Devices for the prevention of backflow shall be tested and certified to meet the standards of one or more of the below-listed agencies: 
American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE). 
American Water Works Association (AWWA). 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control. 
Commonwealth of Virginia State Board of Health. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.15; Code 1988, § 38-183; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992)  
Sec. 38-184. - Location and installation requirements for protective devices. 
(a)  Backflow prevention devices shall be accessibly located, preferably in the same room with the fixture they serve. In all cases, installation will be in accordance with the director's specifications. 
(b)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers shall be installed with the critical level at least six inches above the flood-level rim of the fixture they serve and on the discharge side of the last control valve to the fixture. 
(c)  Pressure vacuum breakers shall be installed with the critical level at least 12 inches above the flood-level rim of the fixture they serve and/or 12 inches above the highest outlet in an easily accessible location for testing and maintenance. These devices shall not be installed in pits or areas subject to flooding. 
(d)  Reduced-pressure principle backflow preventers and double-gate/double-check valve assemblies shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above existing ground level in an easily accessible location for testing and maintenance. These devices shall not be installed in pits or areas subject to flooding. 
(e)  Any device that has an opening that may vent to the atmosphere shall not be installed in pits or areas subject to flooding. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.16; Code 1988, § 38-184; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992)  
Sec. 38-185. - Responsibility of owner as to inspection, testing, repair, etc., of backflow prevention devices. 
(a)  The owner of any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed shall have such devices inspected and tested at time of installation and annually thereafter. Inspection and testing shall be accomplished by backflow prevention device testers certified by the director. The date of annual testing shall be within 30 days before or 30 days after the anniversary date of installation. If the director concludes that more frequent inspections are required, the director shall notify the owner of the premises in writing of such finding and shall further specify the basis for such conclusions. The director shall also promulgate a schedule for more frequent inspections. 
(b)  Backflow prevention devices shall be tested, repaired, overhauled or replaced as necessary at the expense of the water user or owner. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept by the owner and a copy forwarded to the director. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.17; Code 1988, § 38-185; Ord. No. 1990-111, § 2, 10-9-1990; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 10, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 38-186. - Certification of prevention device testers. 
(a)  Plumbers, mechanical contractors, maintenance personnel, employees of owners or owners of backflow prevention devices may become certified by the director to test and repair such devices. Certification shall be obtained by completing a written and performance examination to the satisfaction of the director in a school approved by the state department of professional and occupational regulation or a Virginia state-issued backflow prevention device worker license. 
(b)  A certification to test and repair devices in the city may be revoked by the director at any time upon sufficient written sworn charges filed with the director showing the holder of the certificate to be then incompetent or guilty of a willful breach of the rules, regulations or requirements of the director, or the provisions of this article or other causes sufficient for the revocation of his certificate. The holder of such certificate shall have written notice of such charges and shall have the right to be heard. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-67.18—38-67.20; Code 1988, § 38-186; Ord. No. 1992-3, § 1, 1-14-1992; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 11, 1-11-1994)  
Sec. 38-187. - Notice of violation of article; failure to correct violation. 
(a)  The director shall notify the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the building or premises in which there is found a violation of this article, apprising the owner of the facts of such violation. The director shall set a reasonable time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. Upon failure of the owner to have the violation corrected by the end of the specified time interval, the director may, if an actual or potential health hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated. 
(b)  Any owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the maintenance of the plumbing systems in the building who knowingly permits a violation of this article to remain uncorrected after the expiration of time set by the director shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Each day of failure to comply with the requirements of this article after the specified time shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 38-67.22; Code 1988, § 38-187; Ord. No. 1990-111, § 2, 10-9-1990; Ord. No. 1994-3, § 12, 1-11-1994) 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 4 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Secs. 38-188—38-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SEPTIC TANKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate septic tanks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157; state septic tank permits, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-164 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-311. - Permit required for installation or repair. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or repair, have installed or repaired, allow to be installed or repaired or contract to install or repair a septic tank for another person before the owner of the property on which the septic tank is to be installed or repaired obtains a permit from the director of public health. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-14, 38-90; Code 1988, § 38-311)  
Sec. 38-312. - General installation and maintenance requirements. 
All septic tanks shall be installed and maintained in accord with the then current regulations of the state board of health on the subject. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-14, 38-88; Code 1988, § 38-312)  
Sec. 38-313. - Location, capacity and drain tile. 
The director of public health shall approve the location of a septic tank system and decide the minimum capacity thereof and amount of drain tile to be used therein. In no instance shall the capacity thereof be less than 200 feet. The permit issued under section 38-311 shall specify the minimum capacity and amount of drain tile and designate the approximate location of the septic tank. 
(Code 1973, §§ 38-89, 38-91; Code 1988, § 38-313)  
Sec. 38-314. - Prerequisites to covering and use. 
No part of any septic tank system shall be covered or put into use until completed and until inspected and approved by the director of public health. 
(Code 1973, §§ 6-14, 38-94; Code 1988, § 38-314)  
Sec. 38-315. - Disposal of contents. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of the contents of a septic tank at any place in the city, except at the place provided for such disposal at a sewage treatment plant in a manner approved by the department of public utilities. 
(Code 1973, § 38-92; Code 1988, § 38-315)  
Sec. 38-316. - Notice to correct violations of article. 
If, upon any inspection, the director of public health shall find any violation of this article or the provisions of a permit issued under this article, he shall direct the person to whom the permit was issued, by written notice, to make the necessary corrections, within such reasonable time as shall be specified therein. 
(Code 1973, § 38-95; Code 1988, § 38-316)  
Secs. 38-317—38-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVOIR AND WATERSHED PROPERTIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 38-341—38-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 38-361. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means any individual, firm, owner, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, governmental body, municipal corporation, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, agent, occupant or other legal entity. 
Reservoir means any body of water owned by the City of Portsmouth and used for drinking as listed: Lake Cohoon, Lake Kilby, Lake Meade, and Lake Speights Run. 
Water system of the City of Portsmouth means lakes and reservoirs, wells, water treatment facilities, intake, storage, pumping, transmission, distribution and related equipment and appurtenances. 
Water tap means the service line that runs from the water main to the city water meter. 
Watershed means that land area that surrounds the Portsmouth lakes and reservoirs and that acts as a drainage basin into the lakes and reservoirs.  
Sec. 38-362. - Protection of watershed. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute, threaten, jeopardize or render impure, turbid or offensive, the water supply of the City of Portsmouth, including the reservoirs and tributary to the reservoirs located within the City of Suffolk. 
(b)  No person shall put any filth, animal or vegetable matter, chips, compost, construction debris, shavings, yard waste or any other substance or pollutant, whether solid or liquid, and whether buried or not, within the City of Portsmouth's watershed property or place or dispose of any such substance in an area which drains into the watershed property or the lakes and reservoirs of the City of Portsmouth. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any sewer, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or facility for the containment or treatment of domestic and household waste on any part of the watersheds surrounding the water supply of the city, without first securing a permit from the City of Suffolk. 
(d)  The director of public utilities shall have the right to develop and enforce policies and procedures for the protection of the city's water system lakes and reservoirs, including the Portsmouth watershed property located within the City of Suffolk.  
Sec. 38-363. - Compliance with state fishing and boating laws. 
Any person fishing in any of the lakes owned by the city shall comply with the regulations set by the state department of game and inland fisheries as well as city regulations as published by the director of public utilities.  
Sec. 38-364. - Permit required for boating on city-owned lakes. 
(a)  No person shall be extended the privilege of boating, including canoeing/kayaking on any of the city-owned reservoirs unless a boating permit is obtained for the boat or canoe/kayak and the following fees are paid therefore: 
(1)  Annual permits for privately owned boats beginning April 1, shall be issued for the period April 15 to April 15 of the following year at the charges as set forth in appendix A to this Code for the following: 
Nonresidents. 
Portsmouth residents. 
Sixty-two years of age or over. 
City of Portsmouth employees. 
(2)  Accompanied guests of the permittee are not required to have a separate permit. 
(3)  Daily permits shall be issued for each day at a cost as set forth in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  The permit is nontransferable. 
(c)  The director has the right to issue boat permits for law enforcement, special events, contractors and other situations as deemed appropriate. 
(d)  Boat identification decal. 
(1)  A boat identification decal will be issued with each permit at no extra cost. The decal shall be securely attached to the right (starboard) bow of the boat in plain view and easily recognizable. Should a decal become mutilated so that its numbers cannot be read easily, it is to be removed and a new decal will be issued. The boat owner will report a defaced, lost or stolen decal to the watershed manager. 
(2)  All boats moored or stored on watershed property must display a decal. Owners must purchase an additional permit for each boat kept on watershed property. 
(e)  No boats will be allowed on the lakes before sunrise and all boats must return to shore before sunset. Boats launched from the Lake Cohoon Fishing Station must leave the property by the time posted at the bait shop.  
Sec. 38-365. - Regulations applicable to city lakes and shores. 
Every permit issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to the following regulations, and all other regulations which may be promulgated by the director of public utilities from time to time, which are hereby established for the use of all city lakes and city-owned land adjoining such lakes: 
(1)  All city lakes and adjacent city-owned property shall be open during hours designated by the director of public utilities and posted at major entry points. Persons are allowed on the city-owned lakes only for fishing/boating and such persons assume the risk attendant with water activities and agree that the department of public utilities, the City of Portsmouth and its employees are relieved of any and all responsibility for accidents, injuries and drowning. 
(2)  No person shall operate a sailboat or houseboat or use jet skis, water skis, wake boards, sailboards, surfboards, tubes, rafts, or similar devices on any city lake. Fishermen may use float waders only in the area of the Lake Cohoon Fishing Station. 
(3)  No person shall permit stagnant water to accumulate in such person's private boat on any city lake. 
(4)  No person shall swim in any city lake. No skin diving or scuba diving is allowed in any city lake except as practiced by game wardens, law enforcement officers or members of a rescue unit in the performance of their duties. 
(5)  No person shall go on any city lake unless such person is equipped with a U.S. Coast Guard approved personal floatation device. Boats of 16 feet or more also require at least one throwable device buoyant cushion or ring buoy on board. 
(6)  No person shall fish from any city-owned land adjoining any city lake, except on property designated therefore at Lake Cohoon unless authorized in writing by the director of public utilities. 
(7)  No person shall take any fish from any city lake except with rod, line and hooks baited with natural or artificial bait unless authorized by the director of public utilities or if such person is a game warden acting in the performance of their official duties. 
(8)  No person under the age of 16 years shall operate any boat unless accompanied by an adult on any city lake. 
(9)  No person shall use any boat having an internal or outboard motor exceeding ten horsepower on any city lake. The use of four-cycle outboard motors and/or electric motors is encouraged. Boats with overcapacity motors may be used so long as the illegal motor is obviously disabled, i.e. a removed prop or fuel tank, and a legal capacity engine is used for propulsion. 
(10)  No mechanically propelled boats shall be used on any city lake except for the purpose of fishing. This prohibition shall not apply to law enforcement personnel, game wardens and city employees in the performance of their official duties. 
(11)  No person shall launch any boat exceeding 18 feet in length. Boats shall be launched only from areas designated by the director of public utilities. 
(12)  Any boat operated on city-owned reservoirs must comply with the Code of Virginia boating operation requirements. 
(13)  All fishing, daily boat launching and other permits issued pursuant to this section and the state code pertaining to freshwater fishing must be produced for inspection when requested by any law enforcement personnel, game warden, or other persons authorized by the director of public utilities. 
(14)  All boats on the city lakes must display the City of Portsmouth Public Utilities current year boat decal on the righthand (starboard) bow section, except those boats which purchase a daily permit at the Lake Cohoon boat landing and those boats operated by law enforcement personnel, game wardens, rescue squads and city personnel in the performance of their official duties. 
(15)  Boats found on the city lakes or on city-owned property adjoining the lakes and not displaying the City of Portsmouth Public Utilities current year boat decal shall be removed and detained by the Portsmouth Department of Public Utilities. Upon confirmation of ownership, purchase of a boat decal and payment of the amount as set forth in appendix A to this Code, the boat shall be returned to its owner. 
(16)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating any motorboat to: (i) pass under any bridge on a city lake at a speed in excess of five miles per hour, or (ii) travel at any speed that creates more than a minimum wake. 
(17)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorboat or other vessel on any city lake in a reckless manner so as to endanger the life, limb, or property of any person. Notwithstanding the above provision, upon the trial of any person charged with reckless boating where the degree of culpability is slight, the court, in its discretion, may find the accused guilty of improper boating. 
(18)  Any person who, having received a visible or audible signal of a flashing light or siren or hail from any game warden or other law enforcement officer to bring his motorboat or other vessel to a stop, fails to do so promptly shall be in violation of these regulations. 
(19)  Boats are to stay outside and clear of warning buoys and/or booms around intakes, dams, spillways, etc. and clear of areas marked by buoys as closed or restricted.  
Sec. 38-366. - Regulations applicable to city owned land adjoining city lakes and shores. 
(a)  No person shall go on any city-owned land adjoining any city-owned property outside of posted hours unless he is a warden, law enforcement officer, member of a rescue unit, or other authorized personnel. 
(b)  No person shall bring, possess, or drink any alcoholic beverage or possess or be under the influence of any drug or intoxicant of any kind while on the city lakes or on any city-owned land adjoining any city lake. 
(c)  No person shall camp, hike, bicycle, motorcycle, or use all terrain vehicles or any type of recreational vehicle on city-owned watershed property without the prior written permission of the director of public utilities. 
(d)  No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire on city-owned property except in grills and fireplaces located in areas designated by the director of public utilities. 
(e)  No person shall carry or possess any BB or pellet gun or paint-ball gun on a city lake unless expressly authorized by the director of public utilities in writing, unless such person is a state, local or federal law enforcement officer or game warden acting in the performance of their official duties. 
(f)  No person shall willfully throw or discharge or cause to be discharged any arrow, stone, missile or other projectile by hand or from a bow, crossbow, slingshot or by any other comparable device on any city lake or city-owned land adjoining any city lake. 
(g)  Automobiles and trucks are allowed on city-owned watershed property only to launch and retrieve boats at designated city-owned boat ramps except for those automobiles and trucks used by law enforcement officers, game wardens, forest wardens and city employees in the performance of their duties. 
(h)  No person shall use city-owned watershed property for storage of any sort or for unauthorized vehicular parking. 
(i)  No person shall cause any loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise through the use of any sound amplification equipment, radio or other means on any city lake or on any city-owned land adjoining any city lake. 
(j)  No person shall have a special event, which shall include parades, processions, or performances of any kind on city-owned watershed property unless they have received authorization in writing from the director of public utilities prior to such event. 
(k)  No person shall hunt or trap on any city-owned lake or on any city-owned land adjacent to any city-owned lake unless such person has been authorized in writing by the director of public utilities or is game warden acting in the official performance of his duties. 
(l)  No person shall bring, ride or drive a horse or pony or cause or permit any other animal owned or under his custody or control to enter any city-owned lake unless he has received written authorization from the director of public utilities. 
(m)  No person shall sell or rent any goods, bait, fishing tackle, food and soft drinks except as authorized by the director of public utilities. 
(n)  (1)  No person shall dump or otherwise dispose of trash, oil, chemicals, herbicides, pesticides, paint or paint related products, refuse, garbage, waste, debris or other material, including but not limited to construction materials, tires, appliances, ashes, grass cuttings and other yard waste on any city lake or on any city-owned property adjacent to any city-owned lake. Each day that such trash, oil, chemicals, herbicides, pesticides, paint or paint related products, refuse, garbage, waste, debris or other material remain on any city lake or on any city-owned property adjacent to any city-owned lake shall constitute a separate offense. The city shall be entitled to reimbursement of reasonable costs associated with mitigation, cleanup, investigation and litigation associated with such acts. Prosecution and/or conviction under this provision shall not bar the city from prosecution of this offense under other applicable state and federal statutes. 
(2)  When a person is convicted of a violation of this provision, the court may suspend the imposition of the sentence, on the condition that the defendant remove or cause to be removed the trash, oil, chemicals, herbicides, pesticides, paint or paint products, refuse, garbage, waste, debris or other materials, and pay for any damages and extra water treatment expense caused by the dumping, and upon payment of the city's reasonable costs of investigation and litigation, if any. 
(o)  No person shall dispose of any litter on any city lake or on any city-owned property adjacent to a city lake except in litter receptacles provided by the city expressly for this purpose. The term "litter" as used in this section shall mean paper, food wrappers, bottles or cans, but shall not include garbage, refuse, trash, oil, chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, construction debris, paint or paint products or other materials. 
(p)  No person shall withdraw water, for any purpose whatsoever, from the lakes owned by the city or lay or place any pipes or lines that could withdraw water from the city lakes or city-owned property without the prior, written consent of the director of public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-114, § 1, 11-24-2009)  
Sec. 38-367. - Permits required for construction, maintenance, clearing of property or encroachment on water supply reservoirs and city-owned land. 
(a)  The director of public utilities is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations and set fees and enforce regulations governing the issuance of permits authorizing: 
(1)  The construction, maintenance and use of bulkheads and/or piers, landings or similar structures made into the water supply reservoirs owned by the city; 
(2)  The clearing of city-owned land to gain a better view of or access to the reservoirs; and 
(3)  The encroachment of other structures upon city-owned property. 
(b)  No person shall construct boat piers, bulkheads, decks or similar structures or shall remove trees, soil, shrubs, ground cover or plants on a city lake or any city-owned land adjoining any city lake without first obtaining a permit from the director of public utilities and the City of Suffolk and any applicable state and federal agencies. 
(c)  Certain original landowners and their immediate families have fishing and/or pier construction privileges on Lake Meade and Lake Speights Run as provided for in their deeds. Said original landowners shall be required to apply for permits under this section however no fees shall be charged. 
(d)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to the city and it specifically reserves the right to use and improve its reservoir property, as it deems proper. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person except an authorized employee or agent of the department of utilities to perform any of the following acts without first obtaining a permit from the director: 
(1)  Plant, prune, trim or remove any tree or portion thereof or damage, cut, tap, caulk, paint, attach any rope, wire, nail, sign or any manmade object to any tree or shrub, or dig a tunnel trench or otherwise excavate or place any dirt, rubble or debris within the drip line of any tree or shrub. 
(2)  Place any material of any sort, including, but not limited to, dirt, soil, tires, organic wastes and other materials including herbicides and growth regulators that either prevent or hinders the establishment of vegetation or is detrimental to the environment beneath the drip line of any tree or shrub except as authorized by permit. 
(f)  When a tree is removed, destroyed or damaged beyond recovery in violation of this section, the director may require that they be replaced on the basis of one tree with a minimum 2.0 inches in caliper for every 2.0 inches diameter of tree removed, destroyed or damaged. Failure to replace or replant as directed shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any additional permits as required by law.  
Sec. 38-368. - Permit revocation. 
In the event of the violation of any of the foregoing regulations by any person holding a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the director shall have the right, in addition to any other remedies herein provided or otherwise allowed by law, to revoke such permit and to deny such person access to the city reservoir and city-owned land adjoining any city reservoir for a period deemed appropriate.  
Sec. 38-369. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any city law enforcement officers, the director of public health, the fire marshal, employees, and others designated in writing by the director of public utilities are authorized to enforce all provisions of this watershed ordinance and regulations, and state laws governing fishing, boating, and general sanitation on all properties owned by the city. Any duly designated sworn police officer has the authority to issue summons as specified in the statewide uniform summons procedures to persons violating this article. Prepayment of violation fines may be allowed. 
(b)  In the event of the violation of the watershed regulations by any persons holding a fishing permit or other permit issued pursuant to this section, the director of public utilities shall have the right, in addition to any other remedies herein provided or otherwise allowed by law, to revoke such permit and to deny such persons access to the city lakes and city-owned land adjoining any city lake for period of one year.  
Sec. 38-370. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically provided, any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day's continuance of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be prosecuted in the courts of the city.  
Secs. 38-371—38-390. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STRUCTURES ON RESERVOIRS 
 
Sec. 38-391. - Permit required; prior permits validated. 
The director is hereby authorized to set fees and issue permits authorizing the construction, maintenance and use of bulkheads and/or piers, landings or similar structures made out into the waters of water supply reservoirs and adjacent property owned by the city from property adjacent to said waters owned by the city.  
Sec. 38-392. - Permit exemption. 
Permit requirements shall not apply to the city or any of its departments, and the city specifically reserves the right to use and improve its reservoir property, as it deems proper.  
Sec. 38-393. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Application for a permit shall be made in writing and shall set forth the proposed location of such structure and the purposes for which it is to be used, and shall be accompanied with plans and specifications for the construction thereof. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued unless the director approves the prescribed application with plans and specifications, and the requisite fee is paid in full. 
(c)  The director shall approve, and provide public access to, standards for the type and characteristics of the materials from which such structures may be constructed, for the dimensions or ranges of dimensions thereof, for the placement of such structures with regard to the water line and any other relevant topographical features, and for any other aspects of such structures for which he deems standards necessary to preserve and protect the waters of the reservoir and/or the purity thereof. Such standards shall be mandatory upon all persons applying for permits, and shall have been set forth in documentary form on or before the effective date of this section. Documents for the construction of piers, bulkheads and similar structures shall be made available and shall set forth the standards for construction on the reservoirs.  
Sec. 38-394. - Qualifications for issuance of permit. 
Only those persons owning real property in fee simple adjacent to real property owned by the city upon which such structure is proposed to be located may be issued permits pursuant to this article. Structures must be placed within the extended sidelines of the property extended to the shoreline. Any person making application for a permit shall state in writing as part of said application, that he meets all the requirements of this article.  
Sec. 38-395. - Insurance; hold-harmless agreement. 
(a)  Issuance of a permit pursuant to this article shall be conditioned upon the person applying for and holding said permit obtaining, paying for and keeping in effect public liability insurance with the city as named insured, in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 per person injured and property damage per incident combined. 
(b)  Any person applying for or holding a permit pursuant to this article shall agree in writing to hold and save the city harmless from any and all liability of whatsoever nature, and to indemnify the city against any loss whatsoever, incurred by reason of the existence or maintenance of the permitted structure.  
Sec. 38-396. - Permit dependent upon obtaining other permits. 
The granting of any permit pursuant to this article shall be conditioned upon the applicant's obtaining all other applicable permits, licenses or permissions required by any local, state or federal government agency having jurisdiction. Failure to obtain all required permits, licenses or permissions shall constitute grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this article.  
Sec. 38-397. - Revocation of permit. 
The director may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article at any time upon reasonable evidence satisfactory to him that any of the conditions of this article or of the standards have not been complied with or have been violated or should the requisite fee not be paid.  
Sec. 38-398. - Transferability. 
No permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferable. However, subsequent purchasers of property having such permit shall be allowed to apply for a new permit if they do so within 30 calendar days after purchase and upon payment of the requisite fee.  
Sec. 38-399. - Existing structures. 
(a)  The owner of any existing bulkhead and/or pier, landing or similar structure for boats made out into the waters of city-owned water supply reservoirs from property adjacent to said water owned by the city, shall make application to the director for a permit as provided in this article. 
(b)  Upon such application, such structure shall be inspected by the director as to its suitability and compliance with the provisions of this article and the standards established pursuant to this article. If such structure is found to be suitable and in proper repair, a permit shall be issued as provided in this article. If such structure is not found to be suitable and in proper repair, the owner thereof shall be notified in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, as to what is to be done to make such structure comply with said standards and requirements of this article. If the matters required to be done, as set forth in said written notification, have not been accomplished and completed within 60 days after the date such notification is mailed to said owner at the address given on said application, the director shall cause such structure to be removed at the cost and expense of the said owner. Ten days prior to the removal of such structure as aforesaid, the director shall post a notice upon such structure that it will be removed and demolished at the expense of the owner upon the date to be stated in the notice. If for any reason the notice cannot be posted upon such structure, the director shall cause such notice to be mailed to the owner at his last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested.  
Sec. 38-400. - Rights of permittee. 
In granting a permit pursuant to this article, the city grants the same only insofar as it is authorized by law to do so; and it does not in any way guarantee to any permittee or any other person any rights or privileges with regard to constructing, maintaining or using any such bulkhead and/or pier, landing or other similar structure.  
Sec. 38-401. - Prohibitions and restrictions. 
(a)  No such structure shall be used or permitted to be used for any commercial purpose, nor for building, constructing or repairing any boat. No charge shall be made for the use of any such structure. 
(b)  No vessel fitted for use as a dwelling or residence or occupied as such shall be permitted at any pier, bulkhead or similar structure allowed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  The person making application for a permit pursuant to this article shall at all times keep the permitted structure clean and in good repair. No changes or additions to such structure shall be allowed subsequent to issuance of the permit therefore. 
(d)  The person holding a pier permit pursuant to this section may keep and tie up a boat at the permitted structure, and may place such boat upon the structure from the water; such permit holder may not place such upon land owned by the city or transport such boat across such land, or cause or allow such placement or transportation. Any such boat shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the city pertaining to boats upon waters owned by the city, as the same now exist or as they may be amended in the future; except that such boat may be kept, tied up and placed as provided in this section. 
(e)  The person holding a pier permit pursuant to this article shall be permitted to fish from the pier provided all applicable regulations related to fishing are adhered to. For purposes of this section, the term "person" shall mean all occupants of the property and immediate family members.  
Chapter 39 - WETLANDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Wetlands, Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 39-1—39-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WETLANDS ZONING ORDINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— General zoning ordinance, ch. 40.1. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt ordinance from which this article is derived, Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1302. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 39-21. - Intent. 
The city council, acting pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq., for purposes of fulfilling the policy standards set forth in such chapter, adopts this article regulating the use and development of wetlands. 
(Code 1988, § 39-21; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-300), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1994-12, § 1, 3-22-1994)  
Sec. 39-22. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly, intentionally, negligently or continually violates any order, rule or regulation of the commission or of the wetlands board or violates any provision of Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or of the provisions contained in this article or any provision of a permit granted by the wetlands board or the commission pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq., shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Following a conviction, every day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to, and notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or any provisions of this Code, upon petition of the wetlands board to the circuit court of the city, the court may enjoin any unlawful act referred to in subsection (a) of this section and may order the person so acting unlawfully to take such steps as are necessary to restore, protect and preserve the wetlands involved. 
(c)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or of the provisions contained in this article, any person who violates any provision of the aforementioned chapter or of this article or who violates or falls, neglects or refuses to obey any commission or wetlands board notice, order, rule, regulation or permit condition shall, upon such finding by an appropriate circuit court, be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed $25,000.00 for each day of violation. Such civil penalties may, at the discretion of the court assessing them, be directed to be paid into the treasury of the city for the purpose of abating environmental damage to or the restoration of wetlands therein in such a manner as the court may, by order, direct; except that where the violator is the city itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(d)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or the provisions contained in this article and with the consent of any person who has violated any provision of the aforementioned chapter or of this article, or who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any commission or wetlands board order, rule, regulation or permit condition, the wetlands board may provide, in an order issued by the wetlands board against such person, for the one-time payment of civil charges for each violation in specific sums, not to exceed $10,000.00 for each violation. Civil charges shall be in lieu of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (c) of this section. Civil charges may be in addition to the cost of any restoration ordered by the wetlands board. 
(Code 1988, § 39-22; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-315), (40-316), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1990-67, § 1, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1994-12, § 1, 3-22-1994) 
Editor's note— Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1318, declares a violation described above to be a "misdemeanor." Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-12, the violation is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
Cross reference— Penalty for class 1 misdemeanor, § 1-11.  
Sec. 39-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the Virginia Marine Resources Commission. 
Commissioner means the state commissioner of marine resources. 
Governmental activity means any or all of the services provided by this city to its citizens for the purpose of maintaining the city and shall include but shall not be limited to such services as constructing, repairing, and maintaining roads, sewage facilities, supplying and treating water, streetlights and construction of public buildings. 
Nonvegetated wetlands means all that land lying contiguous to mean low water and which land is between mean low water and mean high water not otherwise included in the term "vegetated wetlands." 
Person means any corporation, association or partnership, one or more individuals, or any unit of government or agencies thereof. 
Vegetated wetlands means all that land lying between and contiguous to mean low water and an elevation above mean low water equal to the factor 1.5 times the mean tide range at the site of the proposed project in this city; and upon which is growing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or grown thereon subsequent thereto, any one or more of the following: Saltmarsh codgrass (Spartina alterniflora), saltmeadow hay (Spartina patens), saltgrass (Distichlis spicata), black needlerush (Juncus roemerianus), saltwort (Salicornia sp.), sea lavender (limonium sp.), march elder (Iva frutescens), groundsel bush (Baccharis halimifolia), wax myrtle (Myrcia sp.), sea oxeye (Borrichia frutescens), arrow arum (Peltandra virginica), pickerelweed (Pontederia cordata), big cordgrass (Spartina cynosuproides), rice cutgrass (Leersia oryzoides), wildrice (Zizania aquatica), bulrush (Scirpus validus), spikerush (Eleocharis sp.), sea rocket (Cakile edentula), southern wildrice (Zisaniopsis miliacea), cattails (Typha spp.), threesquares (Scirpus spp.), buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), bald cypress (Taxodium distichum), black gum (Nyssa sylvatica), tupelo (Nyssa aquatica), dock (Rumex spp.), yellow pond lily (Nuphar sp.), marsh fleabane (Pluchea purpurascens), royal fern (Osmunda regalis), marsh hibiscus (Hibiscus moscheutos), beggar's tick (Biden sp.), smartweed (Polygonum sp.), arrowhead (Sagittaria spp.), sweet flag (Acorus calamus), water hemp (Amaranthus cannabinus), reed grass (Phragmites communis), and switch grass (Panicum virgatum). 
Wetlands means both vegetated and nonvegetated wetlands. 
Wetlands board or board means the wetlands board created by this article in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300. 
(Code 1988, § 39-23; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-301), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1994-12, § 2, 3-22-1994)  
Sec. 39-24. - General permitted uses and activities on wetlands. 
The following uses of and activities on wetlands are permitted, if otherwise permitted by law: 
(1)  The construction and maintenance of noncommercial catwalks, piers, boathouses, boat shelters, fences, duckblinds, wildlife management shelters, footbridges, observation decks and shelters and other similar structures; provided that such structures are so constructed on pilings as to permit the reasonably unobstructed flow of the tide and preserve the natural contour of the wetlands; 
(2)  The cultivation and harvesting of shellfish and worms for bait; 
(3)  Noncommercial outdoor recreational activities, including hiking, boating, trapping, hunting, fishing, shellfishing, horseback riding, swimming, skeet and trap shooting, and shooting preserves; provided that no structure shall be constructed except as permitted in subsection (1) of this section; 
(4)  The cultivation and harvesting of agricultural, forestry or horticultural products, grazing and haying; 
(5)  Conservation, repletion and research activities of the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, Department of Game and Inland Fisheries and other related conservation agencies; 
(6)  The construction or maintenance of aids to navigation which are authorized by governmental authority; 
(7)  Emergency decrees of any duly appointed health officer of a government division acting to protect the public health; 
(8)  The normal maintenance, repair or addition to presently existing roads, highways, railroad beds, or the facilities of any person, firm, corporation, utility, federal, state, county, city or town abutting on or crossing wetlands, provided that no waterway is altered and no additional wetlands are covered; 
(9)  Governmental activity on wetlands owned or leased by the commonwealth, or a political subdivision thereof; 
(10)  The normal maintenance of manmade drainage ditches, provided that no additional wetlands are covered; and provided further, that this subsection shall not be deemed to authorize construction of any drainage ditch. 
(Code 1988, § 39-24; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-302), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-25. - Wetlands application fees. 
A nonrefundable fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code for single-family dwellings and a fee as set forth in appendix A to this Code for all other uses shall be paid to the city treasurer for a permit for the use or development of any wetland within the city under the provisions of this chapter. A receipt showing such payment shall accompany each application for the same. The fee has been set by the city council with due regard for the services to be rendered, including the time, skill and administrator's expense involved. 
(Code 1988, § 11.1-2; Ord. No. 2004-58, § 2, 10-12-2004)  
Secs. 39-26—39-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WETLANDS BOARD 
 
Sec. 39-46. - Created. 
There is hereby created a wetlands board for the city. 
(Code 1988, § 39-46; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-303), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-47. - Composition; appointment of members. 
The wetlands board shall consist of seven members, who shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 39-47; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-303), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1990-129, § 11, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 39-48. - Membership restricted. 
Members of the wetlands board shall hold no other public office in the city except that they may be members of the planning commission, directors of soil and water conservation boards, or local erosion commission or the board of zoning appeals. When such members are appointed, their term of appointment shall be coterminous with their membership on the planning commission, soil and water conservation boards, erosion commission or the board of zoning appeals. 
(Code 1988, § 39-48; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-303), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-49. - Terms of members. 
The term of office of the members of the wetlands board shall be five years, except that original appointments shall be made for such terms that the term of one member shall expire each year. Members may serve successive terms. A member whose term expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1988, § 39-49; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-303), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-50. - Removal of members. 
Any member of the wetlands board may be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by the city council, after a hearing held after at least 15 days' notice. 
(Code 1988, § 39-50; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-303), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-51. - Filling vacancies. 
The chairman of the wetlands board shall notify the city council at least 30 days in advance of the expiration of any term of office and shall also notify the city council if any vacancy occurs. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Code 1988, § 39-51; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-303), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-52. - Selection of officers. 
The wetlands board shall elect from its membership a chairman and such other officers as it deems necessary who shall serve one-year terms as such and may succeed themselves. 
(Code 1988, § 39-52; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-304), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-53. - Quorum. 
For the conduct of any heading and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than four members of the wetlands board. 
(Code 1988, § 39-53; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-304), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-54. - Rules of procedure. 
The wetlands board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedures, consistent with ordinances of the city and general laws of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1988, § 39-54; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-304), 4-26-1988) 
Cross reference— General procedural rules for boards appointed by council, § 2-28(b).  
Sec. 39-55. - Records, reports. 
The wetlands board shall keep a full public record of its proceedings and shall submit a report of its activities to the city council at least once a year, and a copy of its report to the commission. 
(Code 1988, § 39-55; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-304), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-56. - Investigations and prosecutions. 
The wetlands board shall have the authority to investigate all projects, whether they are proposed or ongoing, which alter wetlands located within the city. The wetlands board shall have the power to prosecute all violations of any order, rule or regulation of the board or any violation of any provision of Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 39-56; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-314), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1994-12, § 1, 3-22-1994)  
Sec. 39-57. - Reports may be required. 
With respect to permits required pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or this article, the wetlands board chairman may require of the person responsible for carrying out the provisions of the permit such monitoring and reports as he may reasonably deem necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 39-57; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-317(a)), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1994-12, § 1, 3-22-1994)  
Sec. 39-58. - On-site inspections. 
With respect to any reported activity not authorized by Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or this article, or with respect to the violation of any permit issued pursuant thereto, the wetlands board chairman may direct such on-site inspections as are deemed reasonably necessary to determine whether the measures required by the permit are being properly performed, or whether the provisions of the aforementioned chapter or article are being violated. Prior to conducting such inspections, notice shall be provided to the resident owner, occupant or operator, who shall be given an opportunity to accompany the site inspector. 
(Code 1988, § 39-58; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-317(a)), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1994-12, § 1, 3-22-1994)  
Sec. 39-59. - Notice of failure to comply. 
If it is determined that there is a failure to comply with the permit issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq., or this article, the wetland board chairman shall serve notice upon the person who is responsible for carrying out the provisions of the permit at the address specified by him in his application or by delivery at the site of the permitted activities to the person supervising such activities and designated in the permit to receive such notice. Such notice shall set forth the measures needed for compliance and the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure of such person to comply within the specified period, he may be deemed to be in violation of this section and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 39-59; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-317(a)), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1994-12, § 1, 3-22-1994)  
Sec. 39-60. - Issuance of stop work order. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or of this article from the designated enforcement officer, the wetlands board chairman may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in section 39-59, issue an order requiring all or part of the activities on the site to be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. 
(b)  In the case of an activity not authorized by such chapter or article, or where the alleged permitted noncompliance is causing or is in eminent danger of causing, significant harm to the wetlands protected by such chapter or article, such an order may be issued without regard to whether the person has been issued a notice to comply as specified in section 39-59. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with a notice to comply. 
(c)  The stop work order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority, permit holder or the resident owner, occupier or operator for appropriate relief to the circuit court of the city. Upon completion of corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the wetlands board chairman from taking any other action specified in Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or this article. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. or of the provisions contained in this article from a designated enforcement officer, the wetlands board may order that the affected site be restored to predevelopment conditions if the board deems restoration necessary to recover lost resources or to prevent further damage to resources. Such an order shall specify the restoration necessary and establish a reasonable time for its completion. Such orders shall be issued only after a hearing with at least 30 days' notice to the affected person of the time, place and purpose thereof, and they shall become effective immediately upon issuance by the board. The wetlands board shall require such scientific monitoring plans as it deems necessary to ensure that such projects result in the successful re-establishment of wetlands protected by Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. and may require that a prepaid contract acceptable to the wetlands board be in effect for the purposes of carrying out the scientific monitoring plan. In addition, the wetlands board may require a reasonable bond or letter of credit in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it securing to the commonwealth and/or the city compliance with the conditions set forth in the restoration order. The appropriate court, upon petition by the wetlands board, shall have authority to enforce any such restoration order by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Failure to complete the required restoration shall constitute a violation of Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. 
(Code 1988, § 39-60; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-317(b)), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1990-67, § 2, 6-26-1990; Ord. No. 1994-12, § 1, 3-22-1994)  
Sec. 39-61. - Delegation of chairman's duties. 
The duties of the wetlands board chairman prescribed in this article may be delegated to his designee; however, such designee shall not be any person who is also designated as an enforcement officer. 
(Code 1988, § 39-61; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-317(c)), 4-26-1988)  
Secs. 39-62—39-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT TO USE OR DEVELOP WETLANDS 
 
Sec. 39-81. - Required. 
No person shall use or develop any wetland within the city, other than for those activities specified in section 39-24, unless he has a permit so to do issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1988, § 39-81; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-305), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-82. - Filing of application. 
Any person who desires a permit required by this division shall file an application therefor with the wetlands board directly or through the commission. 
(Code 1988, § 39-82; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-305), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-83. - Contents of application. 
An application filed pursuant to this division shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  A detailed description of the proposed activity and a map, drawn to an appropriate and uniform scale, showing the area of wetland directly affected, with the location of the proposed work thereon, indicating the area of existing and proposed fill and excavation, especially the location, width, depth and length of any proposed channel and the disposal area, all existing and proposed structures; 
(3)  A detailed description of sewage collection and treatment facilities, utility installations, roadways, and other related appurtenances or facilities, including those on adjacent uplands, and the type of equipment to be used and the means of equipment access to the activity site; 
(4)  The names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent land and known claimants of water rights in or adjacent to the wetland of whom the applicant has notice; 
(5)  An estimate of cost; 
(6)  The primary purpose of the project; 
(7)  Any secondary purposes of the project, including further projects; 
(8)  The public benefit to be derived from the proposed project; 
(9)  A complete description of measures to be taken during and after the alteration to reduce detrimental off-site effects; 
(10)  The completion date of the proposed work, project, or structure; and 
(11)  Such additional materials and documentation as the wetlands board may deem necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 39-83; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-305), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-84. - Application open for public inspection. 
All applications filed under this division, and maps and documents relating thereto, shall be open for public inspection at the office of the planning department. 
(Code 1988, § 39-85; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-306), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-85. - Hearing on application. 
(a)  Not later than 60 days after receipt of an application under this division, the wetlands board shall hold a public hearing on such application. The applicant, the city council, the commissioner, the owner of record of any land adjacent to the wetlands in question, known claimants of water rights in or adjacent to the wetlands in question, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, the state department of game and inland fisheries, the state water control board, the state department of transportation and governmental agencies expressing an interest therein shall be notified by the wetlands board of the hearing by mail not less than 20 days prior to the date set for the hearing. The wetlands board shall also cause notice of such hearing to be published at least once a week for two weeks prior to such hearing in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city. The cost of such publication shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)  The chairman of the wetlands board, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Any person may appear and be heard at the public hearing. Each witness at the hearing may submit a concise written statement of his testimony. 
(Code 1988, § 39-86; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-307), (40-308), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-86. - Determination of board; grant or denial. 
(a)  The wetlands board shall make its determination on an application filed under this division within 30 days from the hearing provided for in section 39-85. If the board fails to act within such time, the application shall be deemed approved. Within 48 hours of its determination, the board shall notify the applicant and the commissioner of such determination, and if the board has not made a determination, it shall notify the applicant and the commission that 30 days has passed and that the application is deemed approved. 
(b)  In acting on any application for a permit under this division, the wetlands board shall grant the application upon the concurring favorable vote of four members. 
(c)  In making its decision whether to grant, to grant in modified form or to deny a permit under this division, the wetlands board shall base its decision on these factors: 
(1)  Matters raised through the testimony of any person in support of or in rebuttal to the permit application. 
(2)  Impact of the development on the public health and welfare as expressed by the policy and standards of Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. and any guidelines which may have been promulgated thereunder by the commission. 
If the wetlands board, in applying the standards above, finds that the anticipated public and private benefit of the proposed activity exceeds the anticipated public and private detriment and that the proposed activity would not violate or tend to violate the purposes and intent of Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. and of this article, the board shall grant the permit, subject to any reasonable condition or modification designed to minimize the impact of the activity on the ability of the city to provide governmental services and on the rights of any other person and to carry out the public policy set forth in Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. and in this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting the right of any person to seek compensation for any injury in fact incurred by him because of the proposed activity. If the wetlands board finds that the anticipated public and private benefit from the proposed activity is exceeded by the anticipated public and private detriment or that the proposed activity would violate the purposes and intent of Code of Virginia, § 28.2-1300 et seq. and of this article, the board shall deny the permit application with leave to the applicant to resubmit the application in modified form. 
(Code 1988, § 39-87; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-308), (40-310), 4-26-1988; Ord. No. 1994-12, § 1, 3-22-1994)  
Sec. 39-87. - Record of proceedings on application. 
The wetlands board shall make a record of the proceedings on the application for a permit under this division, which shall include the application, any written statements of witnesses, a summary of statements of all witnesses, the findings and decision of the board, and the rationale for the decision. If the application is reviewed or appealed, the board shall transmit such record to the commissioner. Upon a final determination by the commission, the record shall be returned to the board. The record shall be open for public inspection at the office of the planning department. 
(Code 1988, § 39-88; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-308), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-88. - Form. 
A permit issued under this division shall be in writing, signed by the chairman of the wetlands board and notarized. 
(Code 1988, § 39-89; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-311), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-89. - Copy to be transmitted to commissioner. 
The wetlands board shall transmit a copy of each permit issued under this division to the commissioner. 
(Code 1988, § 39-90; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-308), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-90. - No effect on zoning and land use ordinance. 
No permit granted by the wetlands board under this division shall affect in any way the applicable zoning and land use ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 39-91; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-313), 4-26-1988) 
Cross reference— Zoning ordinance, ch. 40.  
Sec. 39-91. - Bond to secure compliance with conditions and limitations. 
The wetlands board may require a reasonable bond or letter of credit, in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, securing to the city and the commonwealth compliance with the conditions and limitations set forth in a permit issued under this division. 
(Code 1988, § 39-92; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-309), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-92. - Expiration. 
No permit shall be granted under this division without an expiration date and the wetlands board, ink the exercise of its discretion, shall designate an expiration date for completion of the work specified in the permit from the date the board granted the permit. The board may, upon proper application therefor, grant extensions. 
(Code 1988, § 39-93; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-312), 4-26-1988)  
Sec. 39-93. - Suspension or revocation. 
The wetlands board may, after a hearing as provided in section 39-85, suspend or revoke a permit issued under this division if the board finds that the applicant has failed to comply with any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of work as set forth in the application. The board, after hearing, may suspend a permit if the applicant fails to comply with the terms and conditions set forth in the application. 
(Code 1988, § 39-94; Ord. No. 1988-30, § 1(40-309), 4-26-1988)  
Chapter 40.1 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Revised: Dec. 14, 2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08(Rev.)   June 11 2013 by Ord. No. 2013-33   June 24, 2014 by Ord. No. 2014-54   December 8, 2015 by Ord. No. 2015-83   December 9, 2014 by Ord. No. 2014-103   January 26, 2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07   October 13, 2016 by Ord. No. 2016-70   October 24, 2017 by Ord. No. 2017-96   January 9, 2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01   January 9, 2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02   June 12, 2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39   July 24, 2018 by Ord. No. 2018-59   November 27, 2018 by Ord. No. 2018-112   December 11, 2018 by Ord. No. 2018-115 
 
ARTICLE 40.1-1: - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
40.1-1.1 - Title 
This chapter of the Portsmouth City Code shall be officially known as "The City of Portsmouth, Virginia, Zoning Ordinance" and may be referred to as "the Zoning Ordinance" or "this Ordinance."  
40.1-1.2 - Authority 
(A)  General Authority This Ordinance establishes the city's zoning regulatory authority as authorized by the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, and is adopted in accordance with: 
(1)  The enabling authority contained in Title 15.2, Chapter 22 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, granted to the City of Portsmouth by the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Virginia; 
(2)  The Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia; and 
(3)  All other relevant laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(B)  References to Code of Virginia Whenever any provision of this Ordinance refers to or cites a section of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, and that section is later amended or superseded, this Ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section.  
40.1-1.3 - General Purpose and Intent 
(A)  The City Council for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, or general welfare of the public and of further accomplishing the objectives of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, states this Ordinance is adopted with the following purposes and intent: 
(1)  To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, crime, and other dangers; 
(2)  To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets; 
(3)  To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community; 
(4)  To facilitate the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, and other public requirements; 
(5)  To protect against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas; 
(6)  To protect against overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, or loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood, panic, or other dangers; 
(7)  To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment, high wage jobs, and enlarge the tax base; 
(8)  To provide for the preservation and protection of the natural environment, including surface water and groundwater; 
(9)  To promote the creation and preservation of affordable housing suitable for meeting the current and future needs of the city; 
(10)  To implement the comprehensive plan; 
(11)  To promote a healthy economy through a high quality of life; 
(12)  To develop a sense of place that reflects the city's history, downtown, and waterfront; 
(13)  To maintain quality neighborhoods with diverse housing choices and access to services; 
(14)  To strengthen stable neighborhoods, prevent further decline in transitional neighborhoods, and encourage redevelopment in targeted neighborhoods; 
(15)  To encourage the development of activity centers; 
(16)  To encourage redevelopment that is compatible with its context; 
(17)  To encourage mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly land use patterns, at appropriate locations; 
(18)  To encourage and target land uses for their highest and best use; 
(19)  To target obsolescent uses for redevelopment; 
(20)  To improve the visual character of the gateway corridors; 
(21)  To improve development quality generally; and 
(22)  To focus and strengthen the city's urban form.  
40.1-1.4 - Applicability and Jurisdiction 
(A)  General Applicability The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the development of all land within the corporate limits of the City of Portsmouth except for streets and public rights-of way, and unless it is expressly exempted by a specific section or subsection of this Ordinance. 
(B)  Application to Governmental Units Except as stated herein, the provisions of this Ordinance do not apply to: 
(1)  Development by the city or its agencies or departments during a declared local emergency. The City Council shall ratify such exemption after the fact at its next regularly scheduled meeting, and shall base its ratification on specified findings of fact related to the emergency involved. 
(2)  Development of lands owned by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(3)  Development owned and held in tenancy by the government of the United States, its agencies, departments, or corporate services, to the extent required by law. 
(C)  No Development until Compliance with This Ordinance   
(1)  No land shall be developed without full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable city, county, state, and federal regulations. 
(2)  All departments, officials, and public employees of the city who are vested with the duty of authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. They shall issue permits for uses, buildings, or purposes only when they are in harmony with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any such permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be null and void. 
(3)  No development or land-disturbing activities subject to the standards of this ordinance may take place until the appropriate approval(s) are granted by the city in accordance with this Ordinance. 
(4)  Land or buildings may be used or occupied only after a Certificate of Occupancy is approved by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a temporary Certificate of Occupancy until the applicant has guaranteed the completion of public improvements, including, but not limited to, public streets, public water and public sewer facilities, or the completion of required landscape areas and plantings shown on the approved site plan or other approved plan by providing a surety in a form approved by the City Attorney.  
40.1-1.5 - Conformance with Adopted Plans 
This Ordinance is intended to ensure that all development within the city's jurisdiction is consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, strategies, and actions of the Destination 2025 Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans addressing the city's growth and development. To the extent this Ordinance is or becomes inconsistent with these adopted plans, it should be amended to become or remain consistent with the adopted plans. Additionally, all amendments to this Ordinance's text or official zoning map should maintain and enhance consistency between this Ordinance and the adopted plans.  
40.1-1.6 - Relationship with Other Laws, Covenants, or Deed Restrictions 
(A)  Conflicts with Other City Codes or Laws If a provision of this Ordinance is inconsistent with a provision found in other adopted codes or ordinances of the city, the more restrictive provision shall govern unless the terms of the more restrictive provision specify otherwise. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or burdens, or more stringent controls. 
(B)  Conflicts with Private Agreements The city shall not be responsible for monitoring or enforcing private easements, covenants, and restrictions, although the city may inquire as to whether land is subject to easements, covenants, and restrictions during the review of development applications. 
(C)  Conflicts with State or Federal Law If a provision of this Ordinance is inconsistent with a provision found in the law or regulations of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provision shall control, to the extent permitted by law. 
(D)  Existing Agreements or Vested Rights.   
Nothing in this Ordinance is intended to repeal, supersede, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing private agreements or vested rights recognized in accordance with all applicable laws, provided such agreements or rights are lawfully established and remain in effect.  
40.1-1.7 - Official Zoning Map 
(A)  General The official zoning map designates the location and boundaries of the various base zoning and overlay zoning districts established in this Ordinance. The official zoning map shall be kept on file in the Planning Department and is available for public inspection during normal business hours. The original official version of the map shall be certified by the Planning Director. It may be kept in either hardcopy or digital form. It shall be the final authority as to the status of the current zoning district classification of land in the city, and shall only be amended in accordance with this Ordinance. 
(B)  Incorporated by Reference. The official zoning map and all the notations thereon is incorporated herein by reference and made part of this Ordinance. 
(C)  Damaged, Destroyed, or Lost In the event the official zoning map is damaged, destroyed, lost, or becomes difficult to read and interpret due to the number of changes, the City Council may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map to replace the damaged, destroyed, or lost map. The new official zoning map shall not make any substantive changes (amendments), but may correct drafting and other clerical errors and omissions on the previous official zoning map. 
(D)  Interpretation of Official Zoning Map Boundaries The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for interpretations of the official zoning map in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-2.3.L, Interpretation, and the following standards: 
(1)  Boundaries shown as approximately following a utility line or a street, alley, railroad, or other public access way shall be interpreted as following the centerline of the right-of-way or easement for the utility line or access way. 
(2)  Boundaries shown as approximately following a property line shall be interpreted as following the property line as it existed when the boundary was established. If a single subsequent minor adjustment (such as from settlement of a boundary dispute or overlap) results in the property line moving 10 feet or less, the zoning boundary shall be interpreted as moving with the property line. 
(3)  Where areas under water are not shown within the same district as the adjacent land areas, the boundaries of the zoning districts shown for such adjacent land areas shall extend to the mean low-water line along the property lines of the owners of such adjacent land areas. 
(4)  Boundaries shown as approximately following established municipal corporate limits or other political boundaries shall be interpreted as following the corporate limits or boundaries. 
(5)  Boundaries shown parallel to or as extensions of features indicated in this subsection shall be interpreted as such. 
(6)  If the specific location of a depicted boundary cannot be determined from notations on the official zoning map or application of the above standards, it shall be determined by using the map's scale to determine the boundary's distance from other features shown on the map. 
(7)  Where the actual locations of existing physical or natural features vary from that shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by this subsection, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to interpret the district boundaries (See Section 40.1-2.3.L, Interpretation). Appeals of the Zoning Administrator's decision shall be reviewed by the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3.M, Appeal. 
(8)  In every case where property has not been specifically included within a zoning district, the land shall automatically be designated as Preservation/Government (PG) until such classification is changed by an amendment to this Ordinance in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3.A, Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment. 
(E)  Amendments to the Official Zoning Map Changes made in zoning district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the official zoning map shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance (Section 40.1-2.3.A, Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment). Changes shall be entered on the official zoning map by the Planning Director promptly after the amendment is approved by the City Council. Where the ordinance enacting a zoning district boundary change contains wording explaining or clarifying the location of the new boundary, the Planning Director may enter on the official zoning map notations reflecting the ordinance wording. The Planning Director shall maintain copies of superseded versions of the official zoning map for historical reference. 
(F)  Uses Generally This Ordinance shall be deemed exclusive in nature and only those uses specified shall be permitted in the various zoning districts. If a use is not specified in a zoning district, it shall be prohibited in that district. In the event that a use is not permitted in any zoning district, it may only be permitted after appropriate amendment to the text of this Ordinance. 
(G)  Bifurcation Discouraged Applications seeking to amend the official zoning map (rezoning) to establish or maintain two or more different base zoning district designations on a single lot are discouraged. 
(H)  Transition to New Zoning Districts On May 1, 2010, land zoned with a zoning district classification from the previous zoning ordinance shall be translated or reclassified to one of the zoning district classifications in this Ordinance as set forth in Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts. Table 40.1-1.7(H), Transition to New Zoning Districts, summarizes the translation or reclassification of the zoning districts used in the previous zoning ordinance to the zoning districts used in this Ordinance. (For example, Table 40.1-1.7(H) shows that all lands classified Residential RS-300 in the previous zoning ordinance are classified Neighborhood Residential (NR) in this Ordinance.) 
TABLE 40.1-1.7(H): TRANSITION TO NEW ZONING DISTRICTS 
FORMER ZONING DISTRICTS 	NEW ZONING DISTRICTS 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS [1] 
Residential RS-400 	Neighborhood Residential (NR) 
Residential RS-300 	
Residential RS-150 	General Residential (GR) 
Residential RS-125 	
Residential RS-100 	
Residential RS-85 	
Residential RS-75 	Urban Residential (UR) 
Residential RS-60 	
Residential RS-50 	
Residential RT-75 	High-Density Urban Residential (UR-H) 
Residential RM-75 	
Office Residential OR-75 	
Residential RM-60 	
BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) 	Neighborhood Mixed-Use (NMU) 
General Commercial (C-2) 	General Mixed-Use (GMU) 
Planned Office Park (POP) 	
Business Park (BP) 	[DELETED] 
	High Intensity Mixed-Use (MU-H) [NEW] 
Industrial (M-1) 	Light Industrial (IL) 
Industrial (M-1-R) 	
Commerce Park (CP) 	
Industrial (M-2) 	Industrial (IN) 
ACTIVITY CENTER DISTRICTS [2] 
	Neighborhood Activity Center (NAC) [NEW] 
	Community Activity Center (CAC) [NEW] 
Mixed-Use/Employment Center (MX/EC) 	Regional Activity Center (RAC) 
Planned Unit Development (PUD) 	[DELETED] 
SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
Waterfront (W-1) 	Waterfront (WF) 
Downtown (D-1) 	Downtown (D1) 
Downtown (D-2) 	Downtown (D2) 
Historic Residential (HR) 	Historic Residential (HR) 
Historic Limited Office (HLO) 	Historic Limited Office (HLO) 
Historic Limited Business (HLB) 	Historic Limited Business (HLB) 
Preservation (P1) 	Preservation/Government (PG) 
United States Government (USG) 	
NOTES: 
[1] The Residential Mobile Home (RMH) district standards are located within Appendix C of this Ordinance. Map amendments to establish or enlarge the RMH district are prohibited. 
[2] If land is located within a designated activity center (as depicted on the city's future land use map), the lot may be re-designated to the appropriate activity center district designation in accordance with the procedures and standards of Section 40.1-2.3.A, Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning ) or Text Amendment. 
  
40.1-1.8 - Transitional Rules 
(A)  Effective Date This Ordinance shall become effective on May 1, 2010, and repeals and replaces the current City of Portsmouth Zoning Ordinance, as originally adopted on February 12, 1991, as subsequently amended. 
(B)  Violations Continue Any violation of the previous zoning ordinance shall continue to be a violation under this Ordinance and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes. Violations of this Ordinance shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Article 40.1-7: Enforcement, and any other applicable ordinances, laws, or statutes, unless the development complies with the express terms of this Ordinance or the other ordinances, laws, or statutes. 
(C)  Complete Applications.   
(1)  Any application submitted and accepted as complete before May 1, 2010, but still pending final action as of that date, shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the regulations in effect when the application was accepted. To the extent such an application is approved and proposes development that does not comply with this Ordinance, the subsequent development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Article 40.1-6: Nonconformities. 
(2)  Completed applications shall be processed in good faith and shall comply with any time frames for review, approval, and completion as established in the regulations in effect at the time of application acceptance. If the application fails to comply with the required time frames, it shall expire and future development shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(3)  An applicant with a pending application accepted before May 1, 2010 may opt to have the proposed development reviewed and decided under the standards of this Ordinance by withdrawing the pending application and submitting a new application in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
(D)  Approved Permits and Development Approvals Any applications approved before May 1, 2010 shall remain valid until their expiration date. Development with valid permits or development approvals may be carried out in accordance with the terms and conditions of its approval and the development standards in effect at the time of approval, provided the permit or development approval is valid and has not expired. If the prior approval expires or is revoked (i.e., for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of approval), any subsequent development of the site shall be applied for in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Ordinance. To the extent a prior-approved application proposes development that does not comply with this Ordinance, the subsequent development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Article 40.1-6: Nonconformities. 
(E)  Approved Zoning Subject to Proffers Lands subject to a zoning classification approved subject to proffers before May 1, 2010 shall continue to be subject to the approved rezoning and proffers until or unless the City Council amends the zoning classification of the lands in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Ordinance and the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(F)  Nonconformities If any use, structure, lot, or sign legally existed on May 1, 2010, but does not fully comply with the standards of this Ordinance, then that use, structure, lot, or sign shall be considered nonconforming under this Ordinance and shall be controlled by the provisions of Article 40.1-6: Nonconformities.  
40.1-1.9 - Severability. 
It is the legislative intent of the City Council, in adopting this Ordinance, that all provisions shall regulate development in accordance with the existing and future needs of the city as established in this Ordinance and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the landowners and residents of the city. If any section, subsection, sentence, boundary, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and any section, subsection, sentence, boundary, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, boundaries, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.  
ARTICLE 40.1-2: - ADMINISTRATION 
 
40.1-2.1 - Administrative and decision making bodies. 
(A)  Development Review Structure   
(1)  Table 40.1-2.1(A), Development Review Structure, summarizes the advisory and decision-making bodies that have specific review responsibilities under this Ordinance for permits or development approvals, and their responsibilities. Common procedures for the permits and development approvals are found in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. Provisions specific to each type of development permit or approval are found in Section 40.1-2.3, Standards and Requirements for Applications. 
TABLE 40.1-2.1(A): SUMMARY TABLE OF DEVELOPMENT REVIEW STRUCTURE 
S = Staff Review R = Review and advise D = Decision A = Appeal = Public Hearing 
PERMIT OR 
DEVELOPMENT 
APPROVAL 	SEE 
SECTION 	CITY 
COUNCIL 	PLANNING 
COMMISSION 	BZA 	HPC 	PLANNING 
DIRECTOR 	ZONING 
ADMINISTRATOR 
AMENDMENTS AND USE PERMITS 
Zoning Map or Zoning Text Amendment 	40.1-2.3(A) 	<D> 			R [1] 	S 	
Use Permit 	40.1-2.3(B) 	<D> 				S 	
DEVELOPMENT PLANS 
Type I Development Plan 	40.1-2.3(C) 		A 			D 	
SUBDIVISIONS 
See Chapter 33.1 of the City Code of Ordinances 
PERMITS 
Temporary Use Permit 	40.1-2.3(E) 			<A> 		D 	
Zoning Compliance Permit [3] 	40.1-2.3(F) 			<A> 		D [4] 	D 
Certificate of Appropriateness 	40.1-2.3(I) 				D [5] [6] 	S/D [7] 	
VARIANCES, ADJUSTMENTS, AND EXCEPTIONS 
Special Exception 	40.1-2.3(D) 			<D> 		S 	S 
Variance Permit 	40.1-2.3(G) 			<D> 			S 
Administrative Adjustment 	40.1-2.3(H) 			<A> 		D 	
INTERPRETATIONS AND APPEALS 
Interpretations 	40.1-2.3(J) 			<A> 		D [8] 	D 
Appeals 	40.1-2.3(K) 			<D> [2] 			
NOTES: 
BZA = Board of Zoning Appeals 
HPC = Historic Preservation Commission 
[1] The Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) shall review and advise the Planning Commission and City Council on any applications to amend the boundaries of an historic district or modify the Ordinance text related to the historic district provisions. 
[2] Appeals are to the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth. 
[3] The zoning compliance permit serves as the certification of compliance for development in the Downtown D2 district, as described in Appendix B of this Ordinance. 
[4] The Planning Director shall review and decide zoning compliance permits in the Downtown D2 district. 
[5] Appeals are made to the city's Appeals Review Committee. 
[6] The Downtown Design Committee shall review and decide applications for Certificates of Appropriateness in the D1 Downtown district. 
[7] Administrative decisions are made on minor requests for Certificates of Appropriateness are made by the Planning Director in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(I), Certificates of Appropriateness. 
[8] The Zoning Administrator provides interpretations of the zoning ordinance related to the boundaries of the official zoning map, the dimensional standards in Article 40.1-3, the use classifications in Section 40.1-4.2, and the use table in Section 40.1-4.1; The Planning Director provides interpretations of all other aspects of the Ordinance (e.g., intent, design, and appearance issues, etc.). 
 
(2)  All departments, officials, and public employees of the city who are vested with the duty of authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. They shall issue permits for uses, buildings, or purposes only when they are in harmony with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any such permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be null and void. 
(B)  City Council In addition to any other authority granted to City Council by the City Code or the Code of Virginia, (1950) as amended, the City Council shall have the following powers and duties under this Ordinance: 
(1)  To hear and decide applications for amendment of the zoning map or zoning text; and 
(2)  To hear and decide development applications for use permits. 
(C)  Planning Commission   
(1)  Establishment, Membership, and Procedures The establishment, membership, and procedures for the Planning Commission are established in Chapter 2, Article X of the City Code. 
(2)  Powers and Duties In addition to any other authority granted to the Planning Commission by City Council, the City Code, or the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties under this Ordinance: 
(a)  To hear and make recommendations to City Council on the following: 
(i)  Amendments to the zoning map or zoning text; and 
(ii)  Use permits. 
(b)  To hear appeals of the Planning Director's decision on type I development plans, 
(c)  To carry out any other powers and duties delegated to it by the City Council, consistent with the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(D)  Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA)   
(1)  Establishment The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) is hereby established in accordance with the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(2)  Membership   
(a)  Number of Members   
(i)  The BZA shall consist of five regular members and three alternate members. The regular members and alternate members shall be appointed by the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth, and serve without compensation. 
(ii)  Each member shall be a resident of the city. 
(iii)  Alternate members shall be required to attend all regular meetings and training of the BZA, but shall not participate in the voting or decisions of the BZA unless asked by the chairperson to fill a position when a regular member is absent or unavailable to vote on a matter. When seated, alternate members shall have the same powers and duties as the member they replace. 
(iv)  Each member of the BZA shall attend at least one informational or educational meeting each year pertaining to the work and functions of the BZA or to how this Ordinance functions. 
(b)  Terms of Office, Appointment, and Qualifications The terms of office and the qualifications of the members of the BZA, the manner of their appointment and the organization of the board shall be as provided in the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(c)  Vacancies   
(i)  Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled for the period of the unexpired term only. 
(ii)  In filling vacancies, the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth shall give first priority to alternate members. 
(d)  Officers   
(i)  The BZA may elect from its members one chairperson and one vice-chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the BZA. The vice-chairperson shall preside in the absence of the chairperson. 
(ii)  The Planning Director shall serve as a non-voting member and Secretary of the BZA. 
(3)  Meetings   
(a)  BZA meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the BZA may determine. 
(b)  The chairperson, or the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(c)  All BZA hearings shall be open to the public. 
(d)  The BZA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The BZA shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the Planning Department and shall be a public record. 
(e)  The office of the BZA shall be maintained in the space assigned to it by the City Manager. 
(f)  The BZA shall submit a report of its activities to City Council at least once each year. 
(4)  Quorum   
(a)  Three members of the BZA shall constitute a quorum. No official business of the board shall be conducted without a quorum present. 
(b)  Alternate members may be seated as necessary to establish a quorum. 
(5)  Powers and Duties In addition to any other authority granted to the BZA by City Council, the City Code, or the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the BZA shall have the following powers and duties under this Ordinance: 
(a)  To hear and decide applications for variance permits; and 
(b)  To hear and decide applications for special exception permits; and 
(c)  To hear and decide appeals taken from any interpretation or final decision made by the Zoning Administrator under this Ordinance. 
(E)  Historic Preservation Commission (HPC)   
(1)  Establishment For the general purposes of this Ordinance, and specifically to preserve and protect historic places and areas in Portsmouth through the control of demolition and regulation of architectural design and uses of structures in historic districts, a Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) is hereby established in accordance with the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(2)  Membership   
(a)  Number of Members and Qualifications 
(i)  The HPC shall consist of seven members, appointed by the City Council, who serve without compensation. 
(ii)  Each member shall be a resident of the city. 
(iii)  All members must demonstrate an interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation with: 
a.  One member who is an architect or architectural historian; and 
b.  Two members with professional training or equivalent experience in architecture, history, architectural history, archaeology, or planning. 
(iv)  City Council shall consider, secondary to the above listed qualifications, adequate representation from residents of each historic district. 
(b)  Non-Voting Members In additional to the seven voting members, City Council shall appoint a liaison to the HPC from its own body as well as a liaison from the City Attorney's office. 
(c)  Terms of Office and Appointment   
(i)  Members shall be appointed by the City Council for terms of three years from the date of appointment. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms. 
(ii)  In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year, three members for two years, and three members for three years. 
(iii)  No individual may serve more than six years total as an HPC member without a three-year vacancy from the HPC. 
(d)  Alternates   
(i)  The City Council may appoint three qualified alternate members to the HPC. The terms of the alternates shall be for three years. 
(ii)  Alternate members shall be required to attend all regular meetings and training of the HPC, but shall not participate in the voting or decisions of the HPC unless asked by the chairperson to fill a position to maintain a quorum. 
(e)  Removal Any member may be removed from office by City Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance, or continued absence from regular or called meetings of the HPC. Continued absence shall mean absence from three consecutive meetings or a total of four meetings in a 12-month period. 
(f)  Vacancy   
(i)  If a member representing a designated organization or profession ceases to be a member of that organization or profession, or if a vacancy occurs for some other reason, a new appointment shall be made by City Council within 60 days, for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(ii)  In filling vacancies, City Council shall give first priority to alternate members. 
(g)  Conflicts of Interest No member shall participate in the selection, award, or administration of a contract, vote, participate, or otherwise engage in any other conduct or action that would violate the terms of the applicable provisions of the Virginia State and Local Conflict of Interests Act of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(h)  Training Each member of the HPC shall attend at least one informational or educational meeting each year, as approved by the Virginia Department of Historic Resources, pertaining to the work and functions of the HPC or to historic preservation. 
(3)  Powers and Duties The HPC shall have the following powers and duties under this Ordinance: 
(a)  To hear and decide applications for certificates of appropriateness except for development in the Downtown D1 district. 
(b)  To advise the Planning Commission on the following: 
(i)  Creation of historic districts; and 
(ii)  Amendments to the text of this Ordinance related to historic district provisions. 
(c)  To periodically conduct, or cause to be conducted, a survey of structures, buildings, sites, and areas in the city having historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural significance, interest or value for the purpose of compiling appropriate descriptions, facts, lists and an inventory map of historic properties. 
(d)  To conduct educational programs and disseminate information on historic properties and districts located within the city and general historic preservation issues and concerns and coordinate local preservation efforts with those of local historic and preservation organizations, the Virginia Department of Historic Resources, and other parties, both public and private. 
(e)  To review all proposed Virginia Landmarks Register and National Register of Historic Places nominations within the city for the purpose of providing local comment to the State Review Board and the Virginia Department of Historic Resources. 
(4)  Records of Commission Meeting and Annual Report A public record shall be kept of the HPC's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. The HPC shall make an annual report with recommendations to the Planning Commission and the City Council concerning the operation of the HPC and the status of historic preservation within the city. The Planning Director shall serve as the administrative staff to the HPC and maintain all resolutions, proceedings, and actions of the HPC. 
(5)  Standards and Guidelines The HPC shall submit to the City Council standards and guidelines for each historic district that shall govern the decisions for the HPC. Once City Council has approved the initial standards and guidelines, modifications may be proposed by the HPC, Planning Director, Planning Commission, or City Council. Amendments to these standards shall be approved by the City Council's Appeal Review Committee (ARC). 
(F)  Downtown Development Committee (DDC)   
(1)  Establishment and Membership See Appendix A for more information on the DDC. 
(2)  Powers and Duties The DDC shall hear and decide applications for certificates of appropriateness in the Downtown D1 district (see Appendix A of this Ordinance). 
(G)  City Staff   
(1)  Planning Director   
(a)  Designation The Planning Director is designated by the City Manager to administer this Ordinance. The Planning Director may delegate any administrative, review, or decision-making authorities under this Ordinance to any professional-level staff in the Planning Department. 
(b)  Powers and Duties The Planning Director shall have the following powers and duties under this Ordinance: 
(i)  To review and decide applications for: 
a.  Administrative adjustments; 
b.  Type I development plans; 
c.  Zoning compliance permits in the Downtown D2 district (See Appendix B of this Ordinance). 
(ii)  Serve on and coordinate the functions of the city's Appeal Review Committee related to review and revision of the city's historic protection provisions. 
(iii)  Establish a committee to be called the Zoning Design Review Committee (ZDRC) to review and make recommendations to the Zoning Administrator on issues of design, building materials, and any other matter deemed appropriate for review by this committee by the Planning Director or matters specifically to be referred to the committee by this Ordinance. The ZDRC shall consist of five (5) members including the Planning Director, the Director of Neighborhood Advancement, the Building Official or his designee, the City Engineer or his designee, and one additional member of the Department of Planning selected by the Planning Director. 
(iv)  Establish application, content requirements, and a submission schedule for review of applications and appeals, except those associated with Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(v)  Process, review, advise, and prepare a staff report with a recommendation on applications for zoning map or text amendments, use permits, type II development plans, and certificates of appropriateness. 
(vi)  Provide public notice in accordance with Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice. 
(vii)  Provide expertise and technical assistance to the City Council, Planning Commission, BZA, HPC, DDC, and other city officials, departments, and agencies, upon request. 
(2)  Zoning Administrator   
(a)  Designation The Zoning Administrator is designated by the City Manager to enforce and assist the Planning Director in administering this Ordinance in accordance with the City Code and this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may delegate any administrative, review, or decision-making authorities under this Ordinance to any staff in the Planning Department or Department of Permits and Inspections. 
(b)  Powers and Duties The Zoning Administrator shall have the following powers and duties under this Ordinance: 
(i)  To review and decide on applications for: 
a.  Zoning compliance permits except within the Downtown D2 district; and 
b.  Interpretations of the boundaries on the official zoning map, zoning text related to the base zoning district dimensional standards in Article 40.1-3, Zoning Districts, the use classifications in Section 40.1-4.2, and the summary use table (See Table 40.1-4.1(A)); 
c.  Temporary Use Permits; 
d.  Interpretations of all parts of this Ordinance. 
(ii)  Process, review, and advise the BZA on applications for variance permits; 
(iii)  Enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with Article 40.1-7: Enforcement; 
(iv)  Review and make recommendations to the City Council, Planning Commission, BZA, HPC, and other city officials on applications for permits and development approvals, as appropriate; 
(v)  Provide public notice in accordance with Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice; 
(vi)  Maintain the zoning map and other such records and official materials as relate to the adoption, amendment, or administration of this Ordinance. 
(vii)  Provide expertise and technical assistance to the City Council, Planning Commission, BZA HPC, and other city officials, departments, and agencies, upon request; and 
(viii)  To carry out all additional powers and duties authorized by Section 15.2-2286 A.4., Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, not delegated to other city staff. 
(3)  Summary of Staff Responsibility The city staff responsible for receiving and processing applications (as well as preparing a staff report, if appropriate) is outlined in Table 40.1-2.1(G), Staff Responsibilities for Application Processing. 
TABLE 40.1-2.1(G): STAFF RESPONSIBILITIES FOR APPLICATION PROCESSING 
APPLICATION TYPE 	RESPONSIBLE CITY STAFF MEMBER 
Zoning Map or Zoning Text Amendment 	Planning Director 
Use Permit 	
Type I Development Plan 	
Special Exception 	Zoning Administrator 
Temporary Use Permit 	Zoning Administrator 
Zoning Compliance Permit 	Zoning Administrator [1] 
Certificate of Appropriateness 	Planning Director 
Variance Permit 	Zoning Administrator 
Administrative Adjustment 	Planning Director 
Interpretations 	Zoning Administrator 
Appeals 	Zoning Administrator 
NOTES 
[1] The Planning Director shall be responsible for zoning compliance permit applications within the Downtown D2 district. 
 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 6), 12-9-2014) 
40.1-2.2   Common Review Procedures
The provisions of this section shall apply to all application requests under this Ordinance, unless otherwise stated in this section or in Section 40.1-2.3, Standards and Requirements for Applications for Permits and Development Approval. 
(A)  Authority to File Applications   
(1)  Applications for permits or development approvals for a specific parcel of land shall be submitted by: 
(a)  The owner of the land on which the development is proposed; or 
(b)  The contract purchaser of the land, with the owner's written consent; or 
(c)  A person authorized to submit the application on behalf of the owner or the contract purchaser, with the owner's consent, which consent must be evidenced by a power of attorney signed by such owner. 
(2)  If there are multiple owners, contract purchasers, or other persons authorized to submit the application, all such persons shall sign the application, or a power of attorney authorizing either the contract purchaser or other agent to sign the application. 
(B)  Application Contents The Planning Director is authorized to and shall establish, and amend as appropriate, the requirements for application contents and forms, which shall be located in the Procedures Manual. All applications shall include a document disclosing whether any member of the Planning Commission or City Council has any interest in the property that is subject to the application in accordance with Section 15.2-2287, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(C)  Fees The City Council shall establish application fees, and may amend and update those fees as determined necessary. Fees established by the City Council shall be included in the administrative manual. 
(D)  Submission Schedule The Planning Director is authorized and shall establish the submission and review schedule for review of applications under this Ordinance. The Planning Director may amend and update these requirements as determined necessary. The submission schedule established by the Planning Director shall be included in the administrative manual. 
(E)  Pre-Application Conference   
(1)  Purpose The purpose of a pre-application conference is to familiarize the applicant and the city staff with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance relevant to the proposed development, inform the applicant about the preparation of the application, and discuss the application and review process. 
(2)  Pre-Application Conference Mandatory Except for development applications initiated by city staff, the Planning Commission, HPC, or the City Council, pre-application conferences between the applicant and the city staff shall be mandatory before submission of the following types of applications: 
(a)  Zoning map amendments (rezonings), with or without proffers; 
(b)  Use permits; 
(c)  Variance permits; and 
(d)  Reserved 
(3)  Pre-Application Conference Optional A pre-application conference is optional before submission of any other application for permit or development approval. 
(4)  Sketch Plans Required Applicants seeking approval of a zoning map amendment with proffers (See Section 40.1-2.3(A)), a use permit (See Section 40.1-2.3(B) shall submit a sketch plan for review during the pre-application conference. 
(5)  Effect The pre-application conference is intended as a means of facilitating the application process. Discussions held in accordance with this section are not binding on the city. Processing times for review of development applications do not begin until a formal, complete application is submitted and determined to be complete. 
(F)  Application Submission Applications shall be submitted to the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate) in the form established by the Planning Director in Section 40.1-2.2(B), Application Contents, along with a fee established in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(C), Fees. Applications not meeting the requirements of Section 40.1-2.2(G), Determination of Application Completeness, shall be considered incomplete. 
(G)  Determination of Application Completeness   
(1)  Completeness Review Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate) shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application is one that: 
(a)  Contains all information and materials required for submittal of the particular type of application (See Section 40.1-2.2.(B), Application Contents); 
(b)  Is in the form required for submittal of the particular type of application; 
(c)  Includes information in sufficient detail to evaluate the application to determine whether it complies with the appropriate standards of this Ordinance; and 
(d)  Is accompanied by the fee established for the particular type of application. 
(2)  Application Incomplete   
(a)  Notwithstanding Section 40.1-2.2(G)(1) above, applications for development approvals or permits on land with unpaid real estate taxes shall be considered incomplete. 
(b)  If the application is determined incomplete, city staff shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies within ten business days of submittal, and the application shall not be processed. The applicant may correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application for completeness determination. 
(c)  If the applicant fails to resubmit an application within 30 business days after being first notified of deficiencies, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subsection, after an application is determined to be incomplete three times, the applicant may request in writing, and the city staff shall undertake processing and review of the application even though it is not considered a complete application. 
(3)  Application Complete If the application is determined to be complete, or the applicant has requested that the application be processed in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(G)(2)(d) above, the city shall refer the application to the appropriate staff, review agencies, and review bodies for review in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Ordinance. The time frame and cycle for review of the application shall be based on the date the application is determined to be complete or the date the city receives the written request to process it in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(G)(2)(d). 
(H)  Preparation of Staff Report   
(1)  If the application is subject to staff review and a subsequent hearing or consideration by an advisory or decision-making body (See Table 40.1-2.1(A), Summary Table of Development Review Structure), the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate) shall review the application, relevant support material, and any comments from other staff and review agencies, and prepare a written staff report. 
(2)  The staff report shall be addressed to the advisory or decision-making body (as appropriate), and shall state whether the application complies with all appropriate standards of this Ordinance. The staff report shall include a recommendation, and may identify ways in which areas of noncompliance might be eliminated, adverse effects of the development proposal might be mitigated, or consistency with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance may be improved. 
(3)  The staff report shall be transmitted to the applicant and made available to the advisory or decision-making body and to the public a reasonable period of time before the first scheduled review body meeting or public hearing on the application. 
(I)  Scheduling of Public Hearings A public hearing shall be conducted by the appropriate advisory or decision-making body in accordance with Table 40.1-2.2(I), Required Public Hearings. 
Table 40.1-2.2(I): REQUIRED PUBLIC HEARINGS 
X= Advisory or Decision-Making Body Required to Conduct Public Hearing 
Application Type 	See Section 	Advisory or Decision-Making Body [1] 
		City Council 	Planning Commission 	BZA 
Zoning Map or Text Amendment 	40.1-2.3(A) 	X 	X 	
Use Permit 	40.1-2.3(B) 	X 	X 	
Special Exception 	40.1-2.3(D) 			X 
Variance Permit 	40.1-2.3(G) 			X 
Appeal 	40.1-2.3(K) 			X 
NOTES: 
[1] An "X" in more than one column means that the application type requires more than one public hearing. Second readings are not considered as public hearings. 
 
(J)  Public Notification All applications requiring a public hearing shall comply with the requirements in the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice, and the other provisions of this section with regard to public notification. 
(1)  Type of Notice Provided Unless otherwise expressly provided in the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, or this Ordinance, notice shall be provided in accordance with Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice. 
Table 40.1-2.2(J): REQUIRED PUBLIC Notice 
X=Type of Notice Required 
Application Type 	Notice Required 
	Written (Mailed) [1] 	Published 
Zoning Map Amendment 	When an amendment affects 25 or fewer lots, written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land (including land immediately across the street or in other jurisdictions). 
When a proposed application affects more than 25 lots, or the amendment decreases allowable residential density, written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land that is 11,500 square feet in size or larger (including land immediately across the street and lots in other jurisdictions). 	Once a week for 2 successive weeks, with the second notice not less than 6 nor more than 21 days prior to first public hearing. 
Text Amendment 	None except when a proposed application affects more than 25 lots, or the amendment decreases allowable residential density, then written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land that is 11,500 square feet in size or larger (including land immediately across the street and lots in other jurisdictions). 	
Use Permit 	Written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land (including land immediately across the street or in other jurisdictions). 	Once a week for 2 successive weeks, with the second notice not less than 6 nor more than 21 days prior to first public hearing 
Variance 		
Special Exception 		
Appeal 		
Administrative Adjustment 	Written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land (including land immediately across the street or in other jurisdictions) at least 21 days prior to consideration by the Planning Director. 	None required 
NOTES: 
[1] Written (mailed) notice shall be provided at least five days prior to the first public hearing (or consideration by the Planning Director in the case of Administrative Adjustments). 
 
(2)  Written Notice   
(a)  The content and form of the written notice shall be consistent with the requirements of Sections 15.2-2204 and 15.2-2286 of Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, (if applicable). 
(b)  If any portion of the land subject to an application requiring written notice is within a planned unit development, then written notice shall be provided to all applicable property owners' associations having members who own land within 2,000 feet of the land subject to the application. 
(c)  In the case of a condominium or a cooperative, the written notice may be mailed to the unit owners' association or proprietary lessees' association, respectively, in lieu of providing written notice to each individual unit owner. 
(d)  In cases where an amendment to the official zoning map or use permit would result in an increase in the height or bulk of an existing or previously-approved structure by more than 50 percent, the Chief Administrative Officer of any adjacent jurisdiction within one-half (½) mile of the land subject to an application shall receive written notice. 
(e)  In cases where an amendment to the official zoning map or use permit is proposed on land within 3,000 feet of a military base, military installation, military airport (excluding armories operated by the Virginia National Guard), including any leased facility, or any land or interest in land owned by the Commonwealth and administered by the Adjutant General of Virginia or the Virginia Department of Military Affairs, or licensed public-use airport, written notice shall be provided at least 30 days in advance of a public hearing to the commander of the military installation or owner of the public-use airport. The notice shall indicate the opportunity to submit comments or recommendations. 
(f)  In cases where written notice required in accordance with Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice, is provided by a public agency or city staff member via first class mail, an affidavit attesting that notice has been provided in accordance with this Ordinance and the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, shall be signed by the person or agency providing notice and shall be included with the application materials. 
(3)  Published Notice   
(a)  The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate) shall be responsible for preparing the content of the published notice and publishing the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  The content and form of the published notice shall be consistent with the requirements of Sections 15.2-2204 and 15.2-2286 of Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, (if applicable). 
(c)  For the purposes of this Ordinance, the date of public notification shall be considered as the date the city provides information to be published to the newspaper of general circulation. 
(d)  Published notice for applications requiring two public hearings (one before the Planning Commission, and one before the City Council) may be published concurrently in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section "two successive weeks" shall be construed to mean notice shall be published at least twice with at least six days elapsing between the first and second publication. 
(4)  Notice Not Required If a particular permit type is not listed in Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice, then public notification of a meeting or hearing to consider the application is not required under state law. Public notification for these types of applications may be provided by the city as a courtesy only. 
(5)  Effect of Notice A person's actual written notice of, or active participation in, a required public hearing shall waive the right of that person to challenge the validity of the proceeding due to failure to receive written notification as required by this Ordinance. 
(6)  Other Notices Applicants shall be responsible for compliance with any additional notice requirements in this Ordinance, other city ordinances, or state law. 
(7)  Registration to Receive Notice by Mail Any person, neighborhood organization, or other organization in the city may register with the Planning Director biennially to receive written notice of all applications for permits and development approvals in accordance with this subsection. To be eligible for registration, the person or organization shall provide the Planning Director information in a form established by the Planning Director, along with a fee to defray registration and mailing costs. To continue to receive such notice, a person or organization shall re-register every two years. 
(K)  Hearing Procedures All hearings for applications held in accordance with this Ordinance shall comply with the following procedures. 
(1)  Conduct of Hearing   
(a)  Burden of Proof or Persuasion The burden of demonstrating that an application complies with the relevant standards of this Ordinance is on the applicant. The burden is not on the city or other parties to show that the standards are met by the applicant. 
(b)  Rights of All Persons Any person may appear at a hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a representative of a person or an organization. Each person who appears at a hearing shall be identified, state his or her address, and if appearing on behalf of a person or organization, state the name and mailing address of the person or organization being represented. 
(c)  Continuance of Hearing   
(i)  General   
a.  The body conducting the hearing may, on its own motion or at the request of any person, continue the hearing to a fixed date, time, and place only upon good cause shown. 
b.  A request for deferral of a hearing from the applicant received by the city staff following public notification of the hearing (where appropriate) in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2 (J), Public Notification, shall be considered as a request for a continuance, and may only be granted by the advisory or decision-making body considering the application. 
c.  In cases where a request for continuance results in the need for additional public notification, the applicant may be responsible for the costs associated with providing the additional public notification. 
(ii)  When Additional Notice Not Required A hearing for which proper public notification is given or where public notification is not required, may be continued to the next regularly scheduled meeting without additional public notice, provided: 
a.  The continuance is set for a date within 45 days of the originally- advertised public hearing; 
b.  The date and time of the continued hearing is announced at the time of the continuance; and 
c.  The public hearing is left open. 
In the event that additional public notification is required, the applicant may be responsible for the costs associated with providing the additional public notification. In cases where the applicant provides written (mailed) notice, such notice shall be sent via certified mail. 
(iii)  When Additional Notice Required/If the advisory or decision-making body considering an application for which public notification is provided in accordance with this section has not made a decision on the application by the next regularly scheduled meeting, the application shall be re-noticed consistent with the procedures and standards for its original notification. The applicant shall be responsible for the costs associated with providing the additional public notification. 
(2)  General Procedures and Findings at Public Hearing The body conducting the public hearing shall act in accord with any time limits established in this Ordinance and Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. Action shall include a statement of recommendation or decision of approval, approval with conditions, referral to another body, or denial (whichever is appropriate). 
(L)  Review by City Staff If an application is subject to review and decision by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, it shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Review The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall review the application, relevant support material, and any comments from other staff and review agencies, and approve the application, approve the application with conditions (if appropriate), or deny the application, based on the appropriate review standards for the particular permit or approval. 
(2)  Staff Report Preparation of a staff report is optional, at the discretion of the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate. If a staff report is determined to be necessary, it shall be prepared in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(H), Preparation of Staff Report, except that it shall be addressed and provided to the applicant. 
(3)  Revisions to Staff Reports In the event additional information is needed by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, to complete a staff report, or revisions to a proposed application to maintain consistency with this Ordinance are required, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall provide the applicant with all deficiencies or other recommended changes. The applicant shall have 30 days to revise the application and resubmit all required materials. 
(M)  Conditions of Approval   
(1)  In General   
(a)  Where the express terms of this Ordinance authorize a decision-making body to approve an application with conditions, (i.e., use permits and variance permits), the body may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions on the approval. The conditions may, as appropriate, ensure compliance with particular standards of this Ordinance, and prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed development on surrounding lands. 
(b)  The restrictions and conditions imposed must be related in both type and amount to the impact that the proposed development would have on the public and surrounding development. All conditions imposed shall be expressly set forth in the permit or development approval. 
(2)  Conditions Proposed by the Applicant When conditions are proposed by the applicant as part of the application for an amendment to the zoning map (rezoning), the application shall include a voluntary proffer statement, which shall include the following: 
(a)  A list of legally permissible conditions related to the physical development or physical operation of the development; 
(b)  A signed statement from the current land owner or applicant (with a power of attorney granted by the land owner allowing the applicant to submit proffers) that includes the following language: 
"I HEREBY VOLUNTARILY PROFFER THAT THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SUBJECT PROPERTY OF THE APPLICATION SHALL BE IN STRICT ACCORDANCE WITH THE CONDITIONS SET FORTH IN THIS SUBMISSION, UNLESS AMENDMENT THERETO IS MUTUALLY AGREED UPON BY THE CITY COUNCIL AND THE UNDERSIGNED." 
(c)  The current land owner may voluntarily proffer conditions that will supplement the specific zoning district regulations only to the extent that: 
(i)  The amendment to the official zoning map application necessitates the conditions; 
(ii)  Such conditions have a reasonable relation to the request; 
(iii)  All proffered conditions are in conformity with the comprehensive plan; and 
(iv)  If no conditions are proffered by an applicant for an amendment to the official zoning map, then a statement indicating that no conditions are being proffered shall accompany the application. 
(N)  Notification of Decision   
(1)  Within a reasonable period of time after the decision, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall notify the applicant of the decision. If the applicant has a right to appeal the decision to the BZA under this Ordinance, the notice shall also notify the applicant of this right to appeal the decision to the BZA within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notification by the applicant, and that the decision shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within this period of time. 
(2)  A copy of the notification of decision and the right to appeal shall be public record and shall be available for public inspection at the office of the Planning Director, during normal business hours. 
(O)  Request for Deferral of Application   
(1)  An applicant may request that an advisory or decision-making bodies' consideration of an application at a public hearing be deferred by submitting a written request for deferral to the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, prior to the publication of notice for the public hearing (See Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification). The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, may grant such requests for good cause. The date of the public hearing at which the deferred application will be heard shall be set at the time the deferral is granted. 
(2)  Written requests for deferral of an application by an advisory or decision-making body received after publication of notice for the public hearing has occurred shall be forwarded to the advisory or decision-making body and shall be treated as a request for a continuance of the public hearing. 
(P)  Request for Withdrawal of Application   
(1)  Method Any withdrawal of an application shall be either submitted in writing to the appropriate city staff prior to any public hearing, or be made through a verbal request on the record by the applicant or the applicant's agent during a public hearing. If public notification has occurred prior to the request for withdrawal, application fees shall not be returned to the applicant. 
(2)  Prior to Notice of Public Hearing The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall forward notice of a withdrawn application to the appropriate advisory or decision-making body prior to the public hearing on the application (See Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification). 
(Q)  Waiver of Time Limit   
(1)  General Whenever any application for a permit or development approval requiring a public hearing is denied, an application for all or a part of the same land shall not be considered for a period of one year after the date of denial unless a waiver of time limit is subsequently approved by the decision-making body in accordance with the requirements of this section. Only one request for waiver of time limit may be submitted by the applicant during the one-year period. 
(2)  Waiver of Time Limit   
(a)  Owner or Authorized Agent Only the owner of land or the owner's authorized agent may submit a request for waiver of time limit. 
(b)  Initiation A request may be initiated by the owner or the owner's authorized agent by submitting a request for waiver of time limit to the appropriate city staff, along with a fee to defray the cost of processing the request. 
(3)  Action At the meeting for which the request for waiver of time limit is scheduled, the decision-making body shall consider the request, other relevant support materials, statements made by the applicant or the applicant's representative, and the public, and approve or deny the request based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.2(Q)(4), Waiver of Time Limit Standards. 
(4)  Waiver of Time Limits Standards The waiver of time limit shall be approved only upon a finding by two-thirds (2/3) or more of the membership of the decision-making body that substantial evidence is presented that demonstrates: 
(a)  There is a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues or facts considered during review of the application that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the application; or 
(b)  New or additional information is available that was not available at the time of the review that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed; or 
(c)  A new application is proposed to be submitted that is materially different from the prior application; or 
(d)  The final decision on the application was based on a material mistake of fact. 
(R)  Lapse of Approval Lapse of approval shall occur as provided by this Ordinance for the various types of permits and development approvals. Except for general or proffered amendments to the official zoning map (rezoning), if no provision for lapse is given by this Ordinance for a particular type of permit or development approval, and if no lapse period is imposed as part of an approval in the permit or development approval, lapse shall occur if development is not commenced or a subsequent permit is not obtained within two years. 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 7), 12-9-2014) 
40.1-2.3   Standards and Requirements for Applications for Permits and Development Approvals.
This section includes the individual review procedures, standards, and related information for each of the applications for permits and development approvals, as summarized in Table 40.1-2.1(A), Summary Table of Development Review Structure. 
(A)  Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose and intent of this section is to provide procedures and standards for amending the zoning map or text of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Authority The City Council may adopt an ordinance amending the zoning map or text of this Ordinance in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
(3)  Initiation   
(a)  An application to amend the zoning map (rezoning) may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the HPC (for an historic district), the Planning Director, or a person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(A), Authority to File Applications. 
(b)  An application to amend the text of this Ordinance may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the Planning Director, or a person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(A), Authority to File Applications. 
(c)  If the City Council, Planning Commission, HPC, Planning Director, or a person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(A), Authority to File Applications, initiates an amendment to the zoning map (Rezoning) or the text of this Ordinance, the application shall include the statutory public purpose for the proposed amendment in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(4)  Proffers Distinguished   
(a)  City Council shall not apply conditions to applications to amend the zoning map (rezonings). 
(b)  Applications to amend the zoning map (rezonings) either may be general applications, or may be subject to voluntary proffers proposed by the applicant requesting the amendment. 
(5)  Procedures   
(a)  Basic Procedures   
(i)  For Zoning Map Amendments Without Proffers The procedures and requirements for the submission, completeness determination, review, recommendation, hearing, and decision on applications for the zoning map or text amendments are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures, except applications for a zoning map amendment to an historic district, may be made by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the HPC, private preservation organizations, neighborhood associations or civic leagues, groups of property owners, or individual property owners. 
(ii)  For Zoning Map Amendments with Proffers If the applicant proposes to offer proffers as part of an application to amend the zoning map (rezoning), the application shall also comply with the following requirements: 
a.  A voluntary proffer statement may be accepted prior to required public notification of the application for which proffers are offered by an applicant. 
b.  Once public notification of the first public hearing occurs, a proffer to an application shall not be made that is considered a substantial amendment, unless the application is modified, reconsidered and re-reviewed by city staff (as appropriate), re-noticed in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, and re-reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council (if appropriate). This shall not apply if: 
1.  The amended voluntary proffer is not a substantial amendment that materially changes the original voluntary proffer submitted by the applicant; or 
2.  The substantial amendment is the result of Planning Commission, public, or city staff action or comments made about the application after a public hearing is conducted before the Planning Commission. 
c.  For the purposes of this section, a "substantial amendment" includes a modification of proffer(s) that materially changes the uses, layout, and character of external impacts of the development proposed as part of the amendment in a way that is less restrictive than the proffer(s) originally proposed and considered. 
 
(b)  Public Hearing, Review, and Recommendation by HPC   
(i)  Creation of Historic Districts and Designation of Historic Properties   
a.  Initiation Prior to the HPC's recommendation on an application to amend the zoning map to establish an historic district or amendment to the boundaries of an historic district, the HPC shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of a completed National Register of Historic Places nomination/amendment or: 
1.  A physical description; 
2.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
3.  A map showing historic district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
4.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
5.  Representative photographs. 
b.  Designation of an Historic District An historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, that: 
1.  Have special character or special historic/architectural value or interest; 
2.  Represent one or more periods, styles, or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, state, or region; and 
3.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city. 
c.  Designation of Historic Property An historic property is an individual building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, state, or region, for one of the following reasons: 
1.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
2.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
3.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or 
4.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, state, or region. 
d.  Boundaries The boundaries of an historic district or an historic property shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
e.  Adoption Ordinance Requirements The following are required for the adoption of an ordinance designating an historic district or property: 
1.  A designation proposed by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the HPC, private preservation organization, neighborhood association or civic league, group of land owners. 
2.  An ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
A.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
B.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; and 
C.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map, and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
3.  Upon the designation, modification, or designation removal of each historic district or property, the Planning Director shall file with the Clerk of Circuit Court a copy of the resolution containing such action, and a boundary description of such district. 
4.  Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance designating the historic district or property, the owners of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each building, structure, site, or object located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city. The notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. 
(c)  Public Hearing, Review, and Recommendation by Planning Commission   
(i)  After HPC review and recommendation on an application for a zoning map amendment to an historic district, and in all other instances, following staff review, there shall be public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, after which the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public at the hearing, and by a majority vote of a quorum present, adopt a written recommendation for one of the following actions, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(A)(6), Zoning Map Amendment Standards, Section 40.1-2.3(A)(7), Proffer Standards (Offered as Part of a Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)), or Section 40.1-2.3(A)(8), Zoning Text Amendment Standards (as appropriate): 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with proffers proposed by the applicant; or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(iii)  Following its recommendation on a proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall forward the recommendation to the City Council and submit a report with the recommendations along with an explanation of how the application either complies with or fails to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Public Hearing, Review, and Action by City Council   
(i)  Upon certification of the Planning Commission's report and recommendation, and public notification on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the hearing, the City Council shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, the Planning Commission's report and recommendation, and any comments given by the public at the hearing, and by a majority vote of a quorum present, take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(A)(6), Zoning Map Amendment Standards, Section 40.1-2.3(A)(7), Proffer Standards (Offered as Part of a Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)), or Section 40.1-2.3(A)(8), Zoning Text Amendment Standards (as appropriate): 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with proffers proposed by the applicant; 
c.  Denial of the application; or 
d.  Remand of the application back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
(6)  Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) Standards Amending the zoning map is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny the proposed amendment, or, where appropriate, to accept proffered conditions, the City Council's consideration may include, but not be limited to, the following factors: 
(a)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan, or other applicable and adopted long-range planning documents; 
(b)  Whether and the extent to which there are changed conditions that require an amendment; 
(c)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment addresses a demonstrated community need; 
(d)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment will have a positive effect on the city's desired balance between residential and nonresidential uses; 
(e)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment is compatible with existing and proposed uses surrounding the land subject to the amendment, and is the appropriate zoning district for the land and the existing use(s); 
(f)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in a logical and orderly development pattern, or deviate from logical and orderly development patterns; 
(g)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in the creation of an isolated zoning district unrelated to adjacent and surrounding zoning districts; 
(h)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment will result in significant adverse impacts on the property values of surrounding lands; 
(i)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment, including but not limited to water, air, noise, storm water management, wildlife, vegetation, floodplains, wetlands, and the natural functioning of the environment; 
(j)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in development that is adequately served by transportation facilities, including whether a substantial deterioration of the level of service on the city's transportation network would occur; 
(k)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in development that has an adverse impact on the city's economic vitality; and/or 
(l)  Whether or not delinquent real estate taxes are owed to the city. 
(7)  Proffer Standards (Offered as Part of Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)) Proffers offered by an applicant as part of a zoning map amendment (rezoning) shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  When Proposed All proffers shall be proposed in writing as part of the rezoning application prior to the first public notification of the required public hearings, in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification. Proffers may be amended only in accordance with Section, 40.1-2.3(A)(5), Basic Procedures. 
(b)  General Voluntary proffers made by an applicant may be accepted by the City Council provided they comply with the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, and the following: 
(i)  Necessary and Reasonable   
a.  The proposal to amend the zoning map necessitates the proposed proffers, and they are reasonably related to the amendment request. 
b.  The proposed proffers are not generally applicable to lands with similar zoning district classifications. 
(ii)  Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan The proposed proffers are in conformity with the comprehensive plan. 
(iii)  Supplement the District Standards The proposed proffers are in addition to and are no less stringent than the standards and requirements of the proposed zoning district. 
(iv)  Dedication or Payments   
a.  In the event proposed proffers include land dedication or cash payments for public facilities to serve the land subject to the zoning map amendment, such land dedication or cash payment shall not be made until the public facilities are included in the city's capital improvement program; provided nothing shall prevent the city from accepting proffers which are not normally included in the capital improvement program. 
 
b.  If proffers include land dedication or cash payments, the proffers shall provide for the disposition of such land dedication or cash payment in the event the land or cash payment is not used for the purpose for which it is proffered. 
(c)  Enforcement and Guarantee of Performance and Conditions   
(i)  The Planning Director may require an applicant proposing proffers to guarantee performance of the proffers accepted by the City Council. The guarantee(s) shall be in an amount and in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. Such guarantee(s) shall be reduced or released by the City Engineer or a designee upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that performance of such proffers are completed as required by approval of the amendment. 
(ii)  Failure to comply with the proffers accepted by the City Council, including the guarantee(s), shall constitute cause to deny requests to approve any subsequent permits and development approvals required under this Ordinance for the land subject to the amendment with proffers. 
(iii)  The Zoning Administrator, in an effort to enforce the conditions approved by the City Council, may: 
a.  Bring necessary legal action to ensure compliance, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate legal relief; or 
b.  Order in writing the remedy for any noncompliance of conditions. 
(8)  Zoning Text Amendment Review Standards Amending the text of this Ordinance is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny the proposed text amendment, the City Council's consideration may include, but not be limited to, the following factors: 
(a)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan and any other applicable and adopted long range planning documents; 
(b)  Whether the proposed amendment is in conflict with any provision of this Ordinance and any other regulations contained in the City Code or other applicable regulations; 
(c)  Whether and the extent to which there are changed conditions that require an amendment; 
(d)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment addresses a demonstrated community need; 
(e)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in a logical and orderly development pattern; and 
(f)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment, including but not limited to water, air, noise, storm water management, wildlife, vegetation, floodplains, wetlands, and the natural functioning of the environment. 
(9)  Effect of Proffers Accepted as Part of Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)   
(a)  Proffers accepted by the City Council as part of an approved amendment to the zoning map shall continue in effect until a subsequent amendment of the zoning map modifies the zoning district of the land or the content of previously approved proffers. 
(b)  In cases where proffers are accepted as part of an amendment to the zoning map, the zoning map shall include a notation reflecting the specific proffers that were accepted by the City Council and apply to the land. The accepted proffers shall be indexed and recorded in the office of the Planning Director. 
 
(c)  Any subsequent applications for permits or development approvals on land subject to accepted proffers shall only be approved if they are in substantial conformity with the accepted proffers. For the purposes of this section, "substantial conformity" shall mean the degree of conformity that leaves a reasonable margin for adjustment due to final engineering data, but conforms with the general nature of the zoning district, the uses approved, and the specific terms and conditions of the proffer(s). 
(10)  Recording Requirement for Historic Districts or Historic Properties   
(a)  Following the adoption by ordinance of an historic district, a copy of the ordinance creating the district and a boundary description of such district shall be filed by the Planning Director with the Clerk of Circuit Court for the City of Portsmouth. 
(b)  Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance creating an historic district, the owners and occupants of each building, structure, site, or object located within the designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the HPC which notice shall notify said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated. 
(c)  Following the adoption by ordinance of an historic district, the HPC shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the establishment of the new historic district. 
(B)  Use Permit   
(1)  Purpose and Intent A use requiring a use permit is a use that may be appropriate in a zoning district, but because of its nature, extent, and external effects, requires special consideration of its location, design, and methods of operation before it can be deemed appropriate in the district and compatible with its surroundings. The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and standards for review and approval of use permits that provide for such special consideration. 
(2)  Applicability   
(a)  A use permit is required for development of any use designated in Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table, as a use requiring a use permit in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Any legally established use which existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendments, shall not be considered a nonconforming use where a use permit is now required for establishment of such use. The use shall be allowed to continue operation, as well as reconstruct or structurally alter the building or structure without the necessity of obtaining a use permit. However, approval of a use permit shall be required, in accordance with this Section, when either of the conditions below are present, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator. 
(i)  There is a twenty (20) percent or greater net increase in the square footage of the use or structure proposed for expansion or enlargement; or 
(ii)  The expansion or enlargement will substantially alter the site design and layout as it relates to circulation, parking or other site characteristics so as to adversely affect surrounding properties. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on an application for a use permit is as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Public Hearing, Review, and Recommendation by the Planning Commission   
(i)  Following staff review and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public at the hearing, and by a majority vote of a quorum present prepare a written recommendation for one of the following actions, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(B)(4), Use Permit Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(iii)  Following its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall forward the recommendation to the City Council for review. 
(c)  Public Hearing, Review, and Action by the City Council   
(i)  Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the hearing, the City Council shall consider the application, the relevant support materials, the staff report, the Planning Commission's recommendation, and any comments given by the public, and by a majority vote of a quorum present, take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3 (B) (4), Use Permit Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(4)  Use Permit Standards An application for a Use Permit shall be approved only upon a finding the applicant demonstrates all of the following standards are met: 
(a)  The proposed use complies with the applicable standards of this Ordinance; 
(b)  The proposed use is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(c)  The proposed use is compatible with the character of surrounding lands and the uses permitted in the zoning district(s) of surrounding lands; 
(d)  The proposed use is configured to minimize adverse effects, including the visual impacts of the proposed use on adjacent lands; 
(e)  The proposed use avoids significant deterioration of water and air resources, and other natural resources; 
(f)  The proposed use maintains safe and adequate egress and ingress onto the site, and safe road conditions around the site; 
(g)  The proposed use allows for the protection of property values and the ability of neighboring lands to develop the uses permitted in the zoning districts; and 
(h)  The use complies with all other city, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
(5)  Conditions of Approval In authorizing a use permit, the City Council may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed use permit as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the general intent and purposes of this Ordinance and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed use approved. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(6)  Effect of Decision   
(a)  A use permit authorizes only the particular use(s) and associated development that is approved. A use permit, including any approved plans and conditions, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership unless specifically conditioned as part of the approval. 
(b)  No business license shall be issued unless the use meets all conditions of approval. 
(7)  Expiration   
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in the use permit, an application for a building permit or business license (whichever is appropriate) shall be applied for and approved within two years of the date of the approval of the use permit; otherwise, the use permit shall become null and void, and automatically expire. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the use permit by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the Planning Commission may grant one extension not to exceed one year. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Planning Commission has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the use permit null and void, and the development approval shall automatically expire. 
(c)  In addition, a use permit upon which the approved use is developed in accordance with the permit, automatically expires and is immediately null and void when there is a change in use, or when the use approved in the use permit is inactive for a period greater than two years. 
(8)  Revocation of Use Permits A use permit may be revoked or modified by the City Council after noticing a public hearing in the same manner as a zoning map amendment pursuant to Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, 1 and conducting a public hearing in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. The permit shall be revoked only if there is a finding: 
(a)  The use permit was obtained or extended by fraud or deception; 
(b)  The applicant has failed to comply with one or more of the conditions of approval; 
(c)  There is a change in conditions affecting the public health, safety, and welfare, since adoption of the use permit; or 
(d)  There are repeated violations of this Ordinance by the holder of the use permit, related to the development approved by the use permit. 
In addition, and in the discretion of the Chief of Police, if there is a significant risk to public safety or peace and good order on land subject to a use permit that creates the risk of blight, then proceedings to revoke a use permit may be initiated by the Planning Director by sending a letter to the permittee to correct the situation that creates the risk of blight. If within six months of the date the letter is sent out the Planning Director determines the situation is continuing, the Planning Director may initiate proceedings to revoke the use permit. However, if at any time during the course of this process, the Chief of Police determines there is a significant risk to public safety or peace and good order as to create a risk of blight that must be corrected immediately, the Planning Director may initiate proceedings to revoke the use permit immediately, without waiting six months for the permittee to correct the problem. 
(9)  Amendments A use permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(C)  Type I Development Plan   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of a type I development plan is to allow for the review of development proposed for a site prior to construction, to ensure its layout and general configuration complies with all applicable standards and requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable city regulations. The purpose of this section is to establish the procedures and standards for the review of a type I development plan. 
 
(2)  Applicability A type I development plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section prior to issuance of a building permit, unless exempted in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(C)(3), Exemptions. 
(3)  Exemptions The following development shall be exempted from the requirements of this section: 
(a)  Single-family or two-family detached dwellings, unless such review is required by the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act and any regulations or ordinances adopted under that authority; 
(b)  A proposed nonresidential development in a mixed-use or activity center base zoning district of less than 2,500 square feet in area; and 
(c)  Internal construction that does not increase gross floor area or building height, increase the density or intensity of use, and increase off-street parking requirements. 
(4)  Initiation An application for a type I development plan may be initiated by any person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2 (A), Authority to File Applications. 
(5)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures   
(i)  Except as modified in this subsection, the procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications for type I development plan are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(ii)  The application for a type I development plan shall be reviewed within 60 days from the date the application is determined complete. The application review time is extended to 90 days or as authorized by Section 15.2-2222.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, if a portion of the application is required to be reviewed and approved by a state department or agency. In all instances, review of the application shall occur within 45 days after receiving notification from all state agencies required to review and approve the plan that it is approved by the respective state agencies. 2 
(b)  Review and Action by the Planning Director Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(L), Review by Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(C)(6), Type I Development Plan Standards: 
(i)  Approval of the application; or 
(ii)  Approval of the application, with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
(iii)  Denial of the application. 
(6)  Type I Development Plan Standards An application for a type I development plan shall be approved upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
(a)  The development complies with the applicable district and use-specific standards; 
(b)  The development complies with all other applicable standards of this Ordinance; 
(c)  The development complies with all requirements or conditions of any applicable permit or development approvals (e.g., zoning map amendments with proffers, variance permits, use permits, etc.); 
(d)  The development is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
(e)  The development complies with all other applicable city regulations. 
(7)  Conditions of Approval In authorizing a type I development plan, the Planning Director may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed type I development plan as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the general intent and purposes of this Ordinance and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed type I development plan. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(8)  Expiration   
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in the type I development plan approval, an application for a building permit or business license (whichever is appropriate) shall be applied for and approved within five years of the date of the approval of the type I development plan; otherwise, the type I development plan shall become null and void, and automatically expire. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the type I development plan by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the Planning Director may grant one extension not to exceed six months. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Planning Director has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the type I development plan null and void, and the development approval shall automatically expire. 
(9)  Amendments A type I development plan may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(10)  Appeals An applicant may appeal a decision of the Planning Director on an application for a type I development plan to the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 15.2-2259 of Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(D)  Special Exception   
(1)  Purpose and Intent A use requiring a special exception is a use that may be appropriate in a zoning district, but because of its nature, extent, and external effects, requires special consideration of its location, design, and methods of operation before it can be deemed appropriate in the district and compatible with its surroundings. Special exceptions may also permit variations from other standards in this Ordinance expressly identified in this subsection 40.1-2.3(D), but only to the extent of the authorization. The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) authority to consider special exceptions is expressly granted by and subject to the parameters and criteria set by City Council through adoption, and amendment from time to time, of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Applicability   
(a)  A special exception is required for any use designated in Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table, as a use requiring a special exception in accordance with this section; 
(b)  A special exception may also be applied for where otherwise expressly authorized by this subsection 40.1-2.3(D), as adopted and amended from time to time by City Council; 
(c)  The BZA shall not take any action that is construed as rezoning property, nor make a decision that is based solely on the general purpose and intent of the Ordinance as stated in Section 40.1-1.3. 
(d)  Any legally established use which existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendments, shall not be considered a nonconforming use where a special exception is now required for establishment of such use. Except as provided below, the use shall be allowed to continue in operation, and the building or structure housing the use may be reconstructed or structurally altered, without the necessity of obtaining a special exception. However, approval of a special exception shall be required, in accordance with this section, when either of the conditions below are present, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator: 
(i)  There is a fifteen (15) percent or greater net increase in the square footage of the use or structure proposed for expansion or enlargement; or 
(ii)  The expansion or enlargement will substantially alter the site design and layout as it relates to circulation, parking or other site characteristics so as to adversely affect surrounding properties, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures   
(i)  The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on an application for a special exception are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(ii)  The zoning administrator shall also transmit a copy of the application to the Planning Commission as required by Va. Code Section 15.2-2310. The Planning Commission may send a recommendation to the BZA or appear as a party at the hearing. 
(b)  Public Hearing, Review, and Decision by the BZA   
(i)  Following staff review and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the BZA shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the hearing, the BZA shall consider the application, the relevant support materials, the staff report, comments of the Planning Commission, if any, and any comments given by the public, and by a majority vote of a quorum present, take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(D)(4), Special Exception Standards and, if applicable, the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(D)(5), Use Specific Special Exception Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval) and Subsection 40.1-2.3(D)(6)); or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(4)  General Special Exception Standards An application for a Special exception shall be approved only upon a finding the applicant demonstrates all of the following standards are met: 
(a)  The proposed use complies with the applicable standards of the Ordinance; 
(b)  The proposed development is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(c)  The proposed use is compatible with the character of surrounding lands and the uses permitted in the zoning district(s) of surrounding lands; 
(d)  The proposed use is configured to minimize adverse effects, including the visual impacts of the proposed use on adjacent lands; 
(e)  The proposed use will directly or indirectly enhance the economic base of the community; 
(f)  The proposed use avoids significant deterioration of water and air resources, and other natural resources; 
(g)  The proposed use maintains safe and adequate egress and ingress onto the site, and safe road conditions around the site; 
(h)  The proposed use allows for the protection of property values and the ability of neighboring lands to develop the uses permitted in the zoning districts; and 
(i)  The use complies with all other city, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
(5)  Use Specific Special Exception Standards   
(a)  The BZA may grant a special exception for a modification to the number, form, or nature of the parking requirements contained in Section 40.1-5.1 (Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Circulation) of this Ordinance, provided: 
(i)  The applicant shall demonstrate that safe and convenient pedestrian access is provided from the designated use to an off-site parking facility or that transportation is available from an off-site parking facility to the premises; 
(ii)  The applicant shall demonstrate that off-site parking spaces to either supplement the on-site parking or meet the minimum parking requirement, or a combination of both, are available on a long-term basis of not less than twenty (20) years; 
(iii)  A parking modification which was granted based on an off-site parking plan shall be void in the event that said off-site parking plan is terminated in whole or in part; 
(iv)  The applicant shall provide an adequate amount of parking to accommodate the anticipated demand for parking generated by the specified use; 
(v)  The authorization of parking modifications shall be limited to the specified use or uses for which the special exception is requested. Any enlargement of a building or change in use or uses shall be subject to the parking requirement as specified in this Ordinance or as otherwise approved for increase or reduction as provided in this Ordinance; and 
(vi)  The applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that any off-site or on-street parking requested would not have a negative impact on the surrounding neighborhood or to any existing or proposed parking program or parking district impacted by the request. 
(b)  Reserved   
(6)  Conditions of Approval In authorizing a special exception, the BZA may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed special exception as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the general intent and purposes of this Ordinance and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed use. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(7)  Effect of Decision   
(a)  A special exception authorizes only the particular use(s) and associated development that is approved. A special exception, including any approved plans and conditions, shall not be affected by a change in ownership unless specifically conditioned as part of the approval. 
(b)  No Zoning Compliance Permit shall be issued unless the use meets all conditions of approval. 
(c)  No application for substantially the same special exception request shall be considered for a period of one year from the date of the decision by the BZA. 
(8)  Expiration   
(a)  Special exceptions run with the land. Unless otherwise specified in the special exception or by the Code of Virginia (See Va. Code Section 15.2-2209.1), an application for a building permit, business license or land disturbing permit (whichever is appropriate) shall be applied for and approved within two years of the date of the approval of the special exception; otherwise, the special exception shall become null and void, and automatically expire. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the special exception by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the BZA may grant one extension not to exceed one year. The approval shall be deemed extended until the BZA has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the special exception null and void, and the development approval shall automatically expire. 
(c)  After the approved use has been developed in accordance with a special exception permit, the special exception automatically expires and is immediately null and void when there is a change in use, or when the use approved in the special exception is inactive for a period greater than two years. 
(9)  Revocation of Special Exceptions A special exception may be revoked or modified by the BZA after noticing a public hearing in the same manner as the original special exception pursuant to Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, and conducting a public hearing in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. The permit shall be revoked only upon a finding by the BZA that: 
(a)  The special exception was obtained or extended by fraud or deception; 
(b)  The applicant has failed to comply with one or more of the conditions of approval; 
(c)  There is a change in conditions affecting the public health, safety, and welfare, since adoption of the special exception; or 
(d)  There are repeated violations of this Ordinance or other local, state and/or federal law(s) related to the development approved by the special exception. 
(10)  Interpretation and Amendments.   
(a)  Any conditions to a special exception shall be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator and any appeals of the interpretation shall be considered by the BZA under the procedures for an appeal set forth in Section 40.1-2.3(K) (Appeal) of this Ordinance. 
(b)  A special exception may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(E)  Temporary Use Permit   
 
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for the review of temporary uses in accordance with Section 40.1-4.5, Temporary Use Standards. 
(2)  Applicability The provisions of this section shall apply to all proposed temporary uses as set forth in Section 40.1-4.5, Temporary Use Standards. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications for temporary use permits are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Review and Action by Planning Director Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(L), Review by City Staff, and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(E)(4), Temporary Use Permit Standards: 
(i)  Approval of the application as submitted; 
(ii)  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
(iii)  Denial of the application. 
(4)  Temporary Use Permit Standards An application for a temporary use permit shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates the proposed temporary use complies with the relevant standards in Section 40.1-4.5, Temporary Use Standards. 
(5)  Expiration A temporary use permit shall be effective beginning on the date specified in the permit approval, and shall remain effective for the period indicated on the permit. 
(6)  Amendment A temporary use permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(7)  Appeal An appeal from the Planning Director's decision on a temporary use permit application shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
(F)  Zoning Compliance Permit   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for the review of proposed development to ensure its compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Applicability The following development shall receive Zoning Compliance Permit approval prior to submission of an application for a Building Permit or Business License, whichever is appropriate: 
(a)  A change in use; 
(b)  Signs subject to the standards in Section 40.1-5.11, Signage; 
(c)  Development in a historic district that requires a COA; and 
(d)  The construction or expansion of any new building or structure that requires a building permit but that is not subject to review in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(C), Type I Development Plan. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications for a zoning compliance permit are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Lots in the Downtown D2 District Zoning compliance permit applications in the Downtown (D2) district shall be reviewed by the Planning Director in accordance with the standards in Appendix B of this Ordinance. 
 
(c)  Review and Action by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator, or Planning Director, as appropriate, shall review the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(L), Review by City Staff, and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(F)(4), Zoning Compliance Permit Standards: 
(i)  Approval of the application as submitted; 
(ii)  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
(iii)  Denial of the application. 
(4)  Zoning Compliance Permit Standards An application for a zoning compliance permit shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates the proposed development complies with all relevant standards of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Effect of Decision A building permit or business license, whichever is appropriate, shall not be issued until the development subject to this section receives a zoning compliance permit and complies with all its conditions of approval. 
(6)  Appeal An appeal from the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director's (as appropriate), decision on a zoning compliance permit application shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
 
(G)  Variance Permit   
(1)  Purpose   
(a)  The purpose of a variance permit is to allow certain deviations from the standards of this Ordinance (such as size of area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size, area, bulk, or location of a building or structure), when the land owner demonstrates that, owing to special circumstances or conditions beyond the land owner's control (such as exceptional topographical conditions, narrowness, shallowness, or the shape of a specific parcel of land), the literal application of the standards of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the land owner and the need for the variance is not shared generally by other lands, and the deviation is not contrary to the public interest or goals and purposes of this Ordinance. 
(b)  A variance shall not include a change in use, which shall be accomplished through an amendment to the official zoning map (Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment). 
(2)  Authority The BZA is authorized to review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a variance permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on an application for a variance permit are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Public Hearing, Review, and Decision by the BZA   
(i)  Following staff review of the application and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the BZA shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  At the hearing, the BZA shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public, and after close of the hearing, by a majority vote of a quorum present, take one of the following actions, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(G)(4), Variance Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval.); or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(4)  Variance Standards   
(a)  Findings An application for a variance permit shall be approved upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
(i)  The land for which the variance is requested is acquired in good faith; 
(ii)  The land is subject to: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size, or shape; 
b.  Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition; or 
(iii)  The situation is not self-created; 
(iv)  Because of one or several conditions identified in Section 40.1-2.3(G)(4), Variance Standards, the strict application of this Ordinance would produce undue hardship, and effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the land; 
(v)  The hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; 
(vi)  The authorization of the variance alleviates this clearly demonstrated hardship (as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the applicant); 
(vii)  The authorization of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties; 
(viii)  The character of the zoning district in which the land is located will not be changed by the granting of the variance; 
(ix)  The condition or situation of the land is not of so general or recurring a nature as to warrant the formulation of a regulation or standard to address the condition or situation; 
(x)  Any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city on the lands for which the variance is requested have been paid; and 
(xi)  The variance authorized by the BZA is the least possible deviation from the standards necessary to afford relief. 
(b)  Prohibitions   
(i)  No provision of this Ordinance shall be construed as granting the BZA the power to rezone property. 
(ii)  No variance shall be granted to allow a use or development condition not permitted by right or proffer. 
(iii)  No variance shall be granted to any standard or requirement in any other part of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(iv)  No variance shall be granted that allows a principal or accessory building to exceed any applicable maximum size standards set out in Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts or Article 40.1-4: Use Standards. 
(v)  No variance shall be granted to any standard or requirement in Section 40.1-5.1, Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Circulation. 
(5)  Conditions of Approval   
(a)  In authorizing a variance, the BZA may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed structure granted the variance as it may deem necessary in the public interest to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed variance. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(b)  The BZA may require a guarantee or bond to insure compliance with the conditions imposed. 
(6)  Effect of Decision   
(a)  Issuance of a variance permit shall authorize only the particular variance that is approved. A variance permit, including any conditions, shall run with the land and not be affected by a change in ownership. 
 
(b)  Development authorized by the variance permit shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits required by this Ordinance or any other applicable ordinances and regulations of the city. A variance permit, in itself, shall not ensure that the development approved through a variance permit shall receive subsequent approval for any other necessary applications for permit or development approval. 
(7)  Expiration   
(a)  The BZA may prescribe, as part of a variance permit, a time within which development activity shall begin, be completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete such development within the time specified shall render the variance permit void, and the permit shall automatically expire. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the variance permit by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the BZA may grant one extension not to exceed one year. The approval shall be deemed extended until the BZA has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the variance permit void, and the permit shall automatically expire. 
(8)  Amendment A variance permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(9)  Appeal Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the BZA, or any aggrieved taxpayer or any officer, department, commission, or the city, within 30 days of the date of the decision, may appeal the decision of the BZA on the variance permit to the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(H)  Administrative Adjustment   
(1)  Purpose and Intent This purpose and intent of this section is to provide an administrative mechanism for allowing minor variations, or adjustments, to the building setback standards of this Ordinance based on specific standards, with the intent of providing relief where application of a standard creates practical difficulties in allowing development that otherwise advances the purposes served by this Ordinance and is compatible with surrounding lands. 
(2)  Authority The Planning Director is authorized to review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny administrative adjustments to the building setback standards of this Ordinance in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
(3)  Applicability Administrative adjustments may be requested and granted for reductions in a building setback by up to 15 percent. 
(4)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures 
(i)  Except as modified below in subsection ii, the procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications for administrative adjustments are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(ii)  Prior to consideration of an Administrative Adjustment, the Planning Director shall provide public notification in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification. 
(b)  Review and Action by the Planning Director Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(L), Review by City Staff, and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(H)(5), Administrative Adjustment Standards: 
(i)  Approval of the application as submitted; or 
(ii)  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
(iii)  Denial of the application. 
(5)  Administrative Adjustment Standards An application for an administrative adjustment shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates all of the following standards are met: 
(a)  The requested administrative adjustment shall not exceed 15 percent of a building setback standard; 
(b)  The requested administrative adjustment is consistent with the character of development in the surrounding area, and will not result in incompatible uses; 
(c)  Any adverse impacts from the requested administrative adjustment will be mitigated to the maximum extent practicable; 
(d)  The requested administrative adjustment is either: 
(i)  Required to compensate for some unusual aspect of the site or the proposed development that is not shared by landowners in general; 
(ii)  Supporting an objective or goal from the purpose and intent statements of the zoning district where located; or 
(iii)  Proposed to save healthy existing trees; and 
(e)  The requested administrative adjustment will not substantially interfere with the convenient and enjoyable use of adjacent lands, and will not pose a danger to the public health or safety. 
(6)  Conditions of Approval In authorizing an administrative adjustment, the Planning Director may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed administrative adjustment as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the general intent and purposes of this Ordinance and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed administrative adjustment. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(7)  Subsequent Development Development authorized by the administrative adjustment shall not be carried out until the applicant secures all other permits or development approvals required by this Ordinance or any other applicable provisions of the city. An administrative adjustment, in itself, shall not ensure that the development approved as an administrative adjustment shall receive subsequent approval for any other necessary applications for permit or development approval. 
(8)  Effect Issuance of an administrative adjustment shall authorize only the particular administrative adjustment that is approved in accordance with this section. The administrative adjustment shall run with the land and not be affected by a change in ownership. 
(9)  Expiration (a) Unless otherwise specified in the administrative adjustment approval, an application for a building permit shall be applied for and approved within one year of the date of the approval of the administrative adjustment; otherwise, the administrative adjustment shall become null and void, and automatically expire. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the administrative adjustment by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the Planning Director may grant one extension not to exceed six months. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Planning Director has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the administrative adjustment null and void, and the development approval shall automatically expire. 
(10)  Amendment An administrative adjustment may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(11)  Appeal An appeal from the Planning Director's decision on an administrative adjustment application shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
(I)  Certificate of Appropriateness (COA)   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose and intent of this section is to establish procedures and standards for the review of certificates of appropriateness (COAs) for development in the city's historic districts. 
(2)  Authority (a) The Planning Director shall review and decide administrative COA applications, which include certain minor actions as established in the approval matrix in the standards and guideline documents for each historic district, as adopted by City Council. 
(b)  The Downtown Design Commission shall review and decide applications for COAs within the Downtown D1 district. 
(c)  The HPC shall review and decide all other COA applications. 
(3)  Applicability   
 
(a)  In General Unless exempted in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(I)(4) Exemptions, a COA is required prior to any material change in the appearance of a building, structure, or site located in an historic district (See Section 40.1-3.6(F), Historic Districts). For purposes of this section, a "material change in appearance" shall include construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, demolition, or relocation that affects the appearance of the building, structure, or site, or that of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, or site. 
(b)  Action on Publicly Owned Historic Structures   
(i)  The Planning Director or other appropriate city official shall file an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed construction, alteration, renovation, or razing of any historic city-owned building or structure, and shall adhere to all other requirements of this Ordinance. 
(ii)  For buildings and structures owned by other governmental entities or public utilities companies, the City Manager shall request that such owners submit an application for a COA and adhere to all requirements of this section. 
(4)  Exemptions The following development shall be exempted from the requirements of this section: 
(a)  Repairs, maintenance, painting, or alteration of any feature the Building Official certifies is required due to an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
(b)  The normal repair and maintenance of any exterior architectural feature; 
(c)  Ordinary yard maintenance in the historic districts to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form that does not involve a material change in design, material, color or outer appearance; 
(d)  Repainting resulting in the same color, except that the original painting of masonry surfaces is not exempted from review. 
(e)  Replacing broken windowpanes, missing roof shingles, or missing features with matching in-kind materials; 
(f)  Addition or deletion of television or radio antennas, skylights, or solar collectors in locations not visible from a public street; 
(g)  Planting of grass, trees and shrubs, but not landscape treatment that substantially alters the contour of a site or involves landscaping or construction of parking areas, fences, walls, walkways, pools, fountains, and the like which materially affect the appearance of a site and that is visible from a public street; 
(h)  Any changes to a structure that is not visible from a public street. 
(5)  Order of Approvals A COA shall be approved prior to an applicant receiving approvals for any other permits or development approvals required by this Ordinance. 
(6)  Procedure for Administrative Review of Certificates of Appropriateness   
(a)  Basic Procedures Except as modified in this section, the procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications are as established in Section 40.1-2.2., Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Review and Action by the Planning Director (i) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the application and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(I)(8), Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; or 
b.  Denial of the application. 
(ii)  The Planning Director shall be guided in decisions by the standards and guidelines established for the HPC and shall have the authority to request modifications of the applicant of a specific proposal in order that such proposal may comply with said standards and guidelines. 
(iii)  In any case where the Planning Director is uncertain of authority to act on a particular application, or in any case where the Planning Director and the applicant cannot agree on changes in the proposal, or if the Planning Director otherwise fails to issue such COA within 30 days, the application shall be referred to the HPC for action in accordance with to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(9), HPC Review of Certificates of Appropriateness. A written report/agenda shall accompany any application forwarded to the HPC. 
(iv)  The Planning Director shall report, in writing, to the HPC at each regular meeting on all COAs issued through this administrative review process. 
(v)  Copies of a COA shall be clearly posted in a location visible to the public during the construction or repair process. 
(7)  Procedure for Review by the Downtown Design Committee The DDC shall review and decide applications for a COA in accordance with the standards in this subsection and Appendix A of this Ordinance. 
(8)  Procedure for HPC Review of Certificates of Appropriateness   
(a)  Applicability All development that requires a COA that is not subject to administrative review, or review by the DDC, shall be subject to HPC review in accordance with this subsection. 
(b)  Basic Procedures Except as modified in this section, the procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
 
(c)  Public Hearing, Review, and Decision by the HPC Following staff review and public notification conducted in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the HPC shall conduct at least one standard public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(i)  After close of the hearing, the HPC shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public; and 
(ii)  The HPC, by a majority vote of a quorum present, shall adopt a written recommendation for one of the following actions, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(I)(9), Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards, or Section 40.1-2.3(I)(9), Certificate of Appropriateness for Relocation, or Section 40.1-2.3(I)(10), Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition (as applicable): 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(iii)  Unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time in writing, the failure of the HPC to take action on a COA application within 60 days from the date of application shall be deemed to constitute approval of the plans and specifications as submitted, and the Building Official shall issue any required permit, subject to the separate requirements for such permit. 
(9)  Certificate of Appropriateness Standards   
(a)  The standards of this section shall apply to all COA applications except for a COA application for relocation that is subject to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(9), Certificate of Appropriateness for Relocation, or an application for demolition that is subject to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(10), Certificates of Appropriateness for Demolition. 
(b)  The Planning Director, HPC, or DDC (as appropriate), shall approve the application and issue a COA upon a finding the proposed material change(s) in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, cultural, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic structure or the historic district in accordance with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, including the following: 
(i)  The property is used as it was historically or is given a new use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships. 
(ii)  The historic character of the property is retained and preserved. 
(iii)  The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize the property is avoided. 
(iv)  Each property is recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other historic properties, are not undertaken. 
(v)  Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right are retained and preserved. 
(vi)  Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property are preserved. 
(vii)  Deteriorated historic features are repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature matches the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features is substantiated by documentary and physical evidence. 
(viii)  Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, are undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials are not used. 
(ix)  Archeological resources are protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures are undertaken. 
(x)  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction does not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that characterize the property. The new work is differentiated from the old and is compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale and proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its environment. 
(xi)  New additions and adjacent or related new construction is undertaken in a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment is unimpaired. 
(c)  It is not the intent of the city or this Ordinance to discourage contemporary architectural expression, or to require the emulation of existing structures of historic or architectural interest in specific detail. Harmony or incompatibility shall be evaluated in terms of the appropriateness of the architectural features, materials, scale, size, height, and placement of a new structure in relationship to existing structures and to the setting. 
(d)  In making this determination, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall further consider compatibility with the standards and guidelines as adopted by City Council, with accompanying additions and amendments, in addition to any other pertinent factors. 
(10)  Certificate of Appropriateness for Relocation   
(a)  Procedure All COA applications for relocation shall be reviewed by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), pursuant to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(7), Procedure for HPC Review of Certificates of Appropriateness. 
(b)  Relocation Criteria A decision by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), approving, approving with conditions, or denying a COA for the relocation of an historic structure, building, site, or object shall be based on: 
(i)  The historic, scenic, cultural, aesthetic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object; 
(ii)  The importance of the historic structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district; 
(iii)  Whether there are definite plans for the property to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
(iv)  Whether the historic structure, building, site, or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
(v)  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the scenic, cultural, aesthetic, historical, and architectural character of the building, structure, site, or object. 
(11)  Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition   
(a)  Procedure All COA applications for demolition shall be reviewed by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), pursuant to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(7), Procedure for HPC Review of Certificates of Appropriateness. 
(b)  Findings and Decision   
(i)  If preservation of a historic structure is found by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), to be physically or economically unfeasible according Section 40.1-2.3(I)(10)(c), Demolition Criteria, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall issue the COA. 
(ii)  If preservation is found to be both physically and economically feasible, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall take or promote the taking of whatever public or private action that seems likely to lead to such preservation, either on the site on which the historic structure is located or on another site to which it might appropriately be moved. 
(iii)  Where preservation is feasible but the applicant still seeks demolition, the following provisions of Section 40.1-2.3(I)(10)(d), Right to Demolish, from the Code of Virginia may be undertaken while alternatives for preservation are sought. 
(c)  Demolition Criteria A decision by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), approving or denying a COA for the demolition of an historic structures, buildings, site, or objects shall be based on: 
(i)  The historic, scenic, cultural, aesthetic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object; 
(ii)  The importance of the historic structure, building, site, or object to the ambiance of a district; 
(iii)  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a structure, building, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
(iv)  Whether the historic structure, building, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city; 
(v)  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
(vi)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the historic structure, building, site, or object from collapse; and 
(vii)  Whether the historic structure, building, site, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(d)  Right to Demolish The owner of an historic property or the owner of a building, structure, site, or object in any historic district, shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or demolish such structure, building, site, or object provided, that: 
(i)  The land owner has applied to the HPC for such right. If the demolition request is denied by the HPC, the owner may appeal this decision in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeals; 
(ii)  The land owner has made a bona fide offer to sell the structure, building, site, or object, and the land pertaining therein for the time period established in Table 40.1-2.3(I), Time Schedule for Selling Property, and at a price reasonably related to its fair market value. Such offer must be made to the city or to any other person, government, or agency, which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore the structure, building, site, or object and the land pertaining thereto; 
(iii)  No bona fide contract, binding upon all parties thereto, shall have been executed for the sale of any such building, structure, site, or object and the land pertaining thereto, prior to the expiration of the applicable time period set forth in Table 40.1-2.3(I), Time Schedule for Selling Property. Any appeal which may be taken to the court from the decision of the City Council, whether instituted by the owner or by any other proper party, notwithstanding the provisions heretofore stated relating to a stay of the decision appealed from, shall not affect the right of the owner to make the bona fide offer to sell referred to above; 
(iv)  No offer to sell shall be made more than one year after a final decision by the City Council, but thereafter the owner may renew his request to the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), to approve the demolition of the historic landmark, building, or structure. 
TABLE 40.1-2.3(I): TIME SCHEDULE FOR SELLING PROPERTY 
Offer Price 	Time Period Property has been for Sale at Offer Price 
Less than $25,000 	3 months 
$25,000 to $40,000 	4 months 
$40,000 to $55,000 	5 months 
$55,000 to $75,000 	6 months 
$75,000 to $90,000 	7 months 
$90,000 or more 	12 months 
 
(12)  Demolition by Neglect   
(a)  Allowing a historic structure within a historic district to deteriorate due to neglect is a violation of this Ordinance. Deterioration due to neglect shall constitute demolition by neglect when: 
(i)  Deterioration of the exterior of a building occurs to the extent that it creates, or permits, a hazardous or unsafe condition; or 
(ii)  Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports, horizontal members, roofs, chimneys, exterior wall elements such as siding, wooden walls, brick, plaster, or mortar occurs to the extent that it adversely affects the character of the district or could reasonably lead to irreversible damage to the structure or lead to a hazardous condition. 
(b)  The HPC or DDC, as appropriate, shall monitor the condition of historic properties for demolition by neglect. In the event that the HPC or DDC receives a complaint or determines that a structure is being demolished by neglect, it shall notify the Planning Director, and describe the actions needed to address the violation. 
(13)  Undue Hardship   
(a)  The HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall have the power to reduce or suspend any of the requirements of this section, if the historic structure presents special circumstances whereby the strict compliance of this section will produce an undue hardship or if the spirit of the section has been met and deviation has been deemed to be in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  In granting a hardship the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall make the following findings of fact in writing: 
(i)  Strict compliance with the regulation provides the property owner no reasonable use of the property; 
(ii)  The hardship results from application of the regulation to the property; 
(iii)  The hardship is one that affects the property directly; 
(iv)  The hardship is not the result of the property owner's own actions—that is, special circumstances or conditions causing the hardship exist through no fault of the property owner; 
(v)  The hardship is peculiar to the property; 
(vi)  Financial considerations, unless they greatly decrease or destroy the property's value, do not constitute a legal hardship; and 
(vii)  That the condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this Ordinance. 
(14)  Conditions of Approval   
(a)  The HPC or DDC (as appropriate), may approve a COA with conditions where it deems the conditions necessary to meet the applicable standards and guidelines as well as the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(b)  If the application does not meet the city's adopted standards and guidelines or the applicant does not agree to the proposed conditions, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall deny the request. Under no circumstance shall the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), approve a set of conditions without the applicant's approval. 
(15)  Effect of Decision Where the exterior appearance of any historic structure is involved: 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for erection, alteration or improvement, unless a COA has first been issued; 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the project is constructed in compliance with the COA; 
(c)  Exterior alterations that do not require a building permit but which can change the exterior appearance of the building or structure such as replacement of doors and windows shall not be constructed or installed unless a COA has first been obtained; 
(d)  During construction or installation, the COA shall be posted on the property in a location where it is visible from the public right-of-way and a complete set of the approved plans shall be retained on the premises and shall be made available to designated staff; 
(e)  In cases of denial where the proposed change would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a COA by the HPC shall be binding upon the designated staff charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(16)  Transfer A COA shall be transferable to subsequent owners of the property for which the certificate is issued. 
(17)  Expiration   
(a)  An approved COA shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance. All work approved and initiated under a COA shall be completed within one year of issuance. 
(b)  Without an approved extension, after one year from issuance of a COA, an owner shall obtain a new certificate in order to commence any previously approved work or to complete any work. Once begun, no project or work shall be left partially- completed. 
(c)  On written request from the applicant, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), may grant a single extension of its approval for a period of up to one additional year if, based upon submissions from the applicant, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), finds that conditions on the site and in the area of the proposed project are essentially the same as when approval was originally granted. 
(d)  Any COA shall also expire and become null and void if such authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year after being commenced. Any period or periods of time during which the right to use any such certificate or permit is stayed pursuant to this chapter shall be excluded from the computation of the 12 months. 
(18)  Amendment A COA may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(19)  Appeals   
(a)  General Appeals from any action or decision of the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), in granting or refusing to grant a COA a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article may be taken to the City Council for review, by setting forth in writing the alleged error of the action or decision of the HPC or DDC (as appropriate),, provided such petition is: 
(i)  Filed within 30 days after the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), final decision; and 
(ii)  Further provided that the basis for such appeal shall be limited to an alleged error by the HPC in finding that the proposed erection, alteration, reconstruction, or restoration of a structure would not be architecturally compatible with the historic properties, buildings, or structures within the historic district. 
(b)  Procedure for Appeals of HPC or DDC Decisions   
(i)  An Appeal Review Committee (ARC) shall be created consisting of the Planning Director, the Building Official and a Deputy City Manager designated by the City Manager to determine whether there are legitimate grounds for such an appeal before placing the appeal on the City Council agenda. 
(ii)  Upon the filing of an appeal, the ARC shall review the request to determine if there are grounds for appeal based on Sections 40.1-2.3(I) (9), and (10). 
(iii)  If the ARC finds that there are no grounds for appeal, they shall notify the applicant in writing of their decision. An appeal of the ARC's decision may be taken by the applicant to the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth for review by filing a petition at law which sets forth the alleged error of the action or decision provided that such petition is filed within 30 days after the final decision is rendered by the ARC. 
(iv)  If the ARC finds that there are grounds for appeal, they shall forward the request to the City Clerk so the matter may be placed on the City Council agenda. When a matter is forwarded to the City Council, a written conclusion from the ARC shall accompany the appeal. 
(v)  City Council shall hear the appeal and either reverse or affirm the decision of the HPC based on an error in findings. 
(vi)  If City Council fails to reverse the HPC's findings and upholds the HPC decision, an appeal may be taken by the applicant to the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth for review by filing a petition at law which sets forth the alleged error of the action or decision provided that such petition is filed within 30 days after the final decision is rendered by the City Council. 
(c)  Procedure for Appeals of Planning Director Decisions An appeal from the Planning Director's decision on a COA application shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
(d)  Stay Filing of an appeal, whether an appeal of the HPC, DDC, ARC, or City Council's decision, shall stay the appealed decision pending outcome of the appeal except that such filing will not stay the decision if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a building or structure. 
(20)  Violations Failure to obtain a COA or performance of work that surpasses or is in conflict with an approved COA is a violation of this Ordinance, and is subject to the applicable remedies in Article 40-1.7: Enforcement. 
(J)  Interpretation   
 
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of this section is to outline a procedure for the interpretation of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Authority   
(a)  Interpretations of the text of this Ordinance and the official zoning map shall be made by either the Planning Director or the Zoning Administrator, in consultation with the City Attorney, in accordance with subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for making the following interpretations: 
(i)  The dimensional standards in Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts; 
(ii)  The use table and use classifications in Article 40.1-4: Use Standards; and 
(iii)  The official zoning map boundaries (Section 40.1-1.7(D), Interpretation of Official Zoning Map Boundaries), and 40.1-3: Zoning Districts. 
(c)  The Planning Director shall be responsible for interpretations of all other matters related to this Ordinance, including conditions of approval and for all permits and development approvals. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Initiation A written interpretation may be requested by the City Council, Planning Commission, BZA, HPC, any resident or landowner in the city, or any person having a contractual interest in land in the city. 
(b)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on a Request for Interpretation are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(c)  Review and Action by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator Within a reasonable period after the Request for Interpretation is determined complete, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall review the request and render an interpretation, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(J)(4), Standards for Interpretation. 
(4)  Standards for Interpretations   
(a)  Interpretation of Official Zoning Map When the request is for an Interpretation of zoning district boundaries on the official zoning map, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the standards in Section 40.1-1.7(D), Interpretation of Official Zoning Map Boundaries, and consider the request in light of the comprehensive plan, this Ordinance, the official zoning map, the City Code, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, and other relevant codes and statutes. 
(b)  Unspecified Uses When the request is for an interpretation of whether an unspecified use falls within a use classification, use category, or use type allowed in a zoning district, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the standards of Section 40.1-4.2, Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types, in making the interpretation. 
(c)  Other Interpretations, Including Proffers and Conditions of Approval For other written interpretations, the Planning Director shall evaluate the request in light of the comprehensive plan, this Ordinance, the official zoning map, the City Code, the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, other relevant codes and statutes, and any previously approved permits or development approvals (if applicable). 
(d)  All Interpretations When making written interpretations, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall consult with the City Attorney and other affected city officials before rendering the interpretation. 
 
(5)  Form and Notification of Interpretation The interpretation shall be in writing, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and sent to the applicant by mail within a reasonable period of time after the Request for Interpretation is made. 
(6)  Official Record The Planning Director shall maintain a record of written interpretations that shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Planning Director, upon reasonable request, during normal business hours. 
(7)  Appeal An appeal from a written interpretation shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeals. 
(K)  Appeal   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure and standards for any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation related to this Ordinance made by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director (except for the Planning Director's decisions on type I development plans, minor subdivision plats, and final subdivision plats), to appeal the decision or interpretation to the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA). 
(2)  Initiation An appeal on a decision or interpretation may be initiated by any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation related to this Ordinance made by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director (except for the Planning Director's decisions on type I development plans, minor subdivision plats, and final subdivision plats). The appeal shall be initiated by filing a written Notice of Appeal, with the Planning Director, along with the appropriate fee, within 30 days of the date of the decision or interpretation. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Contents of Appeal The written Notice of Appeal shall include a statement of the error or improper decision or interpretation, the date of that decision, the grounds for the appeal, and all related support materials. 
(b)  Forwarding the Record Upon receiving the written Notice of Appeal, the Planning Director shall transmit it and all papers, documents and other materials relating to the decision or interpretation that is being appealed, to the BZA. This material shall constitute the record on the appeal. 
(c)  Public Hearing, Review, and Decision by the BZA   
(i)  Following staff review and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the BZA shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal. 
(ii)  At the hearing on the appeal, the BZA shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public. The appellant or the appellant's agent shall state the grounds for the appeal and identify any materials or evidence from the record to support the appeal. The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall be given an opportunity to respond, as shall any other city administrative official or person(s) the BZA deems necessary and appropriate. 
(iii)  After the conclusion of the hearing, the BZA, by majority vote of a quorum present, shall either affirm, partly affirm, modify, reverse, or partly reverse the decision or interpretation, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3 (K) (4), Appeal Standards. The decision shall be made on the appeal within 60 days of the date of the filing of the written Notice of Appeal. 
(4)  Appeal Standards A decision or interpretation of the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director, whichever is appropriate, shall be presumed correct, and may not be reversed or modified unless there is evidence in the record that the decision is not correct, based on the relevant procedures and review standards of this Ordinance. The BZA shall consider the purpose and intent of any applicable provisions of this Ordinance and other relevant ordinances, laws, and regulations in making its decision. 
(5)  Stay An appeal shall stay all administrative proceedings by the city in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director certifies to the BZA that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the administrative proceedings shall not be stayed unless a restraining order is granted by the circuit court. 
(6)  Appeal Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the BZA, or any aggrieved taxpayer or any officer, department, commission, or the city, within 30 days of the date of the decision of the BZA, may appeal the decision of the BZA on the decision to the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 2, 23, 26), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 1), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-2.2 - Common Review Procedures 
The provisions of this section shall apply to all application requests under this Ordinance, unless otherwise stated in this section or in Section 40.1-2.3, Standards and Requirements for Applications for Permits and Development Approval. 
(A)  Authority to File Applications   
(1)  Applications for permits or development approvals for a specific parcel of land shall be submitted by: 
(a)  The owner of the land on which the development is proposed; or 
(b)  The contract purchaser of the land, with the owner's written consent; or 
(c)  A person authorized to submit the application on behalf of the owner or the contract purchaser, with the owner's consent, which consent must be evidenced by a power of attorney signed by such owner. 
(2)  If there are multiple owners, contract purchasers, or other persons authorized to submit the application, all such persons shall sign the application, or a power of attorney authorizing either the contract purchaser or other agent to sign the application. 
(B)  Application Contents The Planning Director is authorized to and shall establish, and amend as appropriate, the requirements for application contents and forms, which shall be located in the Procedures Manual. All applications shall include a document disclosing whether any member of the Planning Commission or City Council has any interest in the property that is subject to the application in accordance with Section 15.2-2287, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(C)  Fees The City Council shall establish application fees, and may amend and update those fees as determined necessary. Fees established by the City Council shall be included in the administrative manual. 
(D)  Submission Schedule The Planning Director is authorized and shall establish the submission and review schedule for review of applications under this Ordinance. The Planning Director may amend and update these requirements as determined necessary. The submission schedule established by the Planning Director shall be included in the administrative manual. 
(E)  Pre-Application Conference   
(1)  Purpose The purpose of a pre-application conference is to familiarize the applicant and the city staff with the applicable provisions of this Ordinance relevant to the proposed development, inform the applicant about the preparation of the application, and discuss the application and review process. 
(2)  Pre-Application Conference Mandatory Except for development applications initiated by city staff, the Planning Commission, HPC, or the City Council, pre-application conferences between the applicant and the city staff shall be mandatory before submission of the following types of applications: 
(a)  Zoning map amendments (rezonings), with or without proffers; 
(b)  Use permits; 
(c)  Variance permits; and 
(d)  Reserved 
(3)  Pre-Application Conference Optional A pre-application conference is optional before submission of any other application for permit or development approval. 
(4)  Sketch Plans Required Applicants seeking approval of a zoning map amendment with proffers (See Section 40.1-2.3(A)), a use permit (See Section 40.1-2.3(B) shall submit a sketch plan for review during the pre-application conference. 
(5)  Effect The pre-application conference is intended as a means of facilitating the application process. Discussions held in accordance with this section are not binding on the city. Processing times for review of development applications do not begin until a formal, complete application is submitted and determined to be complete. 
(F)  Application Submission Applications shall be submitted to the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate) in the form established by the Planning Director in Section 40.1-2.2(B), Application Contents, along with a fee established in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(C), Fees. Applications not meeting the requirements of Section 40.1-2.2(G), Determination of Application Completeness, shall be considered incomplete. 
(G)  Determination of Application Completeness   
(1)  Completeness Review Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate) shall determine if the application is complete. A complete application is one that: 
(a)  Contains all information and materials required for submittal of the particular type of application (See Section 40.1-2.2.(B), Application Contents); 
(b)  Is in the form required for submittal of the particular type of application; 
(c)  Includes information in sufficient detail to evaluate the application to determine whether it complies with the appropriate standards of this Ordinance; and 
(d)  Is accompanied by the fee established for the particular type of application. 
(2)  Application Incomplete   
(a)  Notwithstanding Section 40.1-2.2(G)(1) above, applications for development approvals or permits on land with unpaid real estate taxes shall be considered incomplete. 
(b)  If the application is determined incomplete, city staff shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies within ten business days of submittal, and the application shall not be processed. The applicant may correct the deficiencies and resubmit the application for completeness determination. 
(c)  If the applicant fails to resubmit an application within 30 business days after being first notified of deficiencies, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subsection, after an application is determined to be incomplete three times, the applicant may request in writing, and the city staff shall undertake processing and review of the application even though it is not considered a complete application. 
(3)  Application Complete If the application is determined to be complete, or the applicant has requested that the application be processed in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(G)(2)(d) above, the city shall refer the application to the appropriate staff, review agencies, and review bodies for review in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Ordinance. The time frame and cycle for review of the application shall be based on the date the application is determined to be complete or the date the city receives the written request to process it in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(G)(2)(d). 
(H)  Preparation of Staff Report   
(1)  If the application is subject to staff review and a subsequent hearing or consideration by an advisory or decision-making body (See Table 40.1-2.1(A), Summary Table of Development Review Structure), the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate) shall review the application, relevant support material, and any comments from other staff and review agencies, and prepare a written staff report. 
(2)  The staff report shall be addressed to the advisory or decision-making body (as appropriate), and shall state whether the application complies with all appropriate standards of this Ordinance. The staff report shall include a recommendation, and may identify ways in which areas of noncompliance might be eliminated, adverse effects of the development proposal might be mitigated, or consistency with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance may be improved. 
(3)  The staff report shall be transmitted to the applicant and made available to the advisory or decision-making body and to the public a reasonable period of time before the first scheduled review body meeting or public hearing on the application. 
(I)  Scheduling of Public Hearings A public hearing shall be conducted by the appropriate advisory or decision-making body in accordance with Table 40.1-2.2(I), Required Public Hearings. 
Table 40.1-2.2(I): REQUIRED PUBLIC HEARINGS 
X= Advisory or Decision-Making Body Required to Conduct Public Hearing 
Application Type 	See Section 	Advisory or Decision-Making Body [1] 
		City Council 	Planning Commission 	BZA 
Zoning Map or Text Amendment 	40.1-2.3(A) 	X 	X 	
Use Permit 	40.1-2.3(B) 	X 	X 	
Special Exception 	40.1-2.3(D) 			X 
Variance Permit 	40.1-2.3(G) 			X 
Appeal 	40.1-2.3(K) 			X 
NOTES: 
[1] An "X" in more than one column means that the application type requires more than one public hearing. Second readings are not considered as public hearings. 
 
(J)  Public Notification All applications requiring a public hearing shall comply with the requirements in the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice, and the other provisions of this section with regard to public notification. 
(1)  Type of Notice Provided Unless otherwise expressly provided in the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, or this Ordinance, notice shall be provided in accordance with Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice. 
Table 40.1-2.2(J): REQUIRED PUBLIC Notice 
X=Type of Notice Required 
Application Type 	Notice Required 
	Written (Mailed) [1] 	Published 
Zoning Map Amendment 	When an amendment affects 25 or fewer lots, written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land (including land immediately across the street or in other jurisdictions). 
When a proposed application affects more than 25 lots, or the amendment decreases allowable residential density, written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land that is 11,500 square feet in size or larger (including land immediately across the street and lots in other jurisdictions). 	Once a week for 2 successive weeks, with the second notice not less than 6 nor more than 21 days prior to first public hearing. 
Text Amendment 	None except when a proposed application affects more than 25 lots, or the amendment decreases allowable residential density, then written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land that is 11,500 square feet in size or larger (including land immediately across the street and lots in other jurisdictions). 	
Use Permit 	Written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land (including land immediately across the street or in other jurisdictions). 	Once a week for 2 successive weeks, with the second notice not less than 6 nor more than 21 days prior to first public hearing 
Variance 		
Special Exception 		
Appeal 		
Administrative Adjustment 	Written notice shall be mailed to owners, their agents, or the occupants of all abutting land (including land immediately across the street or in other jurisdictions) at least 21 days prior to consideration by the Planning Director. 	None required 
NOTES: 
[1] Written (mailed) notice shall be provided at least five days prior to the first public hearing (or consideration by the Planning Director in the case of Administrative Adjustments). 
 
(2)  Written Notice   
(a)  The content and form of the written notice shall be consistent with the requirements of Sections 15.2-2204 and 15.2-2286 of Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, (if applicable). 
(b)  If any portion of the land subject to an application requiring written notice is within a planned unit development, then written notice shall be provided to all applicable property owners' associations having members who own land within 2,000 feet of the land subject to the application. 
(c)  In the case of a condominium or a cooperative, the written notice may be mailed to the unit owners' association or proprietary lessees' association, respectively, in lieu of providing written notice to each individual unit owner. 
(d)  In cases where an amendment to the official zoning map or use permit would result in an increase in the height or bulk of an existing or previously-approved structure by more than 50 percent, the Chief Administrative Officer of any adjacent jurisdiction within one-half (½) mile of the land subject to an application shall receive written notice. 
(e)  In cases where an amendment to the official zoning map or use permit is proposed on land within 3,000 feet of a military base, military installation, military airport (excluding armories operated by the Virginia National Guard), including any leased facility, or any land or interest in land owned by the Commonwealth and administered by the Adjutant General of Virginia or the Virginia Department of Military Affairs, or licensed public-use airport, written notice shall be provided at least 30 days in advance of a public hearing to the commander of the military installation or owner of the public-use airport. The notice shall indicate the opportunity to submit comments or recommendations. 
(f)  In cases where written notice required in accordance with Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice, is provided by a public agency or city staff member via first class mail, an affidavit attesting that notice has been provided in accordance with this Ordinance and the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, shall be signed by the person or agency providing notice and shall be included with the application materials. 
(3)  Published Notice   
(a)  The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate) shall be responsible for preparing the content of the published notice and publishing the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  The content and form of the published notice shall be consistent with the requirements of Sections 15.2-2204 and 15.2-2286 of Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, (if applicable). 
(c)  For the purposes of this Ordinance, the date of public notification shall be considered as the date the city provides information to be published to the newspaper of general circulation. 
(d)  Published notice for applications requiring two public hearings (one before the Planning Commission, and one before the City Council) may be published concurrently in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section "two successive weeks" shall be construed to mean notice shall be published at least twice with at least six days elapsing between the first and second publication. 
(4)  Notice Not Required If a particular permit type is not listed in Table 40.1-2.2(J), Required Public Notice, then public notification of a meeting or hearing to consider the application is not required under state law. Public notification for these types of applications may be provided by the city as a courtesy only. 
(5)  Effect of Notice A person's actual written notice of, or active participation in, a required public hearing shall waive the right of that person to challenge the validity of the proceeding due to failure to receive written notification as required by this Ordinance. 
(6)  Other Notices Applicants shall be responsible for compliance with any additional notice requirements in this Ordinance, other city ordinances, or state law. 
(7)  Registration to Receive Notice by Mail Any person, neighborhood organization, or other organization in the city may register with the Planning Director biennially to receive written notice of all applications for permits and development approvals in accordance with this subsection. To be eligible for registration, the person or organization shall provide the Planning Director information in a form established by the Planning Director, along with a fee to defray registration and mailing costs. To continue to receive such notice, a person or organization shall re-register every two years. 
(K)  Hearing Procedures All hearings for applications held in accordance with this Ordinance shall comply with the following procedures. 
(1)  Conduct of Hearing   
(a)  Burden of Proof or Persuasion The burden of demonstrating that an application complies with the relevant standards of this Ordinance is on the applicant. The burden is not on the city or other parties to show that the standards are met by the applicant. 
(b)  Rights of All Persons Any person may appear at a hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a representative of a person or an organization. Each person who appears at a hearing shall be identified, state his or her address, and if appearing on behalf of a person or organization, state the name and mailing address of the person or organization being represented. 
(c)  Continuance of Hearing   
(i)  General   
a.  The body conducting the hearing may, on its own motion or at the request of any person, continue the hearing to a fixed date, time, and place only upon good cause shown. 
b.  A request for deferral of a hearing from the applicant received by the city staff following public notification of the hearing (where appropriate) in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2 (J), Public Notification, shall be considered as a request for a continuance, and may only be granted by the advisory or decision-making body considering the application. 
c.  In cases where a request for continuance results in the need for additional public notification, the applicant may be responsible for the costs associated with providing the additional public notification. 
(ii)  When Additional Notice Not Required A hearing for which proper public notification is given or where public notification is not required, may be continued to the next regularly scheduled meeting without additional public notice, provided: 
a.  The continuance is set for a date within 45 days of the originally- advertised public hearing; 
b.  The date and time of the continued hearing is announced at the time of the continuance; and 
c.  The public hearing is left open. 
In the event that additional public notification is required, the applicant may be responsible for the costs associated with providing the additional public notification. In cases where the applicant provides written (mailed) notice, such notice shall be sent via certified mail. 
(iii)  When Additional Notice Required/If the advisory or decision-making body considering an application for which public notification is provided in accordance with this section has not made a decision on the application by the next regularly scheduled meeting, the application shall be re-noticed consistent with the procedures and standards for its original notification. The applicant shall be responsible for the costs associated with providing the additional public notification. 
(2)  General Procedures and Findings at Public Hearing The body conducting the public hearing shall act in accord with any time limits established in this Ordinance and Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. Action shall include a statement of recommendation or decision of approval, approval with conditions, referral to another body, or denial (whichever is appropriate). 
(L)  Review by City Staff If an application is subject to review and decision by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, it shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Review The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall review the application, relevant support material, and any comments from other staff and review agencies, and approve the application, approve the application with conditions (if appropriate), or deny the application, based on the appropriate review standards for the particular permit or approval. 
(2)  Staff Report Preparation of a staff report is optional, at the discretion of the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate. If a staff report is determined to be necessary, it shall be prepared in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(H), Preparation of Staff Report, except that it shall be addressed and provided to the applicant. 
(3)  Revisions to Staff Reports In the event additional information is needed by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, to complete a staff report, or revisions to a proposed application to maintain consistency with this Ordinance are required, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall provide the applicant with all deficiencies or other recommended changes. The applicant shall have 30 days to revise the application and resubmit all required materials. 
(M)  Conditions of Approval   
(1)  In General   
(a)  Where the express terms of this Ordinance authorize a decision-making body to approve an application with conditions, (i.e., use permits and variance permits), the body may impose reasonable and appropriate conditions on the approval. The conditions may, as appropriate, ensure compliance with particular standards of this Ordinance, and prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed development on surrounding lands. 
(b)  The restrictions and conditions imposed must be related in both type and amount to the impact that the proposed development would have on the public and surrounding development. All conditions imposed shall be expressly set forth in the permit or development approval. 
(2)  Conditions Proposed by the Applicant When conditions are proposed by the applicant as part of the application for an amendment to the zoning map (rezoning), the application shall include a voluntary proffer statement, which shall include the following: 
(a)  A list of legally permissible conditions related to the physical development or physical operation of the development; 
(b)  A signed statement from the current land owner or applicant (with a power of attorney granted by the land owner allowing the applicant to submit proffers) that includes the following language: 
"I HEREBY VOLUNTARILY PROFFER THAT THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SUBJECT PROPERTY OF THE APPLICATION SHALL BE IN STRICT ACCORDANCE WITH THE CONDITIONS SET FORTH IN THIS SUBMISSION, UNLESS AMENDMENT THERETO IS MUTUALLY AGREED UPON BY THE CITY COUNCIL AND THE UNDERSIGNED." 
(c)  The current land owner may voluntarily proffer conditions that will supplement the specific zoning district regulations only to the extent that: 
(i)  The amendment to the official zoning map application necessitates the conditions; 
(ii)  Such conditions have a reasonable relation to the request; 
(iii)  All proffered conditions are in conformity with the comprehensive plan; and 
(iv)  If no conditions are proffered by an applicant for an amendment to the official zoning map, then a statement indicating that no conditions are being proffered shall accompany the application. 
(N)  Notification of Decision   
(1)  Within a reasonable period of time after the decision, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall notify the applicant of the decision. If the applicant has a right to appeal the decision to the BZA under this Ordinance, the notice shall also notify the applicant of this right to appeal the decision to the BZA within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notification by the applicant, and that the decision shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within this period of time. 
(2)  A copy of the notification of decision and the right to appeal shall be public record and shall be available for public inspection at the office of the Planning Director, during normal business hours. 
(O)  Request for Deferral of Application   
(1)  An applicant may request that an advisory or decision-making bodies' consideration of an application at a public hearing be deferred by submitting a written request for deferral to the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, prior to the publication of notice for the public hearing (See Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification). The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, may grant such requests for good cause. The date of the public hearing at which the deferred application will be heard shall be set at the time the deferral is granted. 
(2)  Written requests for deferral of an application by an advisory or decision-making body received after publication of notice for the public hearing has occurred shall be forwarded to the advisory or decision-making body and shall be treated as a request for a continuance of the public hearing. 
(P)  Request for Withdrawal of Application   
(1)  Method Any withdrawal of an application shall be either submitted in writing to the appropriate city staff prior to any public hearing, or be made through a verbal request on the record by the applicant or the applicant's agent during a public hearing. If public notification has occurred prior to the request for withdrawal, application fees shall not be returned to the applicant. 
(2)  Prior to Notice of Public Hearing The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall forward notice of a withdrawn application to the appropriate advisory or decision-making body prior to the public hearing on the application (See Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification). 
(Q)  Waiver of Time Limit   
(1)  General Whenever any application for a permit or development approval requiring a public hearing is denied, an application for all or a part of the same land shall not be considered for a period of one year after the date of denial unless a waiver of time limit is subsequently approved by the decision-making body in accordance with the requirements of this section. Only one request for waiver of time limit may be submitted by the applicant during the one-year period. 
(2)  Waiver of Time Limit   
(a)  Owner or Authorized Agent Only the owner of land or the owner's authorized agent may submit a request for waiver of time limit. 
(b)  Initiation A request may be initiated by the owner or the owner's authorized agent by submitting a request for waiver of time limit to the appropriate city staff, along with a fee to defray the cost of processing the request. 
(3)  Action At the meeting for which the request for waiver of time limit is scheduled, the decision-making body shall consider the request, other relevant support materials, statements made by the applicant or the applicant's representative, and the public, and approve or deny the request based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.2(Q)(4), Waiver of Time Limit Standards. 
(4)  Waiver of Time Limits Standards The waiver of time limit shall be approved only upon a finding by two-thirds (2/3) or more of the membership of the decision-making body that substantial evidence is presented that demonstrates: 
(a)  There is a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues or facts considered during review of the application that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the application; or 
(b)  New or additional information is available that was not available at the time of the review that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed; or 
(c)  A new application is proposed to be submitted that is materially different from the prior application; or 
(d)  The final decision on the application was based on a material mistake of fact. 
(R)  Lapse of Approval Lapse of approval shall occur as provided by this Ordinance for the various types of permits and development approvals. Except for general or proffered amendments to the official zoning map (rezoning), if no provision for lapse is given by this Ordinance for a particular type of permit or development approval, and if no lapse period is imposed as part of an approval in the permit or development approval, lapse shall occur if development is not commenced or a subsequent permit is not obtained within two years. 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 7), 12-9-2014)  
40.1-2.3 - Standards and Requirements for Applications for Permits and Development Approvals. 
This section includes the individual review procedures, standards, and related information for each of the applications for permits and development approvals, as summarized in Table 40.1-2.1(A), Summary Table of Development Review Structure. 
(A)  Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose and intent of this section is to provide procedures and standards for amending the zoning map or text of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Authority The City Council may adopt an ordinance amending the zoning map or text of this Ordinance in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
(3)  Initiation   
(a)  An application to amend the zoning map (rezoning) may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the HPC (for an historic district), the Planning Director, or a person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(A), Authority to File Applications. 
(b)  An application to amend the text of this Ordinance may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the Planning Director, or a person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(A), Authority to File Applications. 
(c)  If the City Council, Planning Commission, HPC, Planning Director, or a person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(A), Authority to File Applications, initiates an amendment to the zoning map (Rezoning) or the text of this Ordinance, the application shall include the statutory public purpose for the proposed amendment in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(4)  Proffers Distinguished   
(a)  City Council shall not apply conditions to applications to amend the zoning map (rezonings). 
(b)  Applications to amend the zoning map (rezonings) either may be general applications, or may be subject to voluntary proffers proposed by the applicant requesting the amendment. 
(5)  Procedures   
(a)  Basic Procedures   
(i)  For Zoning Map Amendments Without Proffers The procedures and requirements for the submission, completeness determination, review, recommendation, hearing, and decision on applications for the zoning map or text amendments are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures, except applications for a zoning map amendment to an historic district, may be made by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the HPC, private preservation organizations, neighborhood associations or civic leagues, groups of property owners, or individual property owners. 
(ii)  For Zoning Map Amendments with Proffers If the applicant proposes to offer proffers as part of an application to amend the zoning map (rezoning), the application shall also comply with the following requirements: 
a.  A voluntary proffer statement may be accepted prior to required public notification of the application for which proffers are offered by an applicant. 
b.  Once public notification of the first public hearing occurs, a proffer to an application shall not be made that is considered a substantial amendment, unless the application is modified, reconsidered and re-reviewed by city staff (as appropriate), re-noticed in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, and re-reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council (if appropriate). This shall not apply if: 
1.  The amended voluntary proffer is not a substantial amendment that materially changes the original voluntary proffer submitted by the applicant; or 
2.  The substantial amendment is the result of Planning Commission, public, or city staff action or comments made about the application after a public hearing is conducted before the Planning Commission. 
c.  For the purposes of this section, a "substantial amendment" includes a modification of proffer(s) that materially changes the uses, layout, and character of external impacts of the development proposed as part of the amendment in a way that is less restrictive than the proffer(s) originally proposed and considered. 
 
(b)  Public Hearing, Review, and Recommendation by HPC   
(i)  Creation of Historic Districts and Designation of Historic Properties   
a.  Initiation Prior to the HPC's recommendation on an application to amend the zoning map to establish an historic district or amendment to the boundaries of an historic district, the HPC shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of a completed National Register of Historic Places nomination/amendment or: 
1.  A physical description; 
2.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
3.  A map showing historic district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
4.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
5.  Representative photographs. 
b.  Designation of an Historic District An historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, that: 
1.  Have special character or special historic/architectural value or interest; 
2.  Represent one or more periods, styles, or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, state, or region; and 
3.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city. 
c.  Designation of Historic Property An historic property is an individual building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, state, or region, for one of the following reasons: 
1.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
2.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
3.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or 
4.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, state, or region. 
d.  Boundaries The boundaries of an historic district or an historic property shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
e.  Adoption Ordinance Requirements The following are required for the adoption of an ordinance designating an historic district or property: 
1.  A designation proposed by the City Council, the Planning Commission, the HPC, private preservation organization, neighborhood association or civic league, group of land owners. 
2.  An ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
A.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
B.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; and 
C.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map, and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
3.  Upon the designation, modification, or designation removal of each historic district or property, the Planning Director shall file with the Clerk of Circuit Court a copy of the resolution containing such action, and a boundary description of such district. 
4.  Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance designating the historic district or property, the owners of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each building, structure, site, or object located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city. The notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. 
(c)  Public Hearing, Review, and Recommendation by Planning Commission   
(i)  After HPC review and recommendation on an application for a zoning map amendment to an historic district, and in all other instances, following staff review, there shall be public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, after which the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public at the hearing, and by a majority vote of a quorum present, adopt a written recommendation for one of the following actions, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(A)(6), Zoning Map Amendment Standards, Section 40.1-2.3(A)(7), Proffer Standards (Offered as Part of a Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)), or Section 40.1-2.3(A)(8), Zoning Text Amendment Standards (as appropriate): 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with proffers proposed by the applicant; or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(iii)  Following its recommendation on a proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall forward the recommendation to the City Council and submit a report with the recommendations along with an explanation of how the application either complies with or fails to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Public Hearing, Review, and Action by City Council   
(i)  Upon certification of the Planning Commission's report and recommendation, and public notification on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the hearing, the City Council shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, the Planning Commission's report and recommendation, and any comments given by the public at the hearing, and by a majority vote of a quorum present, take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(A)(6), Zoning Map Amendment Standards, Section 40.1-2.3(A)(7), Proffer Standards (Offered as Part of a Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)), or Section 40.1-2.3(A)(8), Zoning Text Amendment Standards (as appropriate): 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with proffers proposed by the applicant; 
c.  Denial of the application; or 
d.  Remand of the application back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
(6)  Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) Standards Amending the zoning map is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny the proposed amendment, or, where appropriate, to accept proffered conditions, the City Council's consideration may include, but not be limited to, the following factors: 
(a)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan, or other applicable and adopted long-range planning documents; 
(b)  Whether and the extent to which there are changed conditions that require an amendment; 
(c)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment addresses a demonstrated community need; 
(d)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment will have a positive effect on the city's desired balance between residential and nonresidential uses; 
(e)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment is compatible with existing and proposed uses surrounding the land subject to the amendment, and is the appropriate zoning district for the land and the existing use(s); 
(f)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in a logical and orderly development pattern, or deviate from logical and orderly development patterns; 
(g)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in the creation of an isolated zoning district unrelated to adjacent and surrounding zoning districts; 
(h)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment will result in significant adverse impacts on the property values of surrounding lands; 
(i)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment, including but not limited to water, air, noise, storm water management, wildlife, vegetation, floodplains, wetlands, and the natural functioning of the environment; 
(j)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in development that is adequately served by transportation facilities, including whether a substantial deterioration of the level of service on the city's transportation network would occur; 
(k)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in development that has an adverse impact on the city's economic vitality; and/or 
(l)  Whether or not delinquent real estate taxes are owed to the city. 
(7)  Proffer Standards (Offered as Part of Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)) Proffers offered by an applicant as part of a zoning map amendment (rezoning) shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  When Proposed All proffers shall be proposed in writing as part of the rezoning application prior to the first public notification of the required public hearings, in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification. Proffers may be amended only in accordance with Section, 40.1-2.3(A)(5), Basic Procedures. 
(b)  General Voluntary proffers made by an applicant may be accepted by the City Council provided they comply with the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, and the following: 
(i)  Necessary and Reasonable   
a.  The proposal to amend the zoning map necessitates the proposed proffers, and they are reasonably related to the amendment request. 
b.  The proposed proffers are not generally applicable to lands with similar zoning district classifications. 
(ii)  Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan The proposed proffers are in conformity with the comprehensive plan. 
(iii)  Supplement the District Standards The proposed proffers are in addition to and are no less stringent than the standards and requirements of the proposed zoning district. 
(iv)  Dedication or Payments   
a.  In the event proposed proffers include land dedication or cash payments for public facilities to serve the land subject to the zoning map amendment, such land dedication or cash payment shall not be made until the public facilities are included in the city's capital improvement program; provided nothing shall prevent the city from accepting proffers which are not normally included in the capital improvement program. 
 
b.  If proffers include land dedication or cash payments, the proffers shall provide for the disposition of such land dedication or cash payment in the event the land or cash payment is not used for the purpose for which it is proffered. 
(c)  Enforcement and Guarantee of Performance and Conditions   
(i)  The Planning Director may require an applicant proposing proffers to guarantee performance of the proffers accepted by the City Council. The guarantee(s) shall be in an amount and in a manner satisfactory to the City Engineer. Such guarantee(s) shall be reduced or released by the City Engineer or a designee upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that performance of such proffers are completed as required by approval of the amendment. 
(ii)  Failure to comply with the proffers accepted by the City Council, including the guarantee(s), shall constitute cause to deny requests to approve any subsequent permits and development approvals required under this Ordinance for the land subject to the amendment with proffers. 
(iii)  The Zoning Administrator, in an effort to enforce the conditions approved by the City Council, may: 
a.  Bring necessary legal action to ensure compliance, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate legal relief; or 
b.  Order in writing the remedy for any noncompliance of conditions. 
(8)  Zoning Text Amendment Review Standards Amending the text of this Ordinance is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the City Council and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny the proposed text amendment, the City Council's consideration may include, but not be limited to, the following factors: 
(a)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan and any other applicable and adopted long range planning documents; 
(b)  Whether the proposed amendment is in conflict with any provision of this Ordinance and any other regulations contained in the City Code or other applicable regulations; 
(c)  Whether and the extent to which there are changed conditions that require an amendment; 
(d)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment addresses a demonstrated community need; 
(e)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in a logical and orderly development pattern; and 
(f)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment, including but not limited to water, air, noise, storm water management, wildlife, vegetation, floodplains, wetlands, and the natural functioning of the environment. 
(9)  Effect of Proffers Accepted as Part of Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)   
(a)  Proffers accepted by the City Council as part of an approved amendment to the zoning map shall continue in effect until a subsequent amendment of the zoning map modifies the zoning district of the land or the content of previously approved proffers. 
(b)  In cases where proffers are accepted as part of an amendment to the zoning map, the zoning map shall include a notation reflecting the specific proffers that were accepted by the City Council and apply to the land. The accepted proffers shall be indexed and recorded in the office of the Planning Director. 
 
(c)  Any subsequent applications for permits or development approvals on land subject to accepted proffers shall only be approved if they are in substantial conformity with the accepted proffers. For the purposes of this section, "substantial conformity" shall mean the degree of conformity that leaves a reasonable margin for adjustment due to final engineering data, but conforms with the general nature of the zoning district, the uses approved, and the specific terms and conditions of the proffer(s). 
(10)  Recording Requirement for Historic Districts or Historic Properties   
(a)  Following the adoption by ordinance of an historic district, a copy of the ordinance creating the district and a boundary description of such district shall be filed by the Planning Director with the Clerk of Circuit Court for the City of Portsmouth. 
(b)  Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance creating an historic district, the owners and occupants of each building, structure, site, or object located within the designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the HPC which notice shall notify said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated. 
(c)  Following the adoption by ordinance of an historic district, the HPC shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the establishment of the new historic district. 
(B)  Use Permit   
(1)  Purpose and Intent A use requiring a use permit is a use that may be appropriate in a zoning district, but because of its nature, extent, and external effects, requires special consideration of its location, design, and methods of operation before it can be deemed appropriate in the district and compatible with its surroundings. The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and standards for review and approval of use permits that provide for such special consideration. 
(2)  Applicability   
(a)  A use permit is required for development of any use designated in Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table, as a use requiring a use permit in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Any legally established use which existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendments, shall not be considered a nonconforming use where a use permit is now required for establishment of such use. The use shall be allowed to continue operation, as well as reconstruct or structurally alter the building or structure without the necessity of obtaining a use permit. However, approval of a use permit shall be required, in accordance with this Section, when either of the conditions below are present, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator. 
(i)  There is a twenty (20) percent or greater net increase in the square footage of the use or structure proposed for expansion or enlargement; or 
(ii)  The expansion or enlargement will substantially alter the site design and layout as it relates to circulation, parking or other site characteristics so as to adversely affect surrounding properties. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on an application for a use permit is as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Public Hearing, Review, and Recommendation by the Planning Commission   
(i)  Following staff review and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public at the hearing, and by a majority vote of a quorum present prepare a written recommendation for one of the following actions, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(B)(4), Use Permit Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(iii)  Following its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall forward the recommendation to the City Council for review. 
(c)  Public Hearing, Review, and Action by the City Council   
(i)  Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the hearing, the City Council shall consider the application, the relevant support materials, the staff report, the Planning Commission's recommendation, and any comments given by the public, and by a majority vote of a quorum present, take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3 (B) (4), Use Permit Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(4)  Use Permit Standards An application for a Use Permit shall be approved only upon a finding the applicant demonstrates all of the following standards are met: 
(a)  The proposed use complies with the applicable standards of this Ordinance; 
(b)  The proposed use is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(c)  The proposed use is compatible with the character of surrounding lands and the uses permitted in the zoning district(s) of surrounding lands; 
(d)  The proposed use is configured to minimize adverse effects, including the visual impacts of the proposed use on adjacent lands; 
(e)  The proposed use avoids significant deterioration of water and air resources, and other natural resources; 
(f)  The proposed use maintains safe and adequate egress and ingress onto the site, and safe road conditions around the site; 
(g)  The proposed use allows for the protection of property values and the ability of neighboring lands to develop the uses permitted in the zoning districts; and 
(h)  The use complies with all other city, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
(5)  Conditions of Approval In authorizing a use permit, the City Council may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed use permit as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the general intent and purposes of this Ordinance and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed use approved. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(6)  Effect of Decision   
(a)  A use permit authorizes only the particular use(s) and associated development that is approved. A use permit, including any approved plans and conditions, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership unless specifically conditioned as part of the approval. 
(b)  No business license shall be issued unless the use meets all conditions of approval. 
(7)  Expiration   
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in the use permit, an application for a building permit or business license (whichever is appropriate) shall be applied for and approved within two years of the date of the approval of the use permit; otherwise, the use permit shall become null and void, and automatically expire. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the use permit by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the Planning Commission may grant one extension not to exceed one year. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Planning Commission has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the use permit null and void, and the development approval shall automatically expire. 
(c)  In addition, a use permit upon which the approved use is developed in accordance with the permit, automatically expires and is immediately null and void when there is a change in use, or when the use approved in the use permit is inactive for a period greater than two years. 
(8)  Revocation of Use Permits A use permit may be revoked or modified by the City Council after noticing a public hearing in the same manner as a zoning map amendment pursuant to Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, 1 and conducting a public hearing in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. The permit shall be revoked only if there is a finding: 
(a)  The use permit was obtained or extended by fraud or deception; 
(b)  The applicant has failed to comply with one or more of the conditions of approval; 
(c)  There is a change in conditions affecting the public health, safety, and welfare, since adoption of the use permit; or 
(d)  There are repeated violations of this Ordinance by the holder of the use permit, related to the development approved by the use permit. 
In addition, and in the discretion of the Chief of Police, if there is a significant risk to public safety or peace and good order on land subject to a use permit that creates the risk of blight, then proceedings to revoke a use permit may be initiated by the Planning Director by sending a letter to the permittee to correct the situation that creates the risk of blight. If within six months of the date the letter is sent out the Planning Director determines the situation is continuing, the Planning Director may initiate proceedings to revoke the use permit. However, if at any time during the course of this process, the Chief of Police determines there is a significant risk to public safety or peace and good order as to create a risk of blight that must be corrected immediately, the Planning Director may initiate proceedings to revoke the use permit immediately, without waiting six months for the permittee to correct the problem. 
(9)  Amendments A use permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(C)  Type I Development Plan   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of a type I development plan is to allow for the review of development proposed for a site prior to construction, to ensure its layout and general configuration complies with all applicable standards and requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable city regulations. The purpose of this section is to establish the procedures and standards for the review of a type I development plan. 
 
(2)  Applicability A type I development plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section prior to issuance of a building permit, unless exempted in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(C)(3), Exemptions. 
(3)  Exemptions The following development shall be exempted from the requirements of this section: 
(a)  Single-family or two-family detached dwellings, unless such review is required by the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act and any regulations or ordinances adopted under that authority; 
(b)  A proposed nonresidential development in a mixed-use or activity center base zoning district of less than 2,500 square feet in area; and 
(c)  Internal construction that does not increase gross floor area or building height, increase the density or intensity of use, and increase off-street parking requirements. 
(4)  Initiation An application for a type I development plan may be initiated by any person who may submit applications in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2 (A), Authority to File Applications. 
(5)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures   
(i)  Except as modified in this subsection, the procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications for type I development plan are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(ii)  The application for a type I development plan shall be reviewed within 60 days from the date the application is determined complete. The application review time is extended to 90 days or as authorized by Section 15.2-2222.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, if a portion of the application is required to be reviewed and approved by a state department or agency. In all instances, review of the application shall occur within 45 days after receiving notification from all state agencies required to review and approve the plan that it is approved by the respective state agencies. 2 
(b)  Review and Action by the Planning Director Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(L), Review by Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(C)(6), Type I Development Plan Standards: 
(i)  Approval of the application; or 
(ii)  Approval of the application, with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
(iii)  Denial of the application. 
(6)  Type I Development Plan Standards An application for a type I development plan shall be approved upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
(a)  The development complies with the applicable district and use-specific standards; 
(b)  The development complies with all other applicable standards of this Ordinance; 
(c)  The development complies with all requirements or conditions of any applicable permit or development approvals (e.g., zoning map amendments with proffers, variance permits, use permits, etc.); 
(d)  The development is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
(e)  The development complies with all other applicable city regulations. 
(7)  Conditions of Approval In authorizing a type I development plan, the Planning Director may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed type I development plan as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the general intent and purposes of this Ordinance and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed type I development plan. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(8)  Expiration   
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in the type I development plan approval, an application for a building permit or business license (whichever is appropriate) shall be applied for and approved within five years of the date of the approval of the type I development plan; otherwise, the type I development plan shall become null and void, and automatically expire. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the type I development plan by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the Planning Director may grant one extension not to exceed six months. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Planning Director has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the type I development plan null and void, and the development approval shall automatically expire. 
(9)  Amendments A type I development plan may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(10)  Appeals An applicant may appeal a decision of the Planning Director on an application for a type I development plan to the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 15.2-2259 of Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(D)  Special Exception   
(1)  Purpose and Intent A use requiring a special exception is a use that may be appropriate in a zoning district, but because of its nature, extent, and external effects, requires special consideration of its location, design, and methods of operation before it can be deemed appropriate in the district and compatible with its surroundings. Special exceptions may also permit variations from other standards in this Ordinance expressly identified in this subsection 40.1-2.3(D), but only to the extent of the authorization. The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) authority to consider special exceptions is expressly granted by and subject to the parameters and criteria set by City Council through adoption, and amendment from time to time, of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Applicability   
(a)  A special exception is required for any use designated in Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table, as a use requiring a special exception in accordance with this section; 
(b)  A special exception may also be applied for where otherwise expressly authorized by this subsection 40.1-2.3(D), as adopted and amended from time to time by City Council; 
(c)  The BZA shall not take any action that is construed as rezoning property, nor make a decision that is based solely on the general purpose and intent of the Ordinance as stated in Section 40.1-1.3. 
(d)  Any legally established use which existed prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or any subsequent amendments, shall not be considered a nonconforming use where a special exception is now required for establishment of such use. Except as provided below, the use shall be allowed to continue in operation, and the building or structure housing the use may be reconstructed or structurally altered, without the necessity of obtaining a special exception. However, approval of a special exception shall be required, in accordance with this section, when either of the conditions below are present, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator: 
(i)  There is a fifteen (15) percent or greater net increase in the square footage of the use or structure proposed for expansion or enlargement; or 
(ii)  The expansion or enlargement will substantially alter the site design and layout as it relates to circulation, parking or other site characteristics so as to adversely affect surrounding properties, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures   
(i)  The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on an application for a special exception are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(ii)  The zoning administrator shall also transmit a copy of the application to the Planning Commission as required by Va. Code Section 15.2-2310. The Planning Commission may send a recommendation to the BZA or appear as a party at the hearing. 
(b)  Public Hearing, Review, and Decision by the BZA   
(i)  Following staff review and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the BZA shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  After close of the hearing, the BZA shall consider the application, the relevant support materials, the staff report, comments of the Planning Commission, if any, and any comments given by the public, and by a majority vote of a quorum present, take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(D)(4), Special Exception Standards and, if applicable, the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(D)(5), Use Specific Special Exception Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval) and Subsection 40.1-2.3(D)(6)); or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(4)  General Special Exception Standards An application for a Special exception shall be approved only upon a finding the applicant demonstrates all of the following standards are met: 
(a)  The proposed use complies with the applicable standards of the Ordinance; 
(b)  The proposed development is consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(c)  The proposed use is compatible with the character of surrounding lands and the uses permitted in the zoning district(s) of surrounding lands; 
(d)  The proposed use is configured to minimize adverse effects, including the visual impacts of the proposed use on adjacent lands; 
(e)  The proposed use will directly or indirectly enhance the economic base of the community; 
(f)  The proposed use avoids significant deterioration of water and air resources, and other natural resources; 
(g)  The proposed use maintains safe and adequate egress and ingress onto the site, and safe road conditions around the site; 
(h)  The proposed use allows for the protection of property values and the ability of neighboring lands to develop the uses permitted in the zoning districts; and 
(i)  The use complies with all other city, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
(5)  Use Specific Special Exception Standards   
(a)  The BZA may grant a special exception for a modification to the number, form, or nature of the parking requirements contained in Section 40.1-5.1 (Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Circulation) of this Ordinance, provided: 
(i)  The applicant shall demonstrate that safe and convenient pedestrian access is provided from the designated use to an off-site parking facility or that transportation is available from an off-site parking facility to the premises; 
(ii)  The applicant shall demonstrate that off-site parking spaces to either supplement the on-site parking or meet the minimum parking requirement, or a combination of both, are available on a long-term basis of not less than twenty (20) years; 
(iii)  A parking modification which was granted based on an off-site parking plan shall be void in the event that said off-site parking plan is terminated in whole or in part; 
(iv)  The applicant shall provide an adequate amount of parking to accommodate the anticipated demand for parking generated by the specified use; 
(v)  The authorization of parking modifications shall be limited to the specified use or uses for which the special exception is requested. Any enlargement of a building or change in use or uses shall be subject to the parking requirement as specified in this Ordinance or as otherwise approved for increase or reduction as provided in this Ordinance; and 
(vi)  The applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that any off-site or on-street parking requested would not have a negative impact on the surrounding neighborhood or to any existing or proposed parking program or parking district impacted by the request. 
(b)  Reserved   
(6)  Conditions of Approval In authorizing a special exception, the BZA may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed special exception as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the general intent and purposes of this Ordinance and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed use. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(7)  Effect of Decision   
(a)  A special exception authorizes only the particular use(s) and associated development that is approved. A special exception, including any approved plans and conditions, shall not be affected by a change in ownership unless specifically conditioned as part of the approval. 
(b)  No Zoning Compliance Permit shall be issued unless the use meets all conditions of approval. 
(c)  No application for substantially the same special exception request shall be considered for a period of one year from the date of the decision by the BZA. 
(8)  Expiration   
(a)  Special exceptions run with the land. Unless otherwise specified in the special exception or by the Code of Virginia (See Va. Code Section 15.2-2209.1), an application for a building permit, business license or land disturbing permit (whichever is appropriate) shall be applied for and approved within two years of the date of the approval of the special exception; otherwise, the special exception shall become null and void, and automatically expire. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the special exception by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the BZA may grant one extension not to exceed one year. The approval shall be deemed extended until the BZA has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the special exception null and void, and the development approval shall automatically expire. 
(c)  After the approved use has been developed in accordance with a special exception permit, the special exception automatically expires and is immediately null and void when there is a change in use, or when the use approved in the special exception is inactive for a period greater than two years. 
(9)  Revocation of Special Exceptions A special exception may be revoked or modified by the BZA after noticing a public hearing in the same manner as the original special exception pursuant to Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, and conducting a public hearing in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. The permit shall be revoked only upon a finding by the BZA that: 
(a)  The special exception was obtained or extended by fraud or deception; 
(b)  The applicant has failed to comply with one or more of the conditions of approval; 
(c)  There is a change in conditions affecting the public health, safety, and welfare, since adoption of the special exception; or 
(d)  There are repeated violations of this Ordinance or other local, state and/or federal law(s) related to the development approved by the special exception. 
(10)  Interpretation and Amendments.   
(a)  Any conditions to a special exception shall be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator and any appeals of the interpretation shall be considered by the BZA under the procedures for an appeal set forth in Section 40.1-2.3(K) (Appeal) of this Ordinance. 
(b)  A special exception may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(E)  Temporary Use Permit   
 
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for the review of temporary uses in accordance with Section 40.1-4.5, Temporary Use Standards. 
(2)  Applicability The provisions of this section shall apply to all proposed temporary uses as set forth in Section 40.1-4.5, Temporary Use Standards. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications for temporary use permits are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Review and Action by Planning Director Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(L), Review by City Staff, and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(E)(4), Temporary Use Permit Standards: 
(i)  Approval of the application as submitted; 
(ii)  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
(iii)  Denial of the application. 
(4)  Temporary Use Permit Standards An application for a temporary use permit shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates the proposed temporary use complies with the relevant standards in Section 40.1-4.5, Temporary Use Standards. 
(5)  Expiration A temporary use permit shall be effective beginning on the date specified in the permit approval, and shall remain effective for the period indicated on the permit. 
(6)  Amendment A temporary use permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(7)  Appeal An appeal from the Planning Director's decision on a temporary use permit application shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
(F)  Zoning Compliance Permit   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for the review of proposed development to ensure its compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Applicability The following development shall receive Zoning Compliance Permit approval prior to submission of an application for a Building Permit or Business License, whichever is appropriate: 
(a)  A change in use; 
(b)  Signs subject to the standards in Section 40.1-5.11, Signage; 
(c)  Development in a historic district that requires a COA; and 
(d)  The construction or expansion of any new building or structure that requires a building permit but that is not subject to review in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(C), Type I Development Plan. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications for a zoning compliance permit are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Lots in the Downtown D2 District Zoning compliance permit applications in the Downtown (D2) district shall be reviewed by the Planning Director in accordance with the standards in Appendix B of this Ordinance. 
 
(c)  Review and Action by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator, or Planning Director, as appropriate, shall review the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(L), Review by City Staff, and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(F)(4), Zoning Compliance Permit Standards: 
(i)  Approval of the application as submitted; 
(ii)  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
(iii)  Denial of the application. 
(4)  Zoning Compliance Permit Standards An application for a zoning compliance permit shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates the proposed development complies with all relevant standards of this Ordinance. 
(5)  Effect of Decision A building permit or business license, whichever is appropriate, shall not be issued until the development subject to this section receives a zoning compliance permit and complies with all its conditions of approval. 
(6)  Appeal An appeal from the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director's (as appropriate), decision on a zoning compliance permit application shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
 
(G)  Variance Permit   
(1)  Purpose   
(a)  The purpose of a variance permit is to allow certain deviations from the standards of this Ordinance (such as size of area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size, area, bulk, or location of a building or structure), when the land owner demonstrates that, owing to special circumstances or conditions beyond the land owner's control (such as exceptional topographical conditions, narrowness, shallowness, or the shape of a specific parcel of land), the literal application of the standards of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the land owner and the need for the variance is not shared generally by other lands, and the deviation is not contrary to the public interest or goals and purposes of this Ordinance. 
(b)  A variance shall not include a change in use, which shall be accomplished through an amendment to the official zoning map (Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment). 
(2)  Authority The BZA is authorized to review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a variance permit in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on an application for a variance permit are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Public Hearing, Review, and Decision by the BZA   
(i)  Following staff review of the application and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the BZA shall conduct a public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(ii)  At the hearing, the BZA shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public, and after close of the hearing, by a majority vote of a quorum present, take one of the following actions, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(G)(4), Variance Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval.); or 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(4)  Variance Standards   
(a)  Findings An application for a variance permit shall be approved upon a finding that all of the following standards are met: 
(i)  The land for which the variance is requested is acquired in good faith; 
(ii)  The land is subject to: 
a.  Exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size, or shape; 
b.  Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition; or 
(iii)  The situation is not self-created; 
(iv)  Because of one or several conditions identified in Section 40.1-2.3(G)(4), Variance Standards, the strict application of this Ordinance would produce undue hardship, and effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the land; 
(v)  The hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; 
(vi)  The authorization of the variance alleviates this clearly demonstrated hardship (as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the applicant); 
(vii)  The authorization of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties; 
(viii)  The character of the zoning district in which the land is located will not be changed by the granting of the variance; 
(ix)  The condition or situation of the land is not of so general or recurring a nature as to warrant the formulation of a regulation or standard to address the condition or situation; 
(x)  Any delinquent real estate taxes owed to the city on the lands for which the variance is requested have been paid; and 
(xi)  The variance authorized by the BZA is the least possible deviation from the standards necessary to afford relief. 
(b)  Prohibitions   
(i)  No provision of this Ordinance shall be construed as granting the BZA the power to rezone property. 
(ii)  No variance shall be granted to allow a use or development condition not permitted by right or proffer. 
(iii)  No variance shall be granted to any standard or requirement in any other part of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(iv)  No variance shall be granted that allows a principal or accessory building to exceed any applicable maximum size standards set out in Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts or Article 40.1-4: Use Standards. 
(v)  No variance shall be granted to any standard or requirement in Section 40.1-5.1, Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Circulation. 
(5)  Conditions of Approval   
(a)  In authorizing a variance, the BZA may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed structure granted the variance as it may deem necessary in the public interest to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed variance. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(b)  The BZA may require a guarantee or bond to insure compliance with the conditions imposed. 
(6)  Effect of Decision   
(a)  Issuance of a variance permit shall authorize only the particular variance that is approved. A variance permit, including any conditions, shall run with the land and not be affected by a change in ownership. 
 
(b)  Development authorized by the variance permit shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits required by this Ordinance or any other applicable ordinances and regulations of the city. A variance permit, in itself, shall not ensure that the development approved through a variance permit shall receive subsequent approval for any other necessary applications for permit or development approval. 
(7)  Expiration   
(a)  The BZA may prescribe, as part of a variance permit, a time within which development activity shall begin, be completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete such development within the time specified shall render the variance permit void, and the permit shall automatically expire. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the variance permit by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the BZA may grant one extension not to exceed one year. The approval shall be deemed extended until the BZA has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the variance permit void, and the permit shall automatically expire. 
(8)  Amendment A variance permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(9)  Appeal Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the BZA, or any aggrieved taxpayer or any officer, department, commission, or the city, within 30 days of the date of the decision, may appeal the decision of the BZA on the variance permit to the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(H)  Administrative Adjustment   
(1)  Purpose and Intent This purpose and intent of this section is to provide an administrative mechanism for allowing minor variations, or adjustments, to the building setback standards of this Ordinance based on specific standards, with the intent of providing relief where application of a standard creates practical difficulties in allowing development that otherwise advances the purposes served by this Ordinance and is compatible with surrounding lands. 
(2)  Authority The Planning Director is authorized to review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny administrative adjustments to the building setback standards of this Ordinance in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
(3)  Applicability Administrative adjustments may be requested and granted for reductions in a building setback by up to 15 percent. 
(4)  Procedure   
(a)  Basic Procedures 
(i)  Except as modified below in subsection ii, the procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications for administrative adjustments are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(ii)  Prior to consideration of an Administrative Adjustment, the Planning Director shall provide public notification in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification. 
(b)  Review and Action by the Planning Director Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(L), Review by City Staff, and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(H)(5), Administrative Adjustment Standards: 
(i)  Approval of the application as submitted; or 
(ii)  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); or 
(iii)  Denial of the application. 
(5)  Administrative Adjustment Standards An application for an administrative adjustment shall be approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates all of the following standards are met: 
(a)  The requested administrative adjustment shall not exceed 15 percent of a building setback standard; 
(b)  The requested administrative adjustment is consistent with the character of development in the surrounding area, and will not result in incompatible uses; 
(c)  Any adverse impacts from the requested administrative adjustment will be mitigated to the maximum extent practicable; 
(d)  The requested administrative adjustment is either: 
(i)  Required to compensate for some unusual aspect of the site or the proposed development that is not shared by landowners in general; 
(ii)  Supporting an objective or goal from the purpose and intent statements of the zoning district where located; or 
(iii)  Proposed to save healthy existing trees; and 
(e)  The requested administrative adjustment will not substantially interfere with the convenient and enjoyable use of adjacent lands, and will not pose a danger to the public health or safety. 
(6)  Conditions of Approval In authorizing an administrative adjustment, the Planning Director may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed administrative adjustment as may be deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the general intent and purposes of this Ordinance and to prevent or minimize adverse effects from the proposed administrative adjustment. Conditions, where imposed, shall be included as part of the approval. 
(7)  Subsequent Development Development authorized by the administrative adjustment shall not be carried out until the applicant secures all other permits or development approvals required by this Ordinance or any other applicable provisions of the city. An administrative adjustment, in itself, shall not ensure that the development approved as an administrative adjustment shall receive subsequent approval for any other necessary applications for permit or development approval. 
(8)  Effect Issuance of an administrative adjustment shall authorize only the particular administrative adjustment that is approved in accordance with this section. The administrative adjustment shall run with the land and not be affected by a change in ownership. 
(9)  Expiration (a) Unless otherwise specified in the administrative adjustment approval, an application for a building permit shall be applied for and approved within one year of the date of the approval of the administrative adjustment; otherwise, the administrative adjustment shall become null and void, and automatically expire. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. 
(b)  Upon written application submitted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the administrative adjustment by the applicant, and upon a showing of good cause, the Planning Director may grant one extension not to exceed six months. The approval shall be deemed extended until the Planning Director has acted upon the request for extension. Failure to submit an application for an extension within the time limits established by this section shall render the administrative adjustment null and void, and the development approval shall automatically expire. 
(10)  Amendment An administrative adjustment may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(11)  Appeal An appeal from the Planning Director's decision on an administrative adjustment application shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
(I)  Certificate of Appropriateness (COA)   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose and intent of this section is to establish procedures and standards for the review of certificates of appropriateness (COAs) for development in the city's historic districts. 
(2)  Authority (a) The Planning Director shall review and decide administrative COA applications, which include certain minor actions as established in the approval matrix in the standards and guideline documents for each historic district, as adopted by City Council. 
(b)  The Downtown Design Commission shall review and decide applications for COAs within the Downtown D1 district. 
(c)  The HPC shall review and decide all other COA applications. 
(3)  Applicability   
 
(a)  In General Unless exempted in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(I)(4) Exemptions, a COA is required prior to any material change in the appearance of a building, structure, or site located in an historic district (See Section 40.1-3.6(F), Historic Districts). For purposes of this section, a "material change in appearance" shall include construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, demolition, or relocation that affects the appearance of the building, structure, or site, or that of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, or site. 
(b)  Action on Publicly Owned Historic Structures   
(i)  The Planning Director or other appropriate city official shall file an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed construction, alteration, renovation, or razing of any historic city-owned building or structure, and shall adhere to all other requirements of this Ordinance. 
(ii)  For buildings and structures owned by other governmental entities or public utilities companies, the City Manager shall request that such owners submit an application for a COA and adhere to all requirements of this section. 
(4)  Exemptions The following development shall be exempted from the requirements of this section: 
(a)  Repairs, maintenance, painting, or alteration of any feature the Building Official certifies is required due to an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
(b)  The normal repair and maintenance of any exterior architectural feature; 
(c)  Ordinary yard maintenance in the historic districts to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form that does not involve a material change in design, material, color or outer appearance; 
(d)  Repainting resulting in the same color, except that the original painting of masonry surfaces is not exempted from review. 
(e)  Replacing broken windowpanes, missing roof shingles, or missing features with matching in-kind materials; 
(f)  Addition or deletion of television or radio antennas, skylights, or solar collectors in locations not visible from a public street; 
(g)  Planting of grass, trees and shrubs, but not landscape treatment that substantially alters the contour of a site or involves landscaping or construction of parking areas, fences, walls, walkways, pools, fountains, and the like which materially affect the appearance of a site and that is visible from a public street; 
(h)  Any changes to a structure that is not visible from a public street. 
(5)  Order of Approvals A COA shall be approved prior to an applicant receiving approvals for any other permits or development approvals required by this Ordinance. 
(6)  Procedure for Administrative Review of Certificates of Appropriateness   
(a)  Basic Procedures Except as modified in this section, the procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications are as established in Section 40.1-2.2., Common Review Procedures. 
(b)  Review and Action by the Planning Director (i) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall review the application and take one of the following actions based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(I)(8), Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards: 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; or 
b.  Denial of the application. 
(ii)  The Planning Director shall be guided in decisions by the standards and guidelines established for the HPC and shall have the authority to request modifications of the applicant of a specific proposal in order that such proposal may comply with said standards and guidelines. 
(iii)  In any case where the Planning Director is uncertain of authority to act on a particular application, or in any case where the Planning Director and the applicant cannot agree on changes in the proposal, or if the Planning Director otherwise fails to issue such COA within 30 days, the application shall be referred to the HPC for action in accordance with to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(9), HPC Review of Certificates of Appropriateness. A written report/agenda shall accompany any application forwarded to the HPC. 
(iv)  The Planning Director shall report, in writing, to the HPC at each regular meeting on all COAs issued through this administrative review process. 
(v)  Copies of a COA shall be clearly posted in a location visible to the public during the construction or repair process. 
(7)  Procedure for Review by the Downtown Design Committee The DDC shall review and decide applications for a COA in accordance with the standards in this subsection and Appendix A of this Ordinance. 
(8)  Procedure for HPC Review of Certificates of Appropriateness   
(a)  Applicability All development that requires a COA that is not subject to administrative review, or review by the DDC, shall be subject to HPC review in accordance with this subsection. 
(b)  Basic Procedures Except as modified in this section, the procedures and requirements for the initiation, submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on applications are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
 
(c)  Public Hearing, Review, and Decision by the HPC Following staff review and public notification conducted in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the HPC shall conduct at least one standard public hearing on the application in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(K), Hearing Procedures. 
(i)  After close of the hearing, the HPC shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public; and 
(ii)  The HPC, by a majority vote of a quorum present, shall adopt a written recommendation for one of the following actions, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(I)(9), Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards, or Section 40.1-2.3(I)(9), Certificate of Appropriateness for Relocation, or Section 40.1-2.3(I)(10), Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition (as applicable): 
a.  Approval of the application as submitted; 
b.  Approval of the application with conditions (See Section 40.1-2.2(M), Conditions of Approval); 
c.  Denial of the application. 
(iii)  Unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time in writing, the failure of the HPC to take action on a COA application within 60 days from the date of application shall be deemed to constitute approval of the plans and specifications as submitted, and the Building Official shall issue any required permit, subject to the separate requirements for such permit. 
(9)  Certificate of Appropriateness Standards   
(a)  The standards of this section shall apply to all COA applications except for a COA application for relocation that is subject to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(9), Certificate of Appropriateness for Relocation, or an application for demolition that is subject to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(10), Certificates of Appropriateness for Demolition. 
(b)  The Planning Director, HPC, or DDC (as appropriate), shall approve the application and issue a COA upon a finding the proposed material change(s) in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, cultural, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic structure or the historic district in accordance with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, including the following: 
(i)  The property is used as it was historically or is given a new use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships. 
(ii)  The historic character of the property is retained and preserved. 
(iii)  The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize the property is avoided. 
(iv)  Each property is recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other historic properties, are not undertaken. 
(v)  Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right are retained and preserved. 
(vi)  Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property are preserved. 
(vii)  Deteriorated historic features are repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature matches the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features is substantiated by documentary and physical evidence. 
(viii)  Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, are undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials are not used. 
(ix)  Archeological resources are protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures are undertaken. 
(x)  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction does not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that characterize the property. The new work is differentiated from the old and is compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale and proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its environment. 
(xi)  New additions and adjacent or related new construction is undertaken in a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment is unimpaired. 
(c)  It is not the intent of the city or this Ordinance to discourage contemporary architectural expression, or to require the emulation of existing structures of historic or architectural interest in specific detail. Harmony or incompatibility shall be evaluated in terms of the appropriateness of the architectural features, materials, scale, size, height, and placement of a new structure in relationship to existing structures and to the setting. 
(d)  In making this determination, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall further consider compatibility with the standards and guidelines as adopted by City Council, with accompanying additions and amendments, in addition to any other pertinent factors. 
(10)  Certificate of Appropriateness for Relocation   
(a)  Procedure All COA applications for relocation shall be reviewed by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), pursuant to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(7), Procedure for HPC Review of Certificates of Appropriateness. 
(b)  Relocation Criteria A decision by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), approving, approving with conditions, or denying a COA for the relocation of an historic structure, building, site, or object shall be based on: 
(i)  The historic, scenic, cultural, aesthetic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object; 
(ii)  The importance of the historic structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district; 
(iii)  Whether there are definite plans for the property to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
(iv)  Whether the historic structure, building, site, or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
(v)  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the scenic, cultural, aesthetic, historical, and architectural character of the building, structure, site, or object. 
(11)  Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition   
(a)  Procedure All COA applications for demolition shall be reviewed by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), pursuant to Section 40.1-2.3(I)(7), Procedure for HPC Review of Certificates of Appropriateness. 
(b)  Findings and Decision   
(i)  If preservation of a historic structure is found by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), to be physically or economically unfeasible according Section 40.1-2.3(I)(10)(c), Demolition Criteria, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall issue the COA. 
(ii)  If preservation is found to be both physically and economically feasible, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall take or promote the taking of whatever public or private action that seems likely to lead to such preservation, either on the site on which the historic structure is located or on another site to which it might appropriately be moved. 
(iii)  Where preservation is feasible but the applicant still seeks demolition, the following provisions of Section 40.1-2.3(I)(10)(d), Right to Demolish, from the Code of Virginia may be undertaken while alternatives for preservation are sought. 
(c)  Demolition Criteria A decision by the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), approving or denying a COA for the demolition of an historic structures, buildings, site, or objects shall be based on: 
(i)  The historic, scenic, cultural, aesthetic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object; 
(ii)  The importance of the historic structure, building, site, or object to the ambiance of a district; 
(iii)  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a structure, building, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
(iv)  Whether the historic structure, building, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city; 
(v)  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
(vi)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the historic structure, building, site, or object from collapse; and 
(vii)  Whether the historic structure, building, site, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(d)  Right to Demolish The owner of an historic property or the owner of a building, structure, site, or object in any historic district, shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or demolish such structure, building, site, or object provided, that: 
(i)  The land owner has applied to the HPC for such right. If the demolition request is denied by the HPC, the owner may appeal this decision in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeals; 
(ii)  The land owner has made a bona fide offer to sell the structure, building, site, or object, and the land pertaining therein for the time period established in Table 40.1-2.3(I), Time Schedule for Selling Property, and at a price reasonably related to its fair market value. Such offer must be made to the city or to any other person, government, or agency, which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore the structure, building, site, or object and the land pertaining thereto; 
(iii)  No bona fide contract, binding upon all parties thereto, shall have been executed for the sale of any such building, structure, site, or object and the land pertaining thereto, prior to the expiration of the applicable time period set forth in Table 40.1-2.3(I), Time Schedule for Selling Property. Any appeal which may be taken to the court from the decision of the City Council, whether instituted by the owner or by any other proper party, notwithstanding the provisions heretofore stated relating to a stay of the decision appealed from, shall not affect the right of the owner to make the bona fide offer to sell referred to above; 
(iv)  No offer to sell shall be made more than one year after a final decision by the City Council, but thereafter the owner may renew his request to the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), to approve the demolition of the historic landmark, building, or structure. 
TABLE 40.1-2.3(I): TIME SCHEDULE FOR SELLING PROPERTY 
Offer Price 	Time Period Property has been for Sale at Offer Price 
Less than $25,000 	3 months 
$25,000 to $40,000 	4 months 
$40,000 to $55,000 	5 months 
$55,000 to $75,000 	6 months 
$75,000 to $90,000 	7 months 
$90,000 or more 	12 months 
 
(12)  Demolition by Neglect   
(a)  Allowing a historic structure within a historic district to deteriorate due to neglect is a violation of this Ordinance. Deterioration due to neglect shall constitute demolition by neglect when: 
(i)  Deterioration of the exterior of a building occurs to the extent that it creates, or permits, a hazardous or unsafe condition; or 
(ii)  Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports, horizontal members, roofs, chimneys, exterior wall elements such as siding, wooden walls, brick, plaster, or mortar occurs to the extent that it adversely affects the character of the district or could reasonably lead to irreversible damage to the structure or lead to a hazardous condition. 
(b)  The HPC or DDC, as appropriate, shall monitor the condition of historic properties for demolition by neglect. In the event that the HPC or DDC receives a complaint or determines that a structure is being demolished by neglect, it shall notify the Planning Director, and describe the actions needed to address the violation. 
(13)  Undue Hardship   
(a)  The HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall have the power to reduce or suspend any of the requirements of this section, if the historic structure presents special circumstances whereby the strict compliance of this section will produce an undue hardship or if the spirit of the section has been met and deviation has been deemed to be in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  In granting a hardship the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall make the following findings of fact in writing: 
(i)  Strict compliance with the regulation provides the property owner no reasonable use of the property; 
(ii)  The hardship results from application of the regulation to the property; 
(iii)  The hardship is one that affects the property directly; 
(iv)  The hardship is not the result of the property owner's own actions—that is, special circumstances or conditions causing the hardship exist through no fault of the property owner; 
(v)  The hardship is peculiar to the property; 
(vi)  Financial considerations, unless they greatly decrease or destroy the property's value, do not constitute a legal hardship; and 
(vii)  That the condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this Ordinance. 
(14)  Conditions of Approval   
(a)  The HPC or DDC (as appropriate), may approve a COA with conditions where it deems the conditions necessary to meet the applicable standards and guidelines as well as the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(b)  If the application does not meet the city's adopted standards and guidelines or the applicant does not agree to the proposed conditions, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), shall deny the request. Under no circumstance shall the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), approve a set of conditions without the applicant's approval. 
(15)  Effect of Decision Where the exterior appearance of any historic structure is involved: 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued for erection, alteration or improvement, unless a COA has first been issued; 
(b)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the project is constructed in compliance with the COA; 
(c)  Exterior alterations that do not require a building permit but which can change the exterior appearance of the building or structure such as replacement of doors and windows shall not be constructed or installed unless a COA has first been obtained; 
(d)  During construction or installation, the COA shall be posted on the property in a location where it is visible from the public right-of-way and a complete set of the approved plans shall be retained on the premises and shall be made available to designated staff; 
(e)  In cases of denial where the proposed change would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a COA by the HPC shall be binding upon the designated staff charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(16)  Transfer A COA shall be transferable to subsequent owners of the property for which the certificate is issued. 
(17)  Expiration   
(a)  An approved COA shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance. All work approved and initiated under a COA shall be completed within one year of issuance. 
(b)  Without an approved extension, after one year from issuance of a COA, an owner shall obtain a new certificate in order to commence any previously approved work or to complete any work. Once begun, no project or work shall be left partially- completed. 
(c)  On written request from the applicant, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), may grant a single extension of its approval for a period of up to one additional year if, based upon submissions from the applicant, the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), finds that conditions on the site and in the area of the proposed project are essentially the same as when approval was originally granted. 
(d)  Any COA shall also expire and become null and void if such authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year after being commenced. Any period or periods of time during which the right to use any such certificate or permit is stayed pursuant to this chapter shall be excluded from the computation of the 12 months. 
(18)  Amendment A COA may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original approval. 
(19)  Appeals   
(a)  General Appeals from any action or decision of the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), in granting or refusing to grant a COA a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article may be taken to the City Council for review, by setting forth in writing the alleged error of the action or decision of the HPC or DDC (as appropriate),, provided such petition is: 
(i)  Filed within 30 days after the HPC or DDC (as appropriate), final decision; and 
(ii)  Further provided that the basis for such appeal shall be limited to an alleged error by the HPC in finding that the proposed erection, alteration, reconstruction, or restoration of a structure would not be architecturally compatible with the historic properties, buildings, or structures within the historic district. 
(b)  Procedure for Appeals of HPC or DDC Decisions   
(i)  An Appeal Review Committee (ARC) shall be created consisting of the Planning Director, the Building Official and a Deputy City Manager designated by the City Manager to determine whether there are legitimate grounds for such an appeal before placing the appeal on the City Council agenda. 
(ii)  Upon the filing of an appeal, the ARC shall review the request to determine if there are grounds for appeal based on Sections 40.1-2.3(I) (9), and (10). 
(iii)  If the ARC finds that there are no grounds for appeal, they shall notify the applicant in writing of their decision. An appeal of the ARC's decision may be taken by the applicant to the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth for review by filing a petition at law which sets forth the alleged error of the action or decision provided that such petition is filed within 30 days after the final decision is rendered by the ARC. 
(iv)  If the ARC finds that there are grounds for appeal, they shall forward the request to the City Clerk so the matter may be placed on the City Council agenda. When a matter is forwarded to the City Council, a written conclusion from the ARC shall accompany the appeal. 
(v)  City Council shall hear the appeal and either reverse or affirm the decision of the HPC based on an error in findings. 
(vi)  If City Council fails to reverse the HPC's findings and upholds the HPC decision, an appeal may be taken by the applicant to the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth for review by filing a petition at law which sets forth the alleged error of the action or decision provided that such petition is filed within 30 days after the final decision is rendered by the City Council. 
(c)  Procedure for Appeals of Planning Director Decisions An appeal from the Planning Director's decision on a COA application shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
(d)  Stay Filing of an appeal, whether an appeal of the HPC, DDC, ARC, or City Council's decision, shall stay the appealed decision pending outcome of the appeal except that such filing will not stay the decision if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a building or structure. 
(20)  Violations Failure to obtain a COA or performance of work that surpasses or is in conflict with an approved COA is a violation of this Ordinance, and is subject to the applicable remedies in Article 40-1.7: Enforcement. 
(J)  Interpretation   
 
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of this section is to outline a procedure for the interpretation of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Authority   
(a)  Interpretations of the text of this Ordinance and the official zoning map shall be made by either the Planning Director or the Zoning Administrator, in consultation with the City Attorney, in accordance with subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for making the following interpretations: 
(i)  The dimensional standards in Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts; 
(ii)  The use table and use classifications in Article 40.1-4: Use Standards; and 
(iii)  The official zoning map boundaries (Section 40.1-1.7(D), Interpretation of Official Zoning Map Boundaries), and 40.1-3: Zoning Districts. 
(c)  The Planning Director shall be responsible for interpretations of all other matters related to this Ordinance, including conditions of approval and for all permits and development approvals. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Initiation A written interpretation may be requested by the City Council, Planning Commission, BZA, HPC, any resident or landowner in the city, or any person having a contractual interest in land in the city. 
(b)  Basic Procedures The procedures and requirements for the submission, completeness determination, review, and decision on a Request for Interpretation are as established in Section 40.1-2.2, Common Review Procedures. 
(c)  Review and Action by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator Within a reasonable period after the Request for Interpretation is determined complete, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall review the request and render an interpretation, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(J)(4), Standards for Interpretation. 
(4)  Standards for Interpretations   
(a)  Interpretation of Official Zoning Map When the request is for an Interpretation of zoning district boundaries on the official zoning map, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the standards in Section 40.1-1.7(D), Interpretation of Official Zoning Map Boundaries, and consider the request in light of the comprehensive plan, this Ordinance, the official zoning map, the City Code, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, and other relevant codes and statutes. 
(b)  Unspecified Uses When the request is for an interpretation of whether an unspecified use falls within a use classification, use category, or use type allowed in a zoning district, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the standards of Section 40.1-4.2, Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types, in making the interpretation. 
(c)  Other Interpretations, Including Proffers and Conditions of Approval For other written interpretations, the Planning Director shall evaluate the request in light of the comprehensive plan, this Ordinance, the official zoning map, the City Code, the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, other relevant codes and statutes, and any previously approved permits or development approvals (if applicable). 
(d)  All Interpretations When making written interpretations, the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall consult with the City Attorney and other affected city officials before rendering the interpretation. 
 
(5)  Form and Notification of Interpretation The interpretation shall be in writing, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and sent to the applicant by mail within a reasonable period of time after the Request for Interpretation is made. 
(6)  Official Record The Planning Director shall maintain a record of written interpretations that shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Planning Director, upon reasonable request, during normal business hours. 
(7)  Appeal An appeal from a written interpretation shall be reviewed and decided by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeals. 
(K)  Appeal   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure and standards for any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation related to this Ordinance made by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director (except for the Planning Director's decisions on type I development plans, minor subdivision plats, and final subdivision plats), to appeal the decision or interpretation to the Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA). 
(2)  Initiation An appeal on a decision or interpretation may be initiated by any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation related to this Ordinance made by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director (except for the Planning Director's decisions on type I development plans, minor subdivision plats, and final subdivision plats). The appeal shall be initiated by filing a written Notice of Appeal, with the Planning Director, along with the appropriate fee, within 30 days of the date of the decision or interpretation. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Contents of Appeal The written Notice of Appeal shall include a statement of the error or improper decision or interpretation, the date of that decision, the grounds for the appeal, and all related support materials. 
(b)  Forwarding the Record Upon receiving the written Notice of Appeal, the Planning Director shall transmit it and all papers, documents and other materials relating to the decision or interpretation that is being appealed, to the BZA. This material shall constitute the record on the appeal. 
(c)  Public Hearing, Review, and Decision by the BZA   
(i)  Following staff review and public notification in accordance with Section 40.1-2.2(J), Public Notification, the BZA shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal. 
(ii)  At the hearing on the appeal, the BZA shall consider the application, relevant support materials, the staff report, and any comments given by the public. The appellant or the appellant's agent shall state the grounds for the appeal and identify any materials or evidence from the record to support the appeal. The Planning Director or Zoning Administrator, as appropriate, shall be given an opportunity to respond, as shall any other city administrative official or person(s) the BZA deems necessary and appropriate. 
(iii)  After the conclusion of the hearing, the BZA, by majority vote of a quorum present, shall either affirm, partly affirm, modify, reverse, or partly reverse the decision or interpretation, based on the standards in Section 40.1-2.3 (K) (4), Appeal Standards. The decision shall be made on the appeal within 60 days of the date of the filing of the written Notice of Appeal. 
(4)  Appeal Standards A decision or interpretation of the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director, whichever is appropriate, shall be presumed correct, and may not be reversed or modified unless there is evidence in the record that the decision is not correct, based on the relevant procedures and review standards of this Ordinance. The BZA shall consider the purpose and intent of any applicable provisions of this Ordinance and other relevant ordinances, laws, and regulations in making its decision. 
(5)  Stay An appeal shall stay all administrative proceedings by the city in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator or Planning Director certifies to the BZA that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the administrative proceedings shall not be stayed unless a restraining order is granted by the circuit court. 
(6)  Appeal Any person jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the BZA, or any aggrieved taxpayer or any officer, department, commission, or the city, within 30 days of the date of the decision of the BZA, may appeal the decision of the BZA on the decision to the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth in accordance with Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 2, 23, 26), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 1), 12-8-2015)  
ARTICLE 40.1-3: - ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
40.1-3.1 - General Provisions 
(A)  Types of Zoning Districts Land within the city is classified by this Ordinance to be within one of a number of base zoning districts. Land within any base zoning district may also be classified into one or more overlay zoning districts, in which case regulations governing development in the overlay district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in the underlying base zoning district, unless expressly stated otherwise. 
(B)  Compliance with District Standards No land within the city shall be developed except in accordance with the zoning district regulations of this article and all other regulations of this Ordinance, including but not limited to, Article 40.1-4: Use Standards, and Article 40.1-5: Development Standards.  
40.1-3.2 - Base Zoning Districts Established 
Table 40.1-3.2, Base Zoning Districts Established, sets out the base zoning districts and overlay zoning districts established by this Ordinance. Base zoning districts are grouped into Residential, Business, Activity Center, and Special districts. 
TABLE 40.1-3.2: BASE ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 
DISTRICT ABBREVIATION 	DISTRICT NAME 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
NR 	Neighborhood Residential 
GR 	General Residential 
UR 	Urban Residential 
UR-H 	High Density Urban Residential 
BUSINESS DISTRICTS 
NMU 	Neighborhood Mixed-Use 
GMU 	General Mixed-Use 
MU-H 	High Intensity Mixed-Use 
IL 	Light Industrial 
IN 	Industrial 
ACTIVITY CENTER DISTRICTS 
NAC 	Neighborhood Activity Center 
CAC 	Community Activity Center 
RAC 	Regional Activity Center 
SPECIAL DISTRICTS 
WF 	Waterfront 
D1 	Downtown D1 
D2 	Downtown D2 
HR 	Historic Residential 
HLO 	Historic Limited Office 
HLB 	Historic Limited Business 
PG 	Preservation/Government 
 
(A)  Classification of Base Zoning Districts Land shall be classified or reclassified into a base zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment. 
(B)  Relationship to Overlay Zoning Districts Regulations governing development in an overlay zoning district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in the underlying base zoning district, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance. If the standards governing a base zoning district expressly conflict with those governing an overlay zoning district, the standards governing the overlay zoning district shall control, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance. 
(C)  Organization of Base Zoning District Regulations Sections 40.1-3.3 through 40.1-3.6 set out the general purposes of each group of base zoning districts and contain subsections that set out the purpose and bulk and dimensional standards for each individual base zoning district. These subsections have a common structure consisting of a purpose statement, applicable dimensional standards, photographs showing a hypothetical set of building forms for the district, graphic depictions of hypothetical street layout and lot patterns, and a hypothetical graphic depiction of the district's bulk and dimensional standards as applied to typical lot patterns and building forms. Article 40.1-4: Use Standards, includes Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table, a summary use table specifying permitted, special uses, and allowable uses for each of the base zoning districts and references any standards specific to individual uses. 
(D)  Diagrams for Illustrative Purposes Only The building form photographs, lot pattern diagrams, and typical building configuration graphics are for illustrative purposes only, and may not be consistent with all the dimensional requirements. In these cases, the text of this Ordinance shall control. 
(E)  Retention of Original Dimensional Provisions One copy of each of the base district tables containing dimensional requirements shall be kept on file without alteration in the office of the Planning Director. These copies shall be called the "Original Tables of Dimensional Requirements." When amendments to the text of this Ordinance alter the provisions contained within the Original Tables of Dimensional Requirements, each such alteration shall be identified by ordinance number and shall be filed with the Original Tables of Dimensional Requirements. In case of any dispute as to the contents of the dimensional standards in this Ordinance, the Original Tables of Dimensional Requirements, and any subsequent alterations, shall control.  
40.1-3.3 - Residential base zoning districts 
(A)  General Purposes The residential base zoning districts established in this section are intended to provide diverse housing options in a comfortable, healthy, safe, and pleasant environment in which to live, recreate, and shop at a neighborhood level. More specifically, they are intended to: 
(1)  Provide appropriately located lands for residential development that are consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and recreational and open space areas for each Dwelling Unit, and protect residents from the negative effects of noise, excessive population density, traffic congestion, flooding, and other significant adverse environmental impacts; 
(3)  Protect residential areas from fires, explosions, toxic fumes and substances, and other public safety hazards; 
(4)  Provide for a diverse range of residential housing choice, affordability, and diversity with varying housing densities, types, and designs, including accessory dwelling units; 
(5)  Provide for safe and efficient vehicular access and circulation and promote bicycle-, pedestrian-, and transit-friendly neighborhoods; 
(6)  Provide for public services and facilities needed to serve residential areas and accommodate public and semi-public land uses that complement residential development or require a residential environment while protecting residential areas from incompatible nonresidential development; 
(7)  Create neighborhoods and preserve existing community character while accommodating new infill development and redevelopment consistent with the city's goals and objectives; and 
(8)  Preserve the unique character and resources of the traditional neighborhoods and the community. 
(9)  The Residential Mobile Home (RMH) district standards are included in Appendix C of this Ordinance. 
(B)  Lot Size and Lot Width Requirements for New Subdivisions or Resubdivisions in Residential Districts.   
(1)  Effective June 12, 2018 all new subdivisions of property or resubdivisions of existing lots in the General Residential (GR), Urban Residential (UR) and Urban Residential—High (UR-H) zoning districts shall adhere to the minimum lot size and lot width requirements in Table 40.1-3.3(B) below: 
TABLE 40.1-3.3(6) 
ZONING DISTRICT 	MINIMUM LOT SIZE (in square feet) 	MINIMUM LOT WIDTH 	NOTES 
General Residential (GR) 	12,500 	75 ft. 	The minimum lot width may be reduced to no less than the average lot width within the same entire block on the same side of the street. 
Urban Residential (UR) 	6,000 	60 ft. 	
Urban Residential—High (UR-H) 	7,500 	50 ft. 	
 
(2)  Individual lots of record existing prior to the effective date of this subsection 40.1-3.3(B) shall not be deemed to be non-conforming lots due to these provisions. 
(3)  Multiple adjoining lots under the same ownership shall be subject to the provisions of Section 40.1-6.4(D), Lot Consolidation, and shall comply with the requirements of Table 40.1-3.3(B) above. 
(4)  Any application submitted to the City and deemed by the City to be complete as of June 12, 2018 shall be exempt from this Subsection 
40.1-3.3(B) provided (a) the plat of subdivision or resubdivision is approved on or before September 10, 2018 or (b) if the applicant has been unable to obtain plat approval by September 10, 2018 despite continuous and diligent efforts, then plat approval is obtained as soon thereafter as reasonably practicable in the exercise of commercially reasonable diligence. 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 2), 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 2018-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-2018) 
(C) Neighborhood Residential (NR) District 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 	TYPICAL BUILDING TYPES 
The Neighborhood Residential (NR) district is established to accommodate single-family detached residential dwellings at low densities. District regulations are intended to discourage any use that substantially interferes with the development of single-family detached dwellings or that is detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the district. The district also accommodates accessory dwelling units and complementary uses usually found in residential zoning districts such as parks, open space, community gardens, religious institutions and minor utilities. , Elementary schools, family care homes, small day care facilities, golf courses, country clubs, and major utilities are allowed subject to a use permit (See Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit). 	 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	
STANDARD 	RESIDENTIAL USES 	INSTITUTIONAL USES 	
Density 	Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	1.5; (not applicable if contextual lot size standards are used) 	N/A 	
Lot Area 	Lot Size, Minimum 	The lesser of: 30,000 sf, or the average lot size of lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 3 or more lots within the 300-foot area 	30,000 sf 	
	Lot Width, Minimum 	The lesser of: 150 feet, or the average lot width of lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 3 or more lots within the 300-foot area 	150 ft 	
	Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	45 	
Required Yards 	Front, Minimum 	The lesser of: 40 ft, or the average front yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 3 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 300-foot area 	40 ft 	
	Side, Minimum 	The lesser of: 10 ft, or the average side yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 3 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 300-foot area—except no side yard shall be less than 5 feet unless part of a zero side lot line development 	10 ft 	
	Rear, Minimum 	The lesser of: 40 ft, or the average rear yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 3 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 300-foot area 	40 ft 	
	Corner, Minimum 	15 ft 	
	STANDARD 	RESIDENTIAL USES 	INSTITUTIONAL USES 	TYPICAL LOT PATTERN 
	Accessory Structure, Minimum (ft) 	10 if 600 sf in size or smaller; otherwise same as principal use [1] [2] 	 
	Garage Setback, Minimum 	Even with or behind front façade 	
Bldg. Form 	Height, Maximum (ft/stories) [3] 	36/4 	36/3 	
	Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	800 square feet [4] 	
Notes 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet'; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
[1] No accessory structure/building may be located between the principal building and any front or side street. 
[2] Accessory structures of two or more stories shall meet the minimum yard requirements for principal uses. 
[3] Accessory structures of 600 sf in size or smaller may not exceed one story (12 ft) in height. 
[4] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
[5]No accessory structure excepting Amateur Ham Radio and Television Antennas may exceed the height of the existing principal structure. 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
 
(D) General Residential (GR) District 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 	TYPICAL BUILDING TYPES 
The General Residential (GR) district is established to accommodate primarily single-family detached, and two-to four-family dwellings, subject to design standards to ensure their compatibility with the single-family character of the district, at moderate densities. District regulations are intended to discourage any use that substantially interferes with the development of single-family or two-to-four family dwellings, or that is detrimental to the quiet residential nature of the district. The district also accommodates accessory dwelling units and complementary uses usually found in residential zoning districts such as parks, open space, public golf courses, community centers, elementary and middle schools, home child care uses, religious institutions, and minor utilities. High schools, , country clubs, adult and child care centers, hospitals, and major utilities are allowed subject to a use permit (See Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit). 	 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	
STANDARD 	RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL OTHER USES 	
Density 	Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	5.0 (not applicable if contextual lot size standards are used) 	N/A 	
	Intensity, Maximum (FAR) 	N/A 	0.6 	
Lot Area 	Lot Size, Minimum 	The lesser of: 7,500 sf, or the average lot size of lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 5 or more lots within 300-foot area 
SEE SUBSECTION 40.1-3.3(B) FOR SUBDIVISIONS. 	10,000 sf 	
	Lot Width, Minimum 	The lesser of: 50 feet, or the average lot width of lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 5 or more lots within the 300-foot area 
SEE SUBSECTION 40.1-3.3(B) FOR SUBDIVISIONS. 	70 ft 	
	Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	45 	
Required Yards 	Front, Minimum 	The lesser of: 25 ft, or the average front yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 3 or more lots with existing residential structures on them within the 300-foot area 	25 ft 	
	Side, Minimum 	Two-to-four family dwelling: 10 ft; For all other residential uses, the lesser of: 7 ft, or the average side yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 3 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 300-foot area; 
No side yard shall be less than 5 feet unless part of a zero side lot line development[1] 	10 ft 	
	Rear, Minimum 	The lesser of: 25 ft, or the average rear yard on lots within 300 feet along on the same block face, provided there are 3 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 300-foot area [2] 	25 ft 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet'; "FAR" = floor area ratio; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
	STANDARD 	RESIDENTIAL USES 	INSTITUTIONAL USES 	TYPICAL LOT PATTERN 
	Corner, Side Minimum 	15 ft 	 
	Accessory Structure, Minimum (ft) 	5 if 600 sf in size or smaller; otherwise, same as principal use[4] [5] 	
	Garage Setback, Minimum 	Even with or behind the front façade for residential uses; Even with front façade 	
Bldg. Form 	Height, Maximum (ft/stories) [6] 	36/4 	36/3 	
	Accessory Structure Size, Max. 	800 square feet[7] 	
NOTES 	[1] An additional setback of five feet per floor over two floors shall be required. 
[2] Rear yard setback may be reduced to 15 feet when there is a 25-foot corner side yard or there are no accessory structures or parking spaces in the rear yard. 
[3] The minimum shall be 15 feet for lots platted before March 22, 1994. 
[4] No accessory structure/building may be located between the principal. 
[5] Accessory structures of two or more stories shall meet the minimum yard requirements for principal uses. 
[6]Accessory structures of 600 sf in size or smaller may not exceed one story (12 ft) in height. 
[7] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
[8]No accessory structure excepting Amateur Ham Radio and Television Antennas may exceed the height of the existing principal structure. 	
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
 
(E) URBAN RESIDENTIAL (UR) DISTRICT 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 	TYPICAL BUILDING TYPES 
The Urban Residential (UR) district is established to accommodate a diverse range of residential development as a principal use, along with mixed-use and neighborhood-serving commercial development. The district accommodates all forms of residential development, including single-family detached dwellings, two-to-four family dwellings, townhomes, live/work dwellings, multi-family dwellings, and residential dwelling units above the first floor of commercial development. Also allowed are complimentary uses such as parks, open space, libraries, religious institutions, community centers, schools (elementary, middle, and high), child care centers, and minor utilities. Low-intensity, neighborhood-serving commercial and service uses are allowed to encourage diverse, functioning neighborhoods. Police and fire stations, assisted living facilities, nursing homes, marinas, professional services offices, financial institutions, and drug stores without drive-throughs are allowed subject to a use permit (See Section 40.1-2.3 (B), Use Permit.). 	 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	
STANDARD 	RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL OTHER USES 	
	Single-Family Detached Uses 	All Other Residential Uses 		
Density 	Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	8.0 	18 (not applicable if contextual lot size standards are used) [1] 	N/A 	
	Intensity, Maximum (FAR) 	N/A 	0.6 	
Lot Area 	Lot Size, Minimum [2] 	The lesser of: 5,000 sf, or the average lot size of lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots within the 300-foot area 
SEE SUBSECTION 40.1-3.3(B) FOR SUBDIVISIONS. 	7,500 sf [1] 	7,500 sf 	
	Lot Width, Minimum 	The lesser of: 35 feet, or the average lot width of lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots within the 300-foot area 	24 feet, plus 5 feet for each end unit beyond 4 units [3] 
SEE SUBSECTION 40.1-3.3(B) FOR SUBDIVISIONS. 	50 ft 	
	Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	55 	
Required Yards 	Front, Minimum 	The lesser of: 15 ft, or the average front yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 300-foot area 	15 ft 	25 ft 	
	Side, Minimum 	The lesser of: 7 ft, or the average side yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 300-foot area; No side yard shall be less than 5 ft unless part of a zero side lot line development 	When abutting the end unit of a building: 10 ft; All others: 10 percent of the lot width, up to 15 ft; No side yard shall be less than 5 ft unless part of a zero side lot line development [4] 	10 ft 	
	STANDARD 	SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED USES 	ALL OTHER RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL OTHER USES 	TYPICAL LOT PATTERN 
	Rear, Minimum 	The lesser of: 25 ft, or the average rear yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots with existing residential within the 300-foot area [5] 	25 ft [5] 	25 ft 	 
	Corner Side, Minimum (ft) 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 	10 ft. 	
	Accessory Structure, Minimum (ft) 	5 if 600 sf in size or smaller; otherwise, same as principal use [6] [7] 	
	Garage Setback, Minimum 	Even with or behind front façade for single-family detached dwellings 	
Bldg. Form 	Height, Maximum (ft/stories) [7] 	36/4 	36/3 [8] 	
	Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	800 square feet [9] 	sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet; "FAR" = floor area ratio; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
NOTES 	[1] Townhome and two-to-four-family dwellings may develop without complying with the minimum lot size standard, provided the development does not exceed 8 units an acre and it complies with all other dimensional standards. 
[2] Minimum lot size is applied to the entire development site for multi-family, townhome, and two-to four-family dwellings. 
[3] An additional setback of five feet per floor over two floors shall be required. 
[4] Rear yards may be reduced to 15 feet when there are no accessory structures or parking spaces in the rear yard. 
[5] The minimum shall be 15 feet for lots platted before March 22, 1994. 
[6] No accessory structure/building may be located between the principal. 
[7] Accessory structures of two or more stories shall meet the minimum yard requirements for principal uses. 
[8] Accessory structures of 600 sf in size or smaller may not exceed one story (12 ft) in height. 
[9] t. No accessory structure excepting Amateur Ham Radio and Television Antennas may exceed the height of the existing principal structure. 
[10] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
 
(F) HIGH DENSITY URBAN RESIDENTIAL (UR-H) DISTRICT 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 	TYPICAL BUILDING TYPES 
The High Density Urban Residential (UR-H) district is established to accommodate a diverse range of residential development as a principal use, along with mixed-use and neighborhood-serving commercial development. The district accommodates most forms of residential development, including two-to-four-family dwellings, townhomes, live/work dwelling units, multi-family dwellings, and residential dwelling units above the first floor of commercial development. Also allowed are complimentary uses such as parks, open space, libraries, religious institutions, community centers, schools (elementary, middle, and high), child care centers, and minor utilities. Neighborhood-serving commercial and service uses are allowed to encourage diverse, functioning neighborhoods. Police and fire stations, assisted living facilities, nursing homes, marinas, professional services offices, and financial institutions and drug stores with drive-throughs are allowed subject to a use permit (See Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit). 	 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	
STANDARD 	RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL OTHER USES 	
	Single-Family Detached Uses 	Multi-Family Uses 	All Other Residential Uses 		
Density 	Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	N/A 	25 	20 (not applicable if contextual lot size standards are used) [1] 	N/A 	
	Intensity, Maximum (FAR) 	N/A 	0.7 	
Lot Area 	Lot Size, Minimum [2] 	The lesser of: 5,000 sf, or the average lot size of lots within 200 feet along the same block face, provided there are 5 or more lots within the 200-foot area 
SEE SUBSECTION 40.1-3.3(B) FOR SUBDIVISIONS. 	6,000 sf [3] 	6,000 sf [1][3] 	6,000 sf 	
	Lot Width, Minimum 	25 	25 feet, +4 feet for each end unit beyond 4 [3] 
SEE SUBSECTION 40.1-3.3(B) FOR SUBDIVISIONS. 	50 feet, +4 feet for each end unit beyond 3 [3] 	25 ft 	
	Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	65 	
Required Yards 	Front, Minimum 	The lesser of: 10 ft, or the average front yard on lots within 200 feet along the same block face, provided there are 5 or more lots with existing single-family residential structures within the 200-foot area 	10 ft 	10 ft 	10 ft 	
	Side, Minimum 	The lesser of: 7 ft, or the average side yard on lots within 200 feet along the same block face, provided there are 5 or more lots with existing residential structures on them within the 200-foot area; No side yard shall be less than 5 ft unless part of a zero side lot line development 	When abutting the end unit of a building: 10 ft; All others: 10 percent of the lot width, up to 15 ft; No side yard shall be less than 5 ft unless part of a zero side lot line development [4] 	10 ft 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet; "FAR" = floor area ratio; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
	STANDARD 	RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL OTHER USES 	TYPICAL LOT PATTERN 
		Single-Family Detached Uses 	Multi-Family Uses 	All Other Residential Uses 		 
	Corner, Side Minimum 	10 ft 	15 ft. 	10 ft. 	
	Rear, Minimum 	The lesser of: 25 ft, or the average rear yard on lots within 200 feet along the same block face, provided there are 5 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 200-foot area [4] 	25 ft [4] 	25 ft [4] 	25 ft [5] 	
	Accessory Structure, Min. (ft) 	5 in 600 sf in size or smaller; otherwise same as principal use [6] [7] 	
	Garage Setback, Min. 	Even with or behind front façade for single-family attached dwellings 	
Bldg. Form 	Height, Maximum (ft/stories) [8] 	36/3 for single-family detached 	45/5 for all other residential uses 	45/5 	
	Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	800 square feet 	
Notes 	[1] Townhome, and two-to-four-family dwellings may develop without complying with the minimum lot size standard, provided the development does not exceed 8 units an acre and it complies with all other dimensional standards. 
[2] Minimum lot size is applied to the entire development site for multi-family, townhome, and two-to four-family dwellings. 
[3] An additional setback of five feet per floor over two floors shall be required. 
[4] Rear yards may be reduced to 15 feet when there are no accessory structures or parking spaces in the rear yard. 
[5] The minimum shall be 15 feet for lots platted before March 22, 1994. 
[6] No accessory structure/building may be located between the principal. 
[7] Accessory structures of two or more stories shall meet the minimum yard requirements for principal uses. 
[8] Accessory structures of 600 sf in size or smaller may not exceed one story (12 ft) in height. 
[9] t. No accessory structure excepting Amateur Ham Radio and Television Antennas may exceed the height of the existing principal structure. 
[10] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 2), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 2), 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 2018-39 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-2018)  
40.1-3.4 - Business Base Zoning Districts 
(A)  General Purposes The business base zoning districts are established for the general purpose of ensuring there are lands in the city that provide a wide range of office, retail, service, mixed, industrial, and related uses to meet household and business needs, and more specifically to: 
(1)  Provide appropriately located lands for the full range of business uses needed by the city's residents, businesses, and workers, consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Strengthen the city's economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the city; 
(3)  Provide employment opportunities for residents of surrounding communities; 
(4)  Create suitable environments for various types of business uses, and protect them from the adverse effects of incompatible uses; 
(5)  Create suitable environments for various types of mixed use development, where business, office, retail, and residential uses are designed and integrated in compatible ways; 
(6)  Establish a sense of place along the city's commercial corridors, with attractive shop fronts streetscapes, and multi-modal accessibility; and 
(7)  Minimize the impact of business development on residential districts and uses. 
(B) Neighborhood Mixed-Use (NMU) District 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 	TYPICAL BUILDING TYPES 
The Neighborhood Mixed Use (NMU) district is established to accommodate a mix of residential and small-scale, low-intensity, and "convenience" retail and service uses that provide goods and services serving the residents of the immediately surrounding neighborhood (e.g., personal service uses, restaurants, and limited retail). Development in the district should not include uses of a size that is out of scale with a residential neighborhood, or that attracts traffic from outside the surrounding neighborhood. Individual retail and other commercial uses shall not exceed 5,000 square feet without obtaining a use permit (See Section 40.1-2.3.(B), Use Permit). Residential uses are encouraged on the upper floors of nonresidential establishments. The district is subject to standards intended to ensure development is consistent with the neighborhood scale and compatible with surrounding uses. 	 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	 
STANDARD 	SINGLE-FAMILY USES 	ALL OTHER RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL OTHER USES 	
Density 	Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	N/A 	12 	N/A 	
	Intensity, Maximum (FAR) 	N/A 	0.7 	
Lot Area 	Lot Size, Minimum 	The lesser of: 7,500 sf, or the average lot size of lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots within the 300-foot area 	7,500 sf [1] 	5,000 sf 	
	Lot Width, Minimum 	The lesser of: 50 feet, or the average lot width of lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots within the 300-foot area 	75 feet, plus 5 feet for each additional unit beyond 2 units 	50 ft 	
	Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	60 	70 	TYPICAL LOT PATTERN 
Required Yards 	Front, Minimum (ft) [2] 	The lesser of: 20 ft, or the average front yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 300-foot area 	20 	 
	Side, Minimum [2] 	The lesser of: 7 ft, or the average side yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots with existing residential structures within the 300-foot area; No side yard shall be less than 5 ft unless it is part of a zero side lot line development 	When abutting the end unit of a building: 10 ft; All others: 20 percent of the lot width, up to 20 ft; No side yard shall be less than 5 ft unless it is part of a zero side lot line development [3] 	20, 10 if parcel is less than 100 ft in width 	
 
Required yards 	STANDARD 	SINGLE-FAMILY USES 	ALL OTHER RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL
OTHER
USES 	NOTES 
	Rear, Minimum (ft) [2] 	The lesser of: 15 ft, or the average rear yard on lots within 300 feet along the same block face, provided there are 7 or more lots with existing residential within the 300-foot area [4] 	15 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet; "FAR" = floor area ratio; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
[1] Minimum lot size shall be applied to the entire development site for multi-family, single-family attached, townhome, and two-to four family dwellings. 
[2] Yards abutting streets shall be configured to maintain at least 40 linear feet between the centerline of the street and any adjacent building. 
[3] An additional setback of 5 feet per floor over 2 floors shall be required. 
[4] Rear yards may be reduced to 15 feet when there are no accessory structures or parking spaces in the rear yard. 
[5] No accessory structure/building may be located between the principal. 
[6] Accessory structures of two or more stories shall meet the minimum yard requirements for principal uses. 
[7] Accessory structures of 600 sf in size or smaller may not exceed one story (12 ft) in height. 
[8] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements 
[9]All retail and other commercial uses over 5,000 square feet shall be required to obtain a use permit. 
	Corner, Side Minimum (ft) 	10 ft. 	20 ft.: If parcel is less than 100 ft. in width: 10 ft. 	
	Accessory Structure, Minimum (ft) 	5 if 600 sf in size or smaller; otherwise same as principal use [5] [6] 	
	Garage Setback, Minimum 	Even with or behind front façade 	N/A 	
Bldg. Form 	Height, Maximum (ft/stories) [7] 	36/3 	36/4, unless part of mixed use development that includes a minimum of 2 floors of residential units, then 50/5 	
	Accessory Structure. Size, Maximum 	33% of principal use [8] 	N/A 	
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
 
(C) GENERAL MIXED-USE (GMU) DISTRICT 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 	TYPICAL BUILDING TYPES 
The General Mixed-Use (GMU) district is established to provide a wide variety of professional offices, institutions, and a broad range of light- and moderate intensity commercial uses proximate to residential and more intense business districts so as to satisfy the city's demand for services. These regulations are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a quiet, compatible, and uncongested mixed-use environment intermingled with residential and institutional uses. Live/work, multi-family, and upper-story dwellings, and numerous institutional use types are allowed. Offices, community facilities, religious institutions, retail uses and personal services intended to serve the workers and residents in the district are also allowed. 	 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	
STANDARD 	ATTACHED
RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL OTHER
RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL OTHER USES 	
Density 	Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	N/A 	16 	N/A 	
	Intensity, Maximum (FAR) 	N/A 	0.65 	
Lot Area 	Lot Size, Minimum (sf) 	6,000 	10,000 [1] 	
	Lot Width, Minimum (ft) 	50 	100 [1] 	100 	
	Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	55 	
Required Yards 	Front, Minimum (ft)[2] 	20 	15 	
	Side, Minimum [2] 	10 ft 	5 ft + 5 feet for each building story beyond 3 	
	Rear, Minimum [2] 	30 ft 		
	Corner, Side Minimum (ft) [2] 	20 	15 	
	Accessory Structure, Minimum (ft) 	10 if 600 sf in size or smaller; otherwise same as principal use [3] [4] 	
	Garage Setback, Minimum (ft) 	Even with or behind front façade 	N/A 	
Bldg. Form 	Height, Maximum (ft/stories) [5] 	36/3 	60/6 	75/7 	
	Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	33% of principal use [6] 	
Notes 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet; "FAR" = floor area ratio; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
[1] Minimum lot size or lot width shall be applied to the entire development site for multi-family, single-family attached, townhome, and two-to four family dwellings. 
[2] Yards abutting streets shall be configured to maintain at least 40 linear feet between the centerline of the street and any adjacent building. 
[3] No accessory structure/building may be located between the principal. 
[4] Accessory structures of two or more stories shall meet the minimum yard requirements for principal uses. 
[5] Accessory structures of 600 sf in size or smaller may not exceed one story (12 ft) in height. 
[6] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
 
(D) HIGH INTENSITY MIXED-USE (MU-H) DISTRICT 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 	TYPICAL BUILDING TYPES 
The High-Intensity Mixed Use (MU-H) district is established to accommodate a mix and residential and a diverse range of medium- to high-intensity retail, service, and office uses that provide goods and services serving the residents and businesses in the community at large (e.g., large shopping centers, large convenience stores, large retail sales establishments, and heavier commercial uses). The district is typically located along major arterials, at the intersection of arterials. Higher-density residential uses are encouraged on the upper floors of nonresidential establishments, and may exist as stand-alone uses. The district is subject to standards intended to ensure development is compatible with surrounding uses. 	 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	
STANDARD 	ALL RESIDENTIAL USES 	ALL OTHER USES 	
Density 	Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	18 	N/A 	
	Intensity, Maximum (FAR) 	N/A 	0.7 	
Lot Area 	Lot Size, Minimum (sf) [1] 	7,500 	5,000 	
	Lot Width, Minimum 	80 ft, + 5 feet for each additional unit beyond 2 units 	50 ft 	
	Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	70 	
Required Yards 	Front, Minimum (ft) 	20 	20 	
	Side, Minimum (ft) 	When abutting the end unit of a building: 20 ft; All others: 10 percent of the lot width, up to 20 ft; No side yard shall be less than 5 ft unless part of a zero side lot line development [2] 	20, 10 if parcel is less than 100 ft in width 	
	Rear, Minimum (ft) 	20 ft [3] 	15 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet; "FAR" = floor area ratio; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
	Corner Side, Minimum (ft) 	20, 10 if parcel is less than 100 ft. in width 	
	Accessory Structure, Minimum (ft) 	5 if 600 sf in size or smaller; otherwise same as principal use [4] [5] 	
Bldg. Form 	Height, Maximum (ft/stories) [6] 	75/7 	
	Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	33% of principal use [7] 	
Notes 	[1] Minimum lot size shall be construed as the entire development site for multi-family, townhome, and two-to four family dwellings. 

[2] An additional setback of 5 feet per floor over 2 floors shall be required. 
[3] Rear yards may be reduced to 15 feet when there are no accessory structures or parking spaces in the rear yard. 
[4] No accessory structure/building may be located between the principal. 
[5] Accessory structures of two or more stories shall meet the minimum yard requirements for principal uses. 
[6] Accessory structures of 600 sf in size or smaller may not exceed one story (12 ft) in height. 
[7] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
 
(E) LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (IL) DISTRICT 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The Light Industrial (IL) district is established and intended to accommodate light manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, distribution, storage, research and development, and other industrial uses that are small-scale or otherwise have minimal exterior movement of vehicles, materials, and goods, as well as few or minimal adverse environmental and visual impacts. The district is subject to standards intended to minimize potential nuisances or damage to the environment and adverse impacts on surrounding uses. 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD 	ALL PERMITTED USES 
Density 	Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	N/A 
	Intensity, Maximum (FAR) 	0.75 
Lot Area 	Lot Size, Minimum (sf) 	7,000 [1] 
	Lot Width, Minimum (ft) 	50 
	Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	70 
Required Yards 	Front, Minimum (ft) [2] 	25 
	Side, Minimum [2] 	20 ft, 10 ft if parcel is less than 100 feet wide 
	Rear, Minimum (ft) [2] 	15 
	Corner, Side Minimum (ft) [2] 	20 
	Accessory Structure, Minimum (ft) 	N/A 
	Overhead/Vehicular Access Door Setback, Minimum (ft) 	To side or behind building 
Bldg. Form 	Height, Maximum (ft/stories) 	N/A 
	Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	N/A 
Notes 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet'; "FAR" = floor area ratio; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
  
[1] Yards abutting streets shall be configured to maintain at least 40 linear feet between the centerline of the street and any adjacent building. 
TYPICAL BUILDING TYPES 
 
TYPICAL LOT PATTERNS 
 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
 
(F) INDUSTRIAL (IN) DISTRICT 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The Industrial (IN) district is established and intended to accommodate heavy manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, distribution, storage, research and development, and other industrial uses that may be large-scale or otherwise have extensive exterior movement of vehicle, materials, and goods, and greater potential for adverse environmental and visual impacts. 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD 	ALL PERMITTED USES 
Density 	Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	N/A 
	Intensity, Maximum (FAR) 	0.75 
Lot Area 	Lot Size, Minimum (sf) 	7,000 [1] 
	Lot Width, Minimum (ft) 	50 
	Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	70 
Required Yards 	Front, Minimum (ft) [2] 	25 
	Side, Minimum [2] 	20 ft, 10 ft if parcel is less than 100 feet wide 
	Rear, Minimum (ft) [2] 	15 
	Corner, Side Minimum (ft)[2] 	20 
	Accessory Structure, Minimum (ft) 	N/A 
	Overhead/vehicular Access Door Setback, Minimum (ft) 	To side or behind building 
Bldg. Form 	Height, Maximum (ft/stories) 	N/A 
	Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	N/A 
Notes 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet'; "FAR" = floor area ratio; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
[1] Yards abutting streets shall be configured to maintain at least 40 linear feet between the centerline of the street and any adjacent building. 
TYPICAL BUILDING TYPES 
 
 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-3.5 - Activity Center (AC) Zoning Districts 
(A)  General Purposes The Activity Center (AC) base zoning districts are established and intended to encourage high-quality land planning and site design concepts that: 
(1)  Implement the comprehensive plan and the future land use map by establishing a series of activity centers in designated locations around the city; 
(2)  Promote mixed-use, pedestrian-friendly land use patterns within designated activity centers; 
(3)  Allow greater freedom in providing a well-integrated mix of residential and nonresidential land uses in the same development, including a mix of housing types, lot sizes, and densities; 
(4)  Establish inter-connected developments that provide greater pedestrian orientation, vehicular connectivity, and support for alternative methods of transportation; 
(5)  Provide for efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lowering development and housing costs; and 
(6)  Promote environmentally-sensitive and sustainable development that respects surrounding established land use character and respects and takes advantage of a site's natural and man-made features, such as trees, streams, hillsides, floodplains, and historic features. 
(B)  Classification of Activity Center Zoning Districts Land shall be classified into an AC district only in accordance with the comprehensive plan, the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment, and the standards in this section. 
(C)  Relationship to MX/EMP Districts Lands designated as Mixed-Use/Employment Center (MX/EMP) on April 30, 2010 are subject to the regulations, standards and conditions included within the previously-adopted zoning ordinance, master plans and other requirements related to their approval. These developments may proceed subject to their original approvals in accordance with Section 40.1-1.8, Transitional Rules. In the event the development approval associated with an MX/EMP district expires, or a modification to development within these districts is proposed, the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply. 
(D)  Organization of Activity Center District Regulations Section 40.1-3.5(E), Procedure for Establishing an AC District, describes the review process and application elements. Section 40.1-3.5(F), General Standards for All Activity Center Districts, sets out general standards applicable to all activity center districts. Sections 40.1-3.5(G) to 40.1-3.5(I) set out the individual district-specific standards for each of the three types of AC districts. These sections have a common structure consisting of a purpose statement, applicable district standards, and example development configurations. 
(E)  Procedure Applications for establishment of an AC district shall be reviewed as an amendment to the Official Zoning Map in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment, and the following standards: 
(1)  Master Plan Required Applications for AC districts shall include a master plan reviewed by the City Council as part of the amendment to the Official Zoning Map. The master plan shall illustrate the conceptual layout of proposed uses, streets, buildings, lots, and other elements of the proposed development when fully developed. Required elements of the master plan shall include: 
(a)  Location and mix of proposed land uses; 
(b)  Number (density and intensity), type, and mix of land uses for the district as a whole as well as for each sub-area within the district; 
(c)  Proposed block and lot standards, including: block length, lot size, lot width, and lot coverage; 
(d)  Building dimensional standards, including: building footprints, yard setbacks, proposed heights, and lot coverage; 
(e)  Pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems; 
(f)  Parking and loading locations and quantity; 
(g)  Location of public facilities; 
(h)  Location, type, amount, and ownership of open space; 
(i)  Stormwater management areas; and 
(j)  A conceptual landscaping plan, including: street trees, appropriate buffers and screens, signage and public art. 
Development within an AC district shall conform to the requirements of the approved master plan. 
(2)  Statement of Design Standards Required In addition to a master plan, applications for an AC district shall also provide a statement of design standards in the form of graphics and explanatory text illustrating how buildings, circulation systems, landscaping, and other elements of the master plan will meet the general and district-specific standards of the AC district and other relevant requirements in this Ordinance. The statement of design standards shall, at a minimum, address all of the following: 
(a)  Architectural form, materials, and other guidelines for proposed buildings; 
(b)  Off-street parking design; 
(c)  Fence and wall standards; 
(d)  Exterior lighting standards; 
(e)  Signage descriptions, sizes, and examples; 
(f)  Street hierarchy (collector streets, local streets, alleys, etc.); 
(g)  Street tree planting, landscaping, and drainage; 
(h)  Provision of bicycle lanes, sidewalks, and crosswalks; 
(i)  A traffic impact analysis prepared in accordance with Section 40.1-5.12, Transportation Analysis; 
(j)  A scheduling/phasing plan, if applicable; and 
(k)  Property owners' association documents specifying maintenance, membership, and member responsibilities. 
(3)  Conversion Schedule The AC master plan may include a conversion schedule that identifies the extent to which one type of residential use may be converted to another type of residential use and one type of nonresidential use may be converted to another type of nonresidential use (i.e., residential to residential, or nonresidential to nonresidential). These conversions may occur within development areas and between development areas, as long as they occur within the same development phase, as identified by the approved development phasing plan, and are consistent with established extents of conversion set down in the conversion schedule. 
(4)  Development Phasing Plan If development in the AC district is proposed to be phased, the master plan shall include a development phasing plan that identifies the general sequence or phases proposed to be developed, including how residential and nonresidential development will be timed, how infrastructure (public and private) and open space will be provided and timed, and how development will be coordinated with the city's capital improvements program. 
(5)  Amendment to Master Plan or Statement of Design Standards   
(a)  Amendments   
(i)  General If an applicant determines it is necessary to alter the concept or intent of the master plan or statement of design standards, the master plan or statement shall be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards for its original approval. 
(ii)  Amendments Defined The following items are considered an alteration of the concept or intent of the master plan or statement of design standards and are treated as an amendment: 
a.  Changes in use designations; 
b.  Density/intensity increases; 
c.  Decreases in open space; 
d.  Substantial changes in the location of streets (particularly if streets are to be deleted or access points to the development moved so traffic flows both inside and outside the development are affected); 
e.  Change in the location of any public easement; 
f.  Change in the proportion of housing types by more than 10 percent; 
g.  Substantial changes to the design or materials of structures; or 
h.  Violation of any specific condition of the master plan or statement of design standards. 
(b)  Minor Deviations Subsequent plans and permits for development within an approved AC district may include minor deviations from the master plan or statement of design standards, provided such deviations are limited to changes addressing technical considerations that could not reasonably be anticipated during the zoning classification process or any other change that has no material effect on the character of the approved activity center district or any of its requirements. The following shall constitute minor deviations: 
(i)  Driveway locations; 
(ii)  Structure floor plan revisions; 
(iii)  Minor shifts in building size or location; and 
(iv)  Facility design modifications for amenities and the like. 
Changes that materially affect the basic concept of the master plan or basic parameters set by the statement of design standards are not considered minor deviations, and shall only be changed as amendments to the AC district. 
(F)  General Standards for All Activity Center Districts   
(1)  Consistency with City Plans The AC zoning district designation, the master plan, and the statement of design standards shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and any other applicable plans adopted by the city. 
(2)  Compatibility with Surrounding Areas Development along the perimeter of an AC district shall be compatible with adjacent existing or proposed development. Where there are issues of compatibility, the master plan shall provide for transition areas at the edges of the AC district that provide appropriate buffering or ensure a complementary character of uses and development patterns. Determination of complementary character shall be based on densities/intensities, lot size and dimensions, building height, building mass and scale, hours of operation, exterior lighting, and siting of service areas. 
(3)  Use Regulations   
(a)  Article 40.1-4, Use Standards, includes a summary use table specifying the allowable uses for each of the AC districts (See Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table) subject to an approved master plan. Uses with an "A" under a particular AC district column are allowed subject to an approved master plan and statement of design standards. 
(b)  Uses that do not include an "A" under a particular AC district column in Table 40.1-4.1(A) are prohibited within that AC district. 
(c)  Any applicable use-specific standard shall also apply within an AC district unless the approved master plan and statement of design standards indicate otherwise. 
(4)  Street Standards In approving an AC district master plan, the City Council may approve modifications or reductions of city street design standards, but all AC districts shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  The street network shall consist of a hierarchy of streets designed as a modified grid to promote sustainable, multi-modal, pedestrian-friendly, and interconnected development patterns; 
(b)  Principal vehicular access points shall be designed to provide for smooth traffic flow and to minimize hazards to vehicular, pedestrian, or bicycle traffic; 
(c)  The street network shall provide safe and convenient access to all areas of the proposed development; 
(d)  The internal street network shall make logical connections to the public street system outside the AC district; and 
(e)  Dead end streets shall only be utilized in areas containing environmentally-sensitive features, topographical constraints, or where existing development makes a street connection impossible. 
(5)  Mobility   
(a)  AC districts shall include internal pedestrian pathways that provide a logical, safe, and convenient system for pedestrian access to buildings and common areas, with appropriate linkages off-site; 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be included on both sides of streets; 
(c)  Bicycle racks shall be provided at a rate of one bike rack (accommodating at least four bicycles) for every 100 off-street parking spaces; and 
(d)  Bus shelters and other site features supportive of transit service shall be included in the master plan, as appropriate. 
(6)  On-Street Parking Except where waived by the Planning Director due to safety considerations, on street parking shall be provided on at least one side of all streets except alleys. 
(7)  Off-Street Parking   
(a)  Neighborhood Activity Centers Buildings within a NAC district may have up to one single loaded bay of required off-street surface parking located between the primary façade and the street, provided the width of the bay does not exceed the building's width. 
(b)  Community Activity Centers Up to 25 percent of the total amount of required parking provided in a CAC district may be located between the primary facades of buildings and the adjacent street, provided: 
(i)  Surface parking shall be limited to one single-loaded bay; and 
(ii)  Each single-loaded bay shall have a maximum width less than the width of the building it serves. 
(c)  Regional Activity Centers No off-street surface parking shall be located between a building's primary façade and the street. 
(8)  Street Trees   
(a)  Except where topographic or other conditions make it impractical, street trees shall be located: 
(i)  Along both sides of all streets; 
(ii)  Between the curb and the sidewalk; 
(iii)  Within appropriately-sized tree lawns or tree pits; and 
(iv)  With a maximum on-center spacing of 40 feet. 
(b)  Except beneath overhead utilities, street trees shall be canopy trees. 
(9)  Exterior Lighting Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-5.9, Exterior Lighting, except that it shall not exceed 20 feet in height from the adjacent finished grade to the top of the fixture. 
(10)  Utilities Development within an activity center district shall place all utilities underground. Existing overhead utilities shall be placed underground or relocated into easements located behind buildings and away from street rights-of-way to the maximum extent practicable. 
(11)  Building Design   
(a)  Buildings shall include a main or primary entrance that is oriented to the street from which the building derives its street address. 
(b)  In order to maintain human-scaled design, the primary façade of buildings over 40 feet in length shall include at least three of the following features: 
(i)  At least 60 percent of the ground floor primary façade wall is occupied by windows or doors; 
(ii)  A prominent exterior horizontal expression line denoting the building's ground floor; 
(iii)  Awnings, an arcade, or similar overhang spanning at least 75 percent of the façade to provide shelter to pedestrians; 
(iv)  Changes in wall plane of at least 24 inches relative to the primary façade that indicate storefront bays, entrance features, or other projections or recesses; 
(v)  Changes in material or texture; or 
(vi)  Comparable features like pilasters or columns with regular on-center spacing, entryways recessed at least three feet from the façade plane, or alcoves with statuary, plantings, or fountains. 
(12)  Natural Resources Natural resources like stands of existing trees, wetlands, riparian areas, or significant animal habitat shall be incorporated into an AC district as amenities, wherever possible. 
(13)  Stormwater Management Facilities Stormwater management facilities shall be designed as landscape amenities, including the following requirements: 
(a)  The design of these facilities shall incorporate a curvilinear shape to resemble a naturally-occurring water feature, including indentations and peninsulas; or be configured in an intentional geometric form with a hardened border so as to resemble a pool or fountain; 
(b)  Chain-link fencing shall be avoided; and 
(c)  Rip-rap or other hard armoring techniques are discouraged for facilities designed to appear as naturally-occurring water features. 
(14)  Waste Disposal Private trash collection shall be required unless the Planning Director approves an alternative arrangement. Fencing or landscaping shall be used to screen trash dumpsters and containers from public view. 
(15)  Compliance with District-Specific Standards In addition to the general standards for all AC districts, new AC districts shall also comply with the district specific standards for the particular type of AC district proposed (See Section 40.1-3.5(G) through 40.1-3.5(I)). 
(16)  Waiver of Requirements With the exception of the master plan and the design statement, the Planning Director may waive any of the general standards for all AC districts, when in the opinion of the Planning Director, compliance with such requirements is not applicable or necessary. The waiver shall be in writing, and shall become a part of the AC master plan. 
Page left blank Intentionally 
(G) Neighborhood Activity Center (NAC) District 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The NAC district is established primarily to accommodate mixed, pedestrian-scaled, neighborhood-serving nonresidential and high-density residential uses in the same structure or in close proximity. Nonresidential uses may include small-scale retail, service, and professional offices that provide goods and services to the residents of the surrounding neighborhood. Nonresidential uses should typically be located at the intersection of two collector streets or a collector street and arterial street. Residential uses are encouraged on the upper floors of nonresidential establishments. There are no minimum lot sizes, but residential densities are limited to a maximum of 18 units per gross acre. Establishment of single-tenant nonresidential buildings exceeding 5,000 square feet and multiple-tenant nonresidential buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet shall require a use permit (See Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit.). Mass transit facilities and pedestrian-friendly elements are important components of development in these centers, in order to reduce demand for auto travel as well as increase visual interest. All development in the district is subject to an approved master plan and statement of design standards. 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	USE MIX 
District Size, Minimum 	2 contiguous acres [1] 	Residential Floor Area, Maximum [6] 	85% of total floor area 
Locational Requirements 	Must be consistent with future land use map in comprehensive plan 	Nonresidential Floor Area, Minimum 	15% of total floor area 
		Open Space, Minimum [7] 	15% of district size, subject to standards in Section 40.1-5.4 
Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	18 	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Average Block Length (ft) 	300 	The standards in Article 40.1-5, Development Standards, shall apply to all development in an NAC district, but some of these standards may be modified as part of a master plan if consistent with the general purposes of the district and the procedures noted below: 
LOT AREA 	
Lot Size, Minimum (sf) 	None 	
Lot Area, Minimum (sf) 	None 	DEVELOPMENT STANDARD 	MEANS OF MODIFYING 
Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	65 	Off-Street Parking & Loading 	Specify in master plan 
REQUIRED YARDS [2] 	Landscaping 	Specify in alternative landscaping plan (See Section 40.1-5.2) 
Front Yard, Maximum (ft) 	5 	Tree Protection 	
Side Yard, Minimum (ft) 	3 	Open Space Set-Aside 	Modifications prohibited 
Rear Yard, Minimum (ft) 	10; 20 from street ROW 	Exterior Lighting 	Specify in master plan 
Corner Side, Minimum (ft) 	10 	Multi-family design standards 	Modifications prohibited 
Development Perimeter, Minimum (ft) 	10 [3] 	Commercial design standards 	
BUILDING FORM 	Transitional standards 	
Building Height, Minimum (# of stories) 	None[4] 	Signage 	Specify in master plan 
Building Height, Maximum 
(ft/# of stories) 	36/3 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acres; "ROW" = right-of-way 
Building Size, Maximum (sf) 	10,000 [5] 	
Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	33% of the closest principal structure [8] 	
NOTES: 
[1] Contiguous lands smaller than two acres may be added following initial designation of the NAC district. 
[2] Accessory structures are prohibited within front, corner side, and development perimeter yards, and shall comply with minimum side and rear yard standards. 
[3] Development perimeter yard is not required where NAC borders a ROW or open space. 
[4] Buildings on corner lots abutting four-way street intersections shall be at least two stories in height. 
[5] Retail uses may exceed 10,000 square feet with a use permit. 
[6] The footprint of buildings devoted solely to residential uses shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the collective footprints in the NAC district. 
[7] Central open spaces such as greens or squares shall be provided as focal points in the development. 
[8] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
 
(H) Community Activity Center (CAC) District 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The CAC district is intended to encourage and facilitate the development of a mix of concentrated community-serving land uses in close proximity to each other and residential development that are well-connected. These centers should include economic generators, including shopping, employment, educational facilities, personal service, restaurants, theaters, hotels, and office development. The district should also contain a broad mix of complementary uses, including high-density multi-family housing, major civic and public facilities, parks, and open space. Mass transit facilities and pedestrian-friendly elements are important components of CAC districts, in order to reduce demand for auto travel as well as increase visual interest. All development in the district is subject to an approved master plan and statement of design standards. 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	USE MIX 
District Size, Minimum 	5 contiguous acres [1] 	Residential Floor Area, Maximum [6] 	60% of total floor area 
Locational Requirements 	Must be consistent with comprehensive plan's future land use map and bounded by at least one 4-way street intersection 	Residential Floor Area, Minimum 	10% of total floor area 
		Nonresidential Floor Area, Minimum 	40% of total floor area 
		Open Space, Minimum [7] 	15% of district size, subject to standards in Section 40.1-5.4 
Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	30 	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Average Block Length (ft) 	450 	The standards in Article 40.1-5, Development Standards, shall apply to all development in an CAC district, but some of these standards may be modified as part of a master plan if consistent with the general purposes of the district and the procedures noted below: 
LOT AREA 	
Lot Size, Minimum (sf) 	None 	
Lot Area, Minimum (sf) 	None 	DEVELOPMENT STANDARD 	MEANS OF MODIFYING 
Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	75 	Off-Street Parking & Loading 	Specify in master plan 
REQUIRED YARDS [2] 	Landscaping 	Specify in alternative landscaping plan (See Section 40.1-5.2) 
Front Yard, Maximum (ft) 	5 	Tree Protection 	
Side Yard, Minimum (ft) 	3 	Open Space Set-Aside 	Modifications prohibited 
Rear Yard, Minimum (ft) 	10; 20 from street ROW 	Exterior Lighting 	Specify in master plan 
Corner Side, Minimum (ft) 	10 	Multi-family design standards 	Modifications prohibited 
Development Perimeter, Minimum (ft) 	20 [3] 	Commercial design standards 	
BUILDING FORM 	Transitional standards 	
Building Height, Minimum (# of stories) 	None [4] 	Signage 	Specify in master plan 
Building Height, Maximum 
(ft/# of stories) 	50/4 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acres; "ROW" = right-of-way 
Building Size, Maximum (sf) 	30,000 [5] 	
Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	33% of the closest principal structure [8] 	
NOTES: 
[1] Contiguous lands smaller than 10 acres may be added following initial designation of the CAC district. 
[2] Accessory structures are prohibited within front, corner side, and development perimeter yards, and shall comply with minimum side and rear yard standards. 
[3] Development perimeter yard is not required where CAC borders a ROW or open space. 
[4] Buildings on corner lots abutting four-way street intersections shall be at least two stories in height. 
[5] Retail uses may exceed 30,000 square feet with a use permit. 
[6] The footprint of buildings devoted solely to residential uses shall be limited to a maximum of 25 percent of the collective footprints in the CAC district. 
[7] Central open spaces such as greens or squares shall be provided as focal points in the development. 
[8] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
		
 
(I) Regional Activity Center (RAC) District 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The RAC district is intended to encourage and facilitate the development of distinctive, attractive regional centers containing a mix of concentrated land uses. These high-quality and highly visible regional activity centers are intended to serve as Portsmouth's "image-makers." The centers should include major economic generators, most with a regional market draw, such as regional shopping, major employers, large educational facilities, restaurants, theaters, hotels, and relatively dense office development. The area should contain a broad mix of complementary uses, including high-density multi-family housing, major civic and public facilities, parks, and open space. Mass transit facilities and pedestrian-friendly elements are important components of development in these centers, in order to reduce demand for auto travel as well as increase visual interest. All development in the district is subject to an approved master plan and statement of design standards. 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 	USE MIX 
District Size, Minimum 	20 contiguous acres [1] 	Residential Floor Area, Maximum 	35% of total floor area 
Locational Requirements 	Must be consistent with comprehensive plan's future land use map and bounded by a major arterial street on at least one side 	Residential Floor Area, Minimum 	15% of total floor area 
		Nonresidential Floor Area, Minimum 	65% of total floor area 
		Open Space, Minimum [6] 	20% of district size, subject to standards in Section 40.1-5.4 
Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	40; over 31 requires a use permit 	DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Average Block Length (ft) 	600 	The standards in Article 40.1-5, Development Standards, shall apply to all development in an RAC district, but some of these standards may be modified as part of a master plan if consistent with the general purposes of the district and the procedures noted below: 
LOT AREA 	
Lot Size, Minimum (sf) 	None 	
Lot Area, Minimum (sf) 	None 	DEVELOPMENT STANDARD 	MEANS OF MODIFYING 
Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	85 	Off-Street Parking & Loading 	Specify in master plan 
REQUIRED YARDS [2] 	Landscaping 	Specify in alternative landscaping plan (See Section 40.1-5.2) 
Front Yard, Maximum (ft) 	5 	Tree Protection 	
Side Yard, Minimum (ft) 	3 	Open Space Set-Aside 	Modifications prohibited 
Rear Yard, Minimum (ft) 	10; 20 from street ROW 	Exterior Lighting 	Specify in master plan 
Corner Side, Minimum (ft) 	10 	Multi-family design standards 	Modifications prohibited 
Development Perimeter, Minimum (ft) 	20 [3] 	Commercial design standards 	
BUILDING FORM 	Transitional standards 	
Building Height, Minimum (# of stories) [4] 	2+—50% of all buildings; 
3+—25% of all buildings 	Signage 	Specify in master plan 
Building Height, Maximum 
(ft/# of stories) 	75/6 	"sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acres; "ROW" = right-of-way 
Building Size, Maximum (sf) 	60,000 [5] 	
Accessory Structure Size, Maximum 	33% of the closest principal structure [7] 	
NOTES: 
[1] Contiguous lands smaller than 20 acres may be added following initial designation of the RAC district. 
[2] Accessory structures are prohibited within front, corner side, and development perimeter yards, and shall comply with minimum side and rear yard standards. 
[3] Development perimeter yard is not required where RAC borders a ROW or open space. 
[4] Buildings on corner lots abutting four-way street intersections shall be at least two stories in height. 
[5] Office buildings, educational facilities, research and development, structured parking, hotels, grocery stores, or conference/training centers are exempted from the maximum building size standards. Retail uses may exceed 60,000 square feet with a use permit. 
[6] Central open spaces such as greens or squares shall be provided as focal points in the development. 
[7] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT CONFIGURATION 
 
  
40.1-3.6 - Special Base Zoning Districts 
(A)  General Purposes The special base zoning districts established in this section are intended to address special areas of the city where special area plans and related regulations have been prepared to regulate development. 
(B)  Waterfront (WF) District   
(1)  Purpose and Intent The purpose and intent of the Waterfront (WF) district is to: 
(a)  Encourage development of high quality, mixed-use residential, retail, office, or hotel development that is enhanced by its close proximity to the Elizabeth River waterfront; 
(b)  Facilitate economic development in the city through enhanced commercial and residential development and increased tourism generated by riverfront development; 
(c)  Promote a concentration of uses that result in a high degree of pedestrian attraction and activity along the waterfront, while protecting the area at the shore of the river from building development; 
(d)  Integrate commercial and residential uses horizontally at the street level and vertically within buildings, while preserving the views of the Elizabeth River; 
(e)  Ensure new development complies with and promotes the city's vision and plans for intensive downtown waterfront development, encouraging pedestrian-oriented streetscapes, connectivity of existing street and pedestrian systems, multi-modal transportation access, high quality architectural design and building materials, compatibility with adjacent development, and protection of existing views; and 
(f)  Establish development requirements that are adaptable to changing market conditions, while encouraging creativity in the design of new mixed development centers. 
(2)  Applicability   
(a)  Development in the Waterfront (WF) district, as depicted on the official zoning map, is subject to the standards of this section. 
(b)  In addition to the land designated as WF on the official zoning map, only lands located along the banks of Scotts Creek and Owens Creek north of the southern line of Spratley Street, and its westward prolongation may be designated WF district on the official zoning map. 
(c)  Conflict with other Code Provisions In case of conflicts between this section and other sections of this Ordinance, this section shall control unless the conflicting section contains specific language to the contrary. 
(3)  Review Procedures   
(a)  Modifications to the WF District Location Applications to amend the official zoning map boundaries to a WF district consistent with the terms of this section shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedure and standards in Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment, the Comprehensive Plan, and Section 40.1-3.6(B)(3)(c), Application Requirements. 
(b)  Application Requirements All applications to establish or modify the WF district shall contain a master plan and a design standards statement, prepared in accordance with the following: 
(i)  Master Plan The master plan shall illustrate the conceptual layout of proposed lots, new streets, buildings, uses, and other elements of the proposed development. At a minimum, the master plan shall include the following elements: 
a.  Location and mix of proposed uses. 
b.  Number (density and intensity), type, and mix of uses for the development as a whole as well as for each sub-area within the development. 
c.  Block and lot standards, including: block length, lot size, lot width, and lot coverage. 
d.  Building dimensional standards, including: building footprints, yard setbacks, proposed heights, and lot coverage. 
e.  Pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems, both on-site and located on adjacent lands. 
f.  Parking and loading locations and quantity. 
g.  Location of public facilities. 
h.  Location, type, amount, and ownership of open space, as defined below. 
i.  A stormwater management plan. 
j.  Views of the Elizabeth River and downtown areas of Norfolk and Portsmouth from the site of proposed development. 
k.  Conceptual landscaping plans that include street trees, appropriate buffers and screens, signage and public art. Special attention shall be paid to providing space for outdoor dining and other outdoor spaces and the interface of the building exterior and these spaces. 
(ii)  Design Standards Statement A design standards statement, in the form of graphics and explanatory text, illustrating how buildings, circulation systems, landscaping, and other elements of the master plan are proposed to be developed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. The design standards statement shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Architectural form, materials, and other guidelines for proposed buildings, especially the interface of the proposed building exterior facade and the proposed open spaces. 
b.  Parking design. 
c.  Fence and wall standards. 
d.  Exterior lighting standards. 
e.  Signage descriptions, sizes, and examples. 
f.  Street hierarchy (collector streets, local streets, alleys, etc.). 
g.  A traffic impact analysis prepared in accordance with Section 40.1-5.12, Transportation Analysis. 
h.  Development scheduling/phasing. 
i.  Assurance the property and building design will be properly managed (through provision of property owners' association documents that specify maintenance, membership, and member responsibilities of the association, if applicable). 
(c)  The development of the buildings and sites contained in an approved master plan must conform to the requirements of the development plan process in Sections 40.1-2.3(C) and (D), as appropriate. As each portion of the development is implemented, the applicant shall submit, in phases, development plans that are consistent with the approved master plan and design standards statement. 
(4)  Modification of an Approved Master Plan or Design Standards Statement Master plans or design standards statements approved as part of an amendment to the official zoning map may only be modified in accordance with the following requirements. 
(a)  Major Changes Any major changes to an approved master plan or design standards statement shall be processed only in the manner of the original approval. Major changes shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(i)  Changes in uses. 
(ii)  Decreases in open space. 
(iii)  Substantial changes in the location of streets. 
(iv)  Substantial changes to the design and/or materials of structures. 
(v)  Change in the location of any public easement. 
(vi)  Change in the proportion of housing types by more than ten percent. 
(vii)  Changes in the phasing schedule. 
(viii)  Violation of any condition of approval. 
(ix)  Significant changes in the appearance of building(s). 
(b)  Minor Deviations Minor deviations from an approved master plan or design standards statement are not major changes and may be approved by the Planning Director. Minor deviations shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(i)  Driveway relocations. 
(ii)  Structure floor plan revisions. 
(iii)  Minor alterations to the architecture of structures and similar replacement of building materials. 
(iv)  Facility design modifications for amenities. 
(v)  Modifications to any dimensional standard by ten percent or less. 
(vi)  Substitutions of landscaping materials within the same genus or minor modifications to landscape plans determined during the construction process to be necessary. 
(5)  Development Standards Development in the WF district shall be subject to the development standards in Article 40.1-5: Development Standards, and the following standards. In the event the standards in this section conflict with the standards in Article 40.1-5: Development Standards, the standards in this section shall control. 
(a)  Minimum Land Area The proposed district shall contain at least one contiguous acre, including roadways. Additional land may be designated as WF district in accordance with the procedure and standards in Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment, provided: 
(i)  The land designated is contiguous to an existing WF district; and 
(ii)  The land is adjacent to the southern branch of the Elizabeth River. 
(b)  Building Orientation Buildings shall be sited close to streets with their front facades facing the street from which the building derives its street address. 
(c)  Minimum Building Height All development shall have a minimum height of five stories, with a first floor height of at least 14 feet. 
(d)  Building Fenestration Building facades along street frontages (except alleys) shall be fenestrated in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  Street-level Story   
a.  Nonresidential Uses At least 60 percent of nonresidential building facades between two and eight feet in height along the street frontage shall be comprised of glass windows or glass doors that allow views into the building. Windows used to satisfy these requirements shall be at least four feet in height. 
b.  Residential and Mixed Uses Windows shall comprise a minimum of 30 percent of a residential or mixed-use building facade between two and eight feet in height along the street frontage. Windows shall be double-hung, awning, or casement-style, and shall be configured so that at least one window within each single wall opening is operable. 
(ii)  Upper Stories Windows shall comprise a minimum of 30 percent of each story's facade between two and eight feet in height above the story's floor level. 
(e)  Streetscapes Buildings along streets shall form a consistent line of building facades, relative to the street edge. Street trees, sidewalks and pedestrian-scaled lighting of no greater than 14 feet in height shall be included in streetscape areas to create a comfortable walking environment. Pedestrian amenities (such as benches) shall be consistent with city standards for outdoor furniture downtown and shall also be provided, as appropriate, throughout the development site. 
(f)  Street Trees Street trees shall be located in tree pits or tree lawns established between the curb and the sidewalk along all streets except alleys. The distance between street trees shall be determined by the design of the development, as needed to provide an integrated landscaped theme. Spacing and tree selection shall reflect the district's urban character and enhance views of the waterfront and downtown areas. 
(g)  Open Space Set-Asides   
(i)  Each development in the WF district shall provide at least 20 percent of the total lot area in open space set-aside in the form of roof gardens, landscaped grounds, or atriums. 
(ii)  Each such open space set aside shall contain landscaping, public art elements, or pedestrian elements, and shall be configured to blend with the architecture of the development. 
(iii)  The City Council may accept developments with no more than 15 percent of the total land area in open space set-aside in cases where lots are small, or where existing open space resources are already provided in sufficient amounts by existing development. 
(h)  Residential Density   
(i)  Development with a net residential density of more than 80 units per acre shall require approval of a use permit in accordance with the standards and procedure in Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permits. 
(ii)  In no instance shall development exceed 100 units per acre. 
(i)  Maximum Floor Area   
(i)  Except for high-rise multi-family development, office buildings, structured parking, hotels, convention centers, or retail development, no use shall exceed 30,000 square feet of floor area. 
(ii)  Retail uses exceeding 30,000 square feet shall require approval of a use permit in accordance with the procedure and standards in Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit. 
(j)  Prohibited Uses and Development Features Notwithstanding the standards in Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table, the following uses or development features are prohibited within the WF district: 
(i)  Check-cashing establishments; 
(ii)  Pay day loan establishments; 
(iii)  Nail salons; 
(iv)  Tanning establishments; and 
(v)  Drive-throughs. 
(C)  Downtown Districts The Downtown and D1 district standards are included in Appendix A of this Ordinance. 
(D)  Downtown (D2) District The Downtown D2 district standards are included in Appendix B of this Ordinance. 
(E)  Historic Districts   
(1)  Purpose The historic districts are created for the promotion and preservation of Portsmouth's educational, cultural, and economic interests through: 
(a)  The preservation and protection of historic buildings, structures, places, and areas of historic interest; 
(b)  The preservation, protection and maintenance of buildings, structures, places and areas that mark the history of the colony, the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the City of Portsmouth; 
(c)  Appropriate redevelopment and maintenance of historic buildings, structures, places, and areas; 
(d)  The regulation and control of new development to preserve and protect areas of historical interest and the historical context of the area; and 
(e)  The promotion, development, and preservation of the economy, commerce and industry of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the City of Portsmouth, specifically with regard to property values and tourist trade, through the preservation and protection of historic buildings, structures, places and areas. 
(2)  Historic Districts Established The following historic districts are hereby established as shown on the official map of historic districts, which is hereby incorporated by reference into this Ordinance: 
(a)  The Truxtun Historic District; 
(b)  The Cradock Historic District; 
(c)  The Port Norfolk Historic District; 
(d)  The Olde Towne Historic District; and 
(e)  The Park View Historic District. 
(3)  Certificate of Appropriateness Required New development or redevelopment within a historic district requires approval of a certificate of appropriateness in (addition to any other required permits) in accordance with the procedures and requirements in Section 40.1-2.3(I), Certificate of Appropriateness. 
(4)  Dimensional Standards Uses within the historic districts shall comply with the following dimensional requirements: 
(a)  General Dimensional Requirements Table 40.1-3.6(A), Dimensional Requirements within the Historic Districts, sets out the dimensional standards required for each of the five historic districts. 
TABLE 40.1-3.6.A: DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE HISTORIC DISTRICTS 
HISTORIC
DISTRICT 	USE TYPE 	MINIMUM LOT SIZE (SF) [1] 	MAXIMUM BUILDING COVERAGE (%) 	MAXIMUM HEIGHT FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION (# OF STORIES) 
Truxtun 	Single-family Detached or Two-family Dwelling 	2,500 	70 	2 
	Three-Family Dwelling 	2,500 		
	Four-Family Dwelling 	4,500 		
	Nonresidential Use 	2,500 [2] 		
Cradock 	Single-family Detached 	4,500 	70 	2 
	Two-family Dwelling 	4,500 		
	Three-Family Dwelling 	13,500 	35 	
	Four-Family Dwelling 	16,500 		
	Nonresidential Use 	2,500 [2] 	70 	
Port Norfolk 	Single-family Detached or Two-family Dwelling 	5,600 	70 	3 
	Three-Family Dwelling 	8,400 		
	Four-Family Dwelling 	11,200 [3] 		
	Nonresidential Use 	2,500 [2] 		
Olde Towne and Park View 	Single-family Detached or Two-family Dwelling 	3,045 	70 	3 
	Three-Family Dwelling 	4,570 		
	Four-Family Dwelling 	6,090 [4] 		
	Nonresidential Use 	2,500 [2] 		
NOTES: 
[1] New construction, additions, or other improvements shall not create more than two square feet of floor area per each square foot of lot size. 
[2] Establishment of a new building or conversion of a dwelling unit to an office shall require a minimum lot size of at least 4,500 square feet. 
[3] One additional unit may be permitted for each additional 5,600 square feet of lot area and over 11,200 for an additional 4 unit building. 
[4] One additional unit may be permitted for each additional 3,045 square feet of lot area. 
[5] New construction shall not exceed two square feet of floor area per square foot of zone lot area, nor shall new improvements or additions increase existing floor area above this maximum. 
[6] Accessory buildings must observe a five-foot rear yard setback. Side yard setbacks shall be as established 40.1-3.6(E)(4)(c). No accessory building shall be taller that the principal building and shall be no larger than 600 square feet. 
 
(b)  Front Yard Requirements   
(i)  Front yards shall be at least three feet in depth, but shall maintain consistency with the front yard depth of adjacent structures to the maximum extent practicable. 
(ii)  No new construction shall be located within a front yard, unless necessary to maintain consistency with established front yard context on adjacent lots. 
(c)  Side Yard Requirements   
(i)  Lots less than 30 feet in width shall maintain at least three-foot-wide side yards. 
(ii)  Lots 30 feet wide or wider shall maintain side yards of at least five feet. 
(iii)  No new construction shall be located within a required side yard. 
(d)  Rear Yard Requirements Rear yards shall be at least 20 feet deep. 
(e)  Minimum Distance from Lot Lines No new construction shall be established within three feet of any lot line. 
(f)  Landscaped Area Each lot shall maintain a landscaped area with a minimum size corresponding to 20 percent of the lot size. 
(5)  Design Guidelines Each of the city's five historic districts has a unique set of design guidelines applied to new development or redevelopment within the district. The following sets of design guidelines are hereby incorporated into this Ordinance by reference: 
(a)  Truxtun Historic District Design Guidelines; 
(b)  Cradock Historic District Design Guidelines; 
(c)  Port Norfolk Historic District Design Guidelines; 
(d)  Olde Towne Historic District Design Guidelines; and 
(e)  Park View Historic District Design Guidelines. Review for compliance with these guidelines shall take place as part of certificate of appropriateness review. 
(6)  Permitted Uses   
(a)  In General The range of permitted uses on a lot located within a particular historic district is subject to the lot's historic sub-district designation depicted on the official zoning map and Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table. 
(b)  Historic Sub-districts Each historic district is comprised of one or more sub-districts as depicted on the official zoning map. The range of allowable uses on a lot within a historic district is controlled by its sub-district designation, Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table, and the following standards: 
(i)  Historic Residential (HR) Sub-district The HR sub-district is intended for residential uses, but also allows some public and institutional uses, all subject to the use-specific standards in Section 40.1-4.3, Use-Specific Standards. 
(ii)  Historic Limited Office (HLO) Sub-district   
a.  The HLO sub-district is intended for professional office uses as well as limited residential and institutional uses, subject to the use-specific standards in Section 40.1-4.3, Use-Specific Standards, and the following: 
b.  Residential and office uses may be mixed within a single structure, provided the residential portion occupies less than 50 percent of the building's total floor area. 
(iii)  Historic Limited Business (HLB) The HLB sub-district is generally intended for commercial uses with, along with limited residential, and institutional uses. Residential and nonresidential uses may be combined within a building in this sub-district, provided: 
a.  Buildings with one bedroom include at least 400 square feet of useable floor area solely for residential purposes; 
b.  Buildings with two bedrooms include at least 700 square feet of useable floor area solely for residential purposes; and 
c.  Buildings with three bedrooms include at least 800 square feet of useable floor area solely for residential purposes. 
(7)  District-Specific Standards The following district-specific standards shall apply to new uses and redevelopment within the historic district: 
(a)  Off-Street Parking   
(i)  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Section 40.1-5.1, Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Circulation. 
(ii)  Parking requirements for two or more uses may be provided in a common parking area, provided that all uses being served by the common parking area are under the common ownership. 
(iii)  Parking lots of four or more spaces shall be paved with cobblestone or other approved material which enhances the aesthetic quality of the historic area. 
(b)  Exterior Lighting Lighting shall be provided in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-5.9, Exterior Lighting, and no exterior lighting shall exceed a height of nine feet from the adjacent grade. 
(c)  Signage   
(i)  New signage and changes to existing signage require approval of a certificate of appropriateness (See Section 40.1-2.3(I), Certificate of Appropriateness). 
(ii)  Any authorized changes shall be made within six months of approval. 
(iii)  Signage that fails to comply with the applicable standards in this Ordinance shall be removed, at the owner's expense, within six months of notice provided by the city. 
(d)  Required Landscaping All private areas not covered with building or surface treatment shall be landscaped with plantings, grass, pedestrian walks or similar features, in accordance with Section 40.1-5.2, Landscaping and Screening, and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(e)  Separation Requirements Any nonresidential use in a historic district adjoining a residential use shall comply with the following requirements along all lot lines adjoining the residential uses: 
(i)  The width of each required yard adjacent to a residential use shall be increased by one foot for each foot in height of the nonresidential structure exceeding 35 feet; 
(ii)  Applications to reduce the minimum required yard width shall be prohibited; 
(iii)  Parking and loading areas serving the nonresidential use shall not be located within the required yard; and 
(iv)  A landscaped buffer meeting the requirements of Section 40.1-5.2, Landscaping and Screening, shall be established and maintained in the required yard. 
(f)  Historic Markers   
(i)  Historic markers shall be made available to the owner of any building designated as a historic structure. 
(ii)  The markers shall show the date of construction and the historic significance of the structure and shall be placed on the structure or adjacent to it. 
(iii)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to display an unauthorized marker or to remove an authorized marker without the prior consent of the structure owner and the city. 
(8)  Conversion of Single-Family Detached Dwellings The conversion of existing Single-Family Detached Dwellings into Two-to-Four-Family dwellings or Multi-Family Dwellings is permitted within the Olde Towne, Port Norfolk, and Park View Historic Districts subject to a use permit (See Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit), and compliance with the following standards: 
(a)  Construction Date Existing Single-Family Detached Dwellings may be converted in accordance with this section provided the original building existed prior to: 
(i)  October 24, 1967 in the Olde Towne Historic District; 
(ii)  April 26, 1983 in the Port Norfolk Historic District; and 
(iii)  April 1, 1984 in the Park View Historic District. 
(b)  Exterior Alterations Prohibited Conversions completed in accordance with these provisions shall not result in any exterior additions to the structure. Any new building entrances shall be to the rear or side of the structure. 
(c)  Minimum Floor Area After conversion, the floor area of each dwelling unit shall include a minimum of 600 square feet. 
(d)  Maximum Number of Units The number of dwelling units permitted within a single structure shall be in accordance with Table 40.1-3.6(B), Maximum Number of Dwelling Units. 
TABLE 40.1-3.6.B: MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE (SQUARE FEET) 	MAXIMUM DWELLING UNITS, INCLUDING ALL EXISTING UNITS (#) 
PORT NORFOLK 
5,600—11,199 	2 
11,200 or more 	4 
OLDE TOWNE AND PARK VIEW [1] 
3,480—6,959 	2 
6,960 or more 	3 
CRADOCK 
	
NOTES: 
[1] In the Olde Towne Historic District, any building larger than 5,000 square feet may be converted into additional dwelling units, provided each dwelling unit contains at least 2,500 square feet. 
 
(e)  Provision of Sewer Service   
(i)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit for conversion in accordance with these standards, approval for sewage disposal shall be obtained from the Department of Environmental Services and the Department of Public Utilities, in accordance with Section 38-37 of the City Code. 
(ii)  Where feasible, separate utility meters for each dwelling unit shall be required. 
(f)  Off-Street Parking Standards   
(i)  Amount Converted residential buildings shall provide at least one off-street parking space per dwelling unit, but no more than two spaces per dwelling unit may be provided. 
(ii)  Location Off-street parking spaces shall be located to the rear or side of a structure, and accessed by an alley, if one exists. 
(F)  Preservation/Government (PG) District   
(1)  Purpose and Intent   
(a)  The Preservation/Government (PG) district is established and intends to preserve and protect identifiable natural resources from urban encroachment—i.e., to preserve watercourses and protect them from erosion and sedimentation; retain open spaces and greenways and protect their environmentally-sensitive character; preserve wildlife and plant life habitats and protect them from the intrusions of urbanization; provide air and noise buffers to ameliorate the effects of development; and preserve and maintain the aesthetic qualities and appearance of the community. 
(b)  The district discourages development that creates risks for loss of life or property from normal natural processes and events in natural hazard areas (e.g., floodplains) for preservation: preservation of city's critical and environmental areas, including parklands, open space, archeological sites, cemetery grounds, wetland ecology, and land for recreation use. 
(c)  The district is also established to identify those lands within the city containing military installations under exclusive federal authority. 
(2)  Federal Government Exemption Uses owned or operated by the Federal government shall be exempted from the standards of this district. 
(3)  Dimensional Standards Development within the PG district shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum Lot Size Except for lots containing public utilities, the minimum lot size within in the PG district shall be at least three acres. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Width Except for lots containing public utilities, the minimum lot width within the PG district shall be at least 200 feet. 
(c)  Minimum Required Yards Except where reduced by the City Council as part of a special exception or use permit, all front, side, and rear yards shall be at least 50 feet. 
(d)  Maximum Building Coverage Maximum building coverage shall be five percent of the lot area. 
(e)  Maximum Building Height No building shall be more than 36 feet in height. 
(f)  Sign Regulations   
(i)  Up to one sign, not exceeding 18 square feet in area, may be permitted. 
(ii)  No sign shall be: 
a.  Directly illuminated; 
b.  Mounted closer than seven feet to a lot line fronting a street; or 
c.  Higher than six feet above the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 3), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-3.7 - Overlay Zoning Districts 
(A)  General   
(1)  Purpose Overlay zoning districts are superimposed over portions of one or more underlying base zoning districts with the intent of supplementing generally applicable development regulations with additional development regulations that address special area-specific conditions, features, or plans while maintaining the character and purposes of the underlying base zoning district. 
(2)  Establishment of Overlay Zoning Districts Table 40.1-3.8, Overlay Zoning Districts Established, sets out the overlay zoning districts established by this Ordinance. Except where specifically provided in this article, variances from the overlay zoning district standards shall not be granted. 
TABLE 40.1-3.8: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 
DISTRICT ABBREVIATION 	DISTRICT NAME 
MPO 	Master-Planned Overlay 
NCO 	Neighborhood Conservation Overlay 
 
(3)  Classification of Overlay Zoning Districts Land shall be classified or reclassified into an overlay zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment. 
(4)  Relationship to Other Zoning Districts Regulations governing development in an overlay zoning district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in the underlying base zoning district, unless expressly stated otherwise in these regulations. If the standards governing an overlay zoning district expressly conflict with those governing a base zoning district, the standards governing the overlay district shall control, unless expressly stated otherwise in these regulations. Where land is classified into multiple overlay zoning districts and the standards governing one overlay zoning district expressly conflict with those governing another overlay district, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
(B)  Master-Planned Overlay (MPO) District   
(1)  Purpose The Master-Planned Overlay (MPO) district is intended to provide an opportunity for the establishment of new development that departs from the range of dimensional and development standards typically applied to development in the city, subject to a proffered master plan. The minimum quality of development in the MPO district is anticipated to exceed the level that would otherwise result from the strict application of the typical range of dimensional and development standards. 
(2)  Applicability The MPO district is available for application to lands of two acres in size or greater located outside of an existing Activity Center district or location where an activity center district designation is anticipated by the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  Procedure The MPO district is established in accordance with the procedure and requirements for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment, and the standards in this section. 
(4)  Standards Before approving a MPO zoning district classification, the City Council shall find that the application for the MPO zoning district classification, as well as the master plan and the terms and conditions included as part of the application, comply with the following standards: 
(a)  MPO Master Plan The MPO Master Plan shall: 
(i)  Include a statement of planning objectives for the district; 
(ii)  Identify the general location of individual development areas, identified by land use(s) and/or development density or intensity; 
(iii)  Identify for the entire MPO district and each development area the acreage, types and mix of land uses, number of residential units (by use type), nonresidential floor area (by use type), residential density, and nonresidential intensity; 
(iv)  Identify the general location, amount, and type (whether designated for active or passive recreation) of open space; 
(v)  Identify the location of environmentally sensitive lands, wildlife habitat, and stream corridors; 
(vi)  Identify the on-site transportation circulation system, including the general location of all public and private streets, existing or projected transit corridors, and pedestrian and bicycle pathways, and how they will connect with existing and planned city systems; 
(vii)  Identify the general location of on-site potable water and wastewater facilities, and how they will connect to city systems; 
(viii)  Identify the general location of on-site stormwater management facilities, and how they will connect to city systems; and 
(ix)  Identify the general location of all other on-site public facilities serving the development, including but not limited to parks, schools, and facilities for fire protection, police protection, EMS, stormwater management, and solid waste management. 
(b)  Terms and Conditions Statement The terms and conditions statement shall incorporate by reference or include, but not be limited to: 
(i)  Conditions related to approval of the application for the MPO zoning district classification; 
(ii)  The MPO master plan, including any density/intensity standards, dimensional standards, and development standards established in the MPO master plan; 
(iii)  Conditions related to the approval of the MPO master plan, including any conditions related to the form and design of development shown in the MPO master plan; 
(iv)  Provisions addressing how transportation, potable water, wastewater, stormwater management, and other public facilities will be provided to accommodate the proposed development; 
(v)  Provisions related to environmental protection and monitoring; and 
(vi)  Any other provisions the City Council determines are relevant and necessary to the development of the MPO in accordance with applicable standards and regulations. 
(c)  Consistency with City Plans The MPO zoning district designation, the MPO master plan, and the terms and conditions statement shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and any applicable small area plans adopted by the city. 
(d)  Minimum District Size The MPO Overlay district shall be at least two acres in size. 
(e)  Compatibility with Surrounding Areas Development along the perimeter of a MPO district shall be compatible with adjacent existing or proposed development. Where there are issues of compatibility, the MPO master plan shall provide for transition areas at the edges of the MPO district that provide for appropriate buffering and/or ensure a complementary character of uses. Determination of complementary character shall be based on densities/intensities, lot size and dimensions, building height, building mass and scale, hours of operation, exterior lighting, and siting of service areas. 
(f)  Development Phasing Plan If development in the MPO district is proposed to be phased, the MPO master plan shall include a development phasing plan that identifies the general sequence or phases in which the district is proposed to be developed, including how residential and nonresidential development will be timed, how infrastructure (public and private) and open space will be provided and timed, and how development will be coordinated with the city's capital improvements program. 
(g)  Conversion Schedule The MPO master plan may include a conversion schedule that identifies the extent to which one type of residential use may be converted to another type of residential use and one type of nonresidential use may be converted to another type of nonresidential use (i.e., residential to residential, or nonresidential to nonresidential). These conversions may occur within development areas and between development areas, as long as they occur within the same development phase, as identified by the approved development phasing plan, and are consistent with established extents of conversion set down in the conversion schedule. 
(h)  On-Site Public Facilities   
(i)  Design and Construction The MPO master plan shall establish the responsibility of the developer/landowner to design and construct or install required and proposed on-site public facilities in compliance with applicable city, state, and federal regulations. 
(ii)  Dedication The MPO master plan shall establish the responsibility of the developer/landowner to dedicate to the public the rights-of-way and easements necessary for the construction or installation of required and proposed on-site public facilities in compliance with applicable city, state, and federal regulations. 
(iii)  Modifications to Street Standards In approving a MPO master plan, the City Council may approve modifications or reductions of city street design standards—including those for right-of-way widths, pavement widths, required materials, and turning radii—on finding that: 
a.  The MPO master plan provides for separation of vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle traffic; 
b.  Access for emergency service vehicles is not substantially impaired; 
c.  Adequate off-street parking is provided for the uses proposed; and 
d.  Adequate space for public utilities is provided within the street right-of-way. 
(i)  Allowable Uses The range of allowable uses within a MPO district shall be the same range of uses allowed within the NAC district as identified in Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table. The MPO master plan shall provide additional detail about how impacts from uses not allowed within the base zoning district will be addressed by the MPO district. All applicable use-specific standards shall continue to apply within the MPO district. 
(j)  Densities/Intensities The densities for residential development and the intensities for nonresidential development applicable in each development area of a MPO district shall be as established in the MPO master plan, and shall be consistent with city plans. 
(k)  Dimensional Standards The dimensional standards applicable in each development area of a MPO district shall be as established in the MPO master plan. The MPO Master Plan shall include at least the following types of dimensional standards: 
(i)  Minimum lot area; 
(ii)  Minimum lot width; 
(iii)  Minimum and maximum setbacks; 
(iv)  Maximum lot coverage; 
(v)  Maximum building height; 
(vi)  Maximum individual building size; 
(vii)  Floor area ratio; and 
(viii)  Minimum setbacks from adjoining residential development or residential zoning districts. 
(l)  Development Standards All development in a MPO district shall comply with the development standards of Article 40.1-5: Development Standards, or any modifications of those standards shall be established in the MPO Master Plan, and shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and the intent of MPO district. 
(m)  Amendments to an Approved MPO Master Plan   
(i)  General If an applicant determines it is necessary to alter the concept or intent of the master plan or terms and conditions, the master plan or terms and conditions shall be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards for its original approval. 
(ii)  Amendments Defined The following items are considered an alteration of the concept or intent of the master plan and are treated as an amendment: 
a.  Changes in use designations; 
b.  Density/intensity increases; 
c.  Decreases in open space; 
d.  Substantial changes in the location of streets (particularly if streets are to be deleted or access points to the development moved so traffic flows both inside and outside the development are affected); 
e.  Change in the location of any public easement; 
f.  Change in the proportion of housing types by more than 10 percent; 
g.  Substantial changes to the design or materials of structures; or 
h.  Violation of any specific condition of the master plan or terms and conditions. 
(n)  Minor Deviations Subsequent plans and permits for development within an approved MPO district may include minor deviations from the master plan or terms and conditions, provided such deviations are limited to changes addressing technical considerations that could not reasonably be anticipated during the zoning classification process or any other change that has no material effect on the character of the approved activity center district or any of its requirements. The following shall constitute minor deviations: 
(i)  Driveway locations; 
(ii)  Structure floor plan revisions; 
(iii)  Minor shifts in building size or location; and 
(iv)  Facility design modifications for amenities and the like. 
Changes that materially affect the basic concept of the master plan or basic parameters set by the terms and conditions are not considered minor deviations, and shall only be changed as amendments to the MPO district. 
(C)  Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District   
(1)  Purpose The Neighborhood Conservation Overlay (NCO) District is established and intended to protect and preserve the unique design features and character of established neighborhoods throughout the city, and to promote new construction that is compatible with the existing neighborhood character. The NCO district is a flexible tool that may be applied to multiple neighborhoods, each of which will have its own unique architectural, natural, cultural, and historic attributes. 
(2)  Establishment of Individual Neighborhood Conservation Districts The City Council may establish individual Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts in accordance with this section and Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment, after approving an area plan for the neighborhood specifying the development context in the district. Each district shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-3.7(C)(4) General Development Standards for All NCO Districts. In establishing a new NCO District, the City Council may also establish a unique set of development standards applicable to all development in the particular district (see Section 40.1-3.7(C)(5), District-Specific Development Standards). 
(3)  Minimum Standards for Designation of an NCO District The City Council may approve an application for designation of a NCO District only if: 
(a)  At least 65 percent of the land area within the proposed NCO district, not including street and other rights-of-way, is developed; 
(b)  Development patterns in the district demonstrate an on-going effort to maintain or rehabilitate the character and physical features of existing buildings in the district; 
(c)  There is existing or potential pressure for new development or redevelopment and new infill development within the district; 
(d)  The area must possess one or more of the following distinctive features that create a cohesive identifiable setting, character or association: 
(i)  Scale, size, type of construction, or distinctive building materials; 
(ii)  Lot layouts, setbacks, street layouts, alleys or sidewalks; 
(iii)  Special natural or streetscape characteristics, such as creek beds, parks, gardens or street landscaping; 
(iv)  Land use patterns, including mixed or unique uses or activities; or 
(v)  Abuts or links designated historic districts and/or landmarks. 
(e)  The development standards proposed to be applied to the district will encourage the retention of the general character and appearance of existing development in the district. 
(4)  General Development Standards for All NCO Districts   
(a)  Compliance with Underlying Zoning District Standards These standards supplement the applicable development and district-specific standards found in the underlying base zoning district and do not affect the use regulations applicable in the underlying zoning district. 
(b)  Compliance with Approved Design and Development Standards No permit for any new construction or expansion of an existing structure resulting in an increase in building footprint area of 25 percent or more may be issued until the Planning Director determines that the proposal complies with all design standards established for the NCO district where the land is located. All new development in a NCO district shall comply with the development standards for the underlying zoning district. 
(c)  Conflict with Other Standards In the case of conflict between the NCO district standards and any other standards of this Ordinance, the NCO district development standards shall control. 
(5)  District-Specific Development Standards Each area designated as a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District shall identify, with specificity, the design standards to be applied to all new construction and expansion of existing structures. Aspects of development that these design standards may include, but are not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Lot size; 
(b)  Location of proposed buildings or additions; 
(c)  Setbacks or required yards; 
(d)  Building height; 
(e)  Building size (for principal and accessory structures); 
(f)  Building orientation; 
(g)  Exterior building materials and colors; 
(h)  Building roof line and pitch; 
(i)  Building foundation treatment; 
(j)  Landscaping and screening; 
(k)  Impervious surface coverage; 
(l)  Paving requirements or limitations; 
(m)  Exterior lighting; 
(n)  Required features on a front façade; 
(o)  Neighborhood character and compatibility; 
(p)  Views of or from specific locations; 
(q)  Riparian areas, wetland areas, or drainage patterns; and 
(r)  Demolition of structures. 
The City Council may approve additional design standards addressing aspects of development not listed above. The City Council may also prohibit use types within a NCO district. 
(6)  Specific Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts [Placeholder]  
ARTICLE 40.1-4: - USE STANDARDS 
 
40.1-4.1 - Use Table 
(A)  Explanation of Use Table Structure   
(1)  General Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table, lists land uses and indicates whether they are allowed by right or with a use permit in a base zoning district, allowed in an activity center zoning district, or prohibited in a base zoning district and activity center zoning district. The use table also includes references to any additional requirements or regulations applicable to the specific use type. 
(2)  Organization of Uses The use table organizes allowable uses by use classifications, use categories, and use types. The use table and Section 40.1-4.2, Use Classifications, Categories, and Use Types, together provide a systematic basis for identifying and consolidating or distinguishing unidentified land uses to determine whether a particular land use is allowable in a particular zoning district and in addressing future land uses. 
(a)  Use Classifications The use classifications identify broad general classifications of land use and include residential uses, public and institutional uses, commercial uses, and industrial uses. Use classifications are further broken down into a series of general "use categories" and specific "use types." 
(b)  Use Categories The use categories describe the major sub-groups of the respective use classifications, and are based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, and site conditions. For example, the Residential Use Classification is divided into the Household Living and Group Living use categories. Use categories are further broken down into a series of individual use types. 
(c)  Use Types The specific use types are included in the respective use category. They identify the specific principal uses that are considered to fall within characteristics identified in the use category. For example, Live/Work Dwellings, Single-Family Detached Dwellings, Two-to-Four Family Dwellings, Townhouse Dwellings, and Multi-Family Dwellings are use types in the Household Living Use Category. 
(3)  Permitted Uses A "P" in a cell of the use table indicates that the corresponding use category or use type is allowed by right in the corresponding base zoning district, subject to compliance with any use-specific standards referenced in the final column of the use table. An "A" is used in the columns for the activity center districts, and specifies the allowable use types in a particular activity center district provided the use type is set out in an approved activity center master plan. Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including those set forth in Article 40.1-5: Development Standards. 
(4)  Uses Allowed Only with a Use Permit A "U" in a cell of the use table indicates that the corresponding use category or use type is allowed in the corresponding base zoning district only upon approval of a use permit in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit, and any use-specific standards referenced in the final column of the use table. Uses subject to a use permit are subject to all other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including those set forth in Article 40.1-5: Development Standards. 
(5)  Allowed Uses Subject to a Activity Center District Classification An "A" in a cell indicates that a use category or use type is allowed by right in an activity center district, subject to compliance with the use-specific regulations set forth in the final column of the table and provided the use is set out as a possible use type in an approved activity center master plan. Allowed uses are subject to other applicable regulations in this Ordinance, including those set forth in Section 40.1-3.5, Activity Center Zoning Districts. Use types that are blank are not allowable in a particular activity center district, and shall not be included in a master plan. 
(6)  Prohibited Uses A blank cell or a slash in the use table indicates that the use type is prohibited in the corresponding zoning district. 
(7)  Use-Specific Standards When a particular use category or use type is permitted in a zoning district, there may be additional regulations that are applicable to a specific use. The existence of these use-specific standards is noted through a section reference in the last column of the use table titled "Additional Requirements." References refer to Section 40.1-4.3, Use-Specific Standards. These standards shall apply to a particular use regardless of the base zoning district where it is proposed unless otherwise specified. 
(8)  Use Restricted or Prohibited by Overlay Zoning District Regardless of whether the use table identifies a particular use type as a permitted use, allowed use, or use requiring a use permit in a zoning district, or references additional requirements for the use type, the use type may be restricted or prohibited, or subject to more restrictive additional requirements, in accordance with applicable overlay district provisions in Section 40.1-3.5, Overlay Zoning Districts. 
(9)  Unlisted Uses The Planning Director shall determine whether or not an unlisted use is part of an existing use category or use type defined in Section 40.1-4.2, Use Classifications, Categories, and Types, or is substantially similar to an already defined use type, using the standards in Section 40.1-4.2(A)(4), Interpretation of Unlisted Uses. 
(10)  Uses in the Downtown D1 and D2 Districts The use standards related to the Downtown D1 and D2 districts are included with the district-specific standards for each district in Appendix A and B, respectively, of this Ordinance. 
(11)  Uses in the Residential Mobile Home (RMH) District The RMH district is included as Appendix C of this Ordinance, and the range of allowable uses shall be limited to mobile or manufactured homes and existing supporting accessory uses. 
TABLE 40.1-4.1(A): USE TABLE 
P = Permitted Use U = use Permit Required A = Allowed Blank Cell or slash = Prohibited Use 
USE 
CATEGORY 	USE TYPE 	ZONING DISTRICTS 	ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
		RESIDENTIAL [1] 	BUSINESS 	ACTIVITY CENTER 	SPECIAL [2] 	
		N 
R 	G 
R 	U 
R 	U 
R 
N 	N 
M 
U 	G 
M 
U 	M 
U 
H 	I 
L 	I 
N 	N 
A 
C 	C 
A 
C 	R 
A 
C 	H 
R 	H 
L 
O 	H 
L 
B 	P 
G 	W 
F 	
RESIDENTIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Household Living 	Dwelling, live/work 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	P 	40.1-4.3(A)(1)(b) 
	Dwelling, multi-family 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(A)(1)(c) 
	Dwelling, single-family detached 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Dwelling, townhouse 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	U 	
	Dwelling, two- to four-family 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	
	Dwelling, upper story 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	P 	
Group Living 	Dormitory 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	U 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(A)(2)(a) 
	Family care home 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(A)(2)(b) 
	Fraternity or sorority house 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Group home 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(A)(2)(c) 
	Rooming or boarding house 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(A)(2)(d) 
	Single room occupancy (SRO) facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(A)(2)(e) 
PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Community Services 	Community center 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Cultural facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Library 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	P 	
	Museum 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Senior center 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
	Youth club facility 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
Day Care 	Adult day care center 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	U 	U 	P 	/ 	U 	
	Child day care center 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	U 	U 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(1)(a) *See additional requirements for administrative approval 
	Family child day care home (6 to 12 children) 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(1)(b) 
	Home child day care for 5 or fewer children 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
Educational Facilities 	College or university 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(2) 
	School, elementary 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	U 	U 	P 	/ 	U 	
	School, middle 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	U 	U 	P 	/ 	U 	
	School, high 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	U 	U 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Vocational or trade school 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	
Government Facilities 	Government maintenance, storage, or distribution facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	
	Government offices 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	
	Other Government Facilities 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	
	Post office 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	
Health Care Facilities 	Blood/tissue collection facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Drug or alcohol treatment facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	U 	U 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Hospital 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	P 	U 	U 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(B)(3)(a) 
	Medical or dental clinic 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
	Medical or dental lab 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
	Medical treatment facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(3)(b) 
	Outpatient facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
Institutions 	Assisted living facility 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	U 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	
	Auditorium 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	/ 	/ 		A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(4)(a) 
	Convention center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 		A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	
	Halfway house 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(B)(4)(b) 
	Nursing home 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	P 	U 	P 	U 	U 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	
	Psychiatric treatment facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Religious institution 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	U 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(4)(c) 
	Civic, social or fraternal clubs or lodges 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
	Shelter 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	
Parks and Open Areas 	Arboretum or botanical garden 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	
	Cemetery, columbaria, mausoleum 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	40.1-4.3(B)(5)(a) 
	Community garden 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	
	Golf course, public 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Park, public 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	
	Park, private 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Public square or plaza 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	
Public Safety 	Correctional facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(B)(6)(a) 
	Fire or EMS facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Fire or police substation 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Police station 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	
Transportation 	Airport 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Helicopter landing facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	U 	U 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(7)(a) 
	Passenger terminal, surface transportation 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	
Utilities 	Telecommunications antenna, collocation on existing tower 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(8)(a) 
	Telecommunications antenna, placement on existing building 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	40.1-4.3(B)(8)(a) 
	Telecommunications tower, freestanding 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(8)(b) 
	Utility, major 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	U 	40.1-4.3(B)(8)(c) 
	Utility, minor 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	
COMMERCIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Adult Uses 	Adult bookstore 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(2) 
	Adult entertainment establishment 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Adult motion picture theater 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Animal Care 	Animal grooming 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(3) 
	Animal shelter 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Kennel, indoor 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Kennel, outdoor 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Veterinary clinic 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Conference and 
Training Centers 	Conference or training center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(C)(4) 
Eating Establishments 	Dinner theater 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
	Restaurant, with indoor or outdoor seating 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(C)(5)(a) 
	Restaurant, with drive-through service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(5)(b) 
	Restaurant, without drive-through service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	P 	40.1-4.3(c)(5)(a) 
	Restaurant, Brew-pub 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	
	Specialty eating establishment 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
Entertainment 
Establishment 	All 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(C)(6) 
Offices 	Offices, business services 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Offices, financial services 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Offices, professional services 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Offices, sales (including real estate) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Radio and television broadcasting studio 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
Parking, 
Commercial 	Parking lot 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(C)(7)(a) 
	Parking structure 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	40.1-4.3(C)(7)(b) 
Recreation 
/Entertainment, Indoor 	Commercial recreation, indoor 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Theater 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
Recreation/Entertainment, Outdoor 	Arena, amphitheater, or stadium 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	U 	U 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(C)(8)(a) 
	Commercial recreation, outdoor 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Country club 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Golf course, public 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Golf driving range 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Marina 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	P 	40.1-4.3(C)(8)(b) 
	Marina, pleasure boats only 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Membership sports or recreation club 
(e.g., swimming pools, tennis courts) 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	40.1-4.3(C)(7)(c) 
Retail Sales & Services 	Gasoline sales 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(9)(c) 
	Crematory 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(9)(d) 
	Dry cleaning and laundry drop-off establishment 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Financial institution, without drive-through service 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Financial institution, with drive-through service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	U 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Funeral home 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	U 	/ 	/ 		A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Laundry, self-service 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Massage therapy 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 		A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Microbrewery/Micro-Distillery/Micro-Winery/Micro-Cidery 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	P 	
	Personal services establishment 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
Retail Sales & Services 	Special events house 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Tattoo parlor/body piercing establishment 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	
	Repair establishment 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Convenience store, without gas sales 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Convenience store, with gas sales 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(9)(e)(i) 
	Drug store or pharmacy, without drive-through service 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Drug store or pharmacy, with drive-through service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(9)(e)(ii) 
	Flea market 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 		A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Grocery store 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	U 	U 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
	Liquor store 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	U 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(C)(9)(e)(iv) 
	Retail sales establishment, large 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(C)(9)(e)(iii) 
	Other retail sales establishments 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	P 	
Self-Service Storage 	Mini-warehouse 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Vehicle Sales and Services, Heavy 	Aircraft parts, sales, and maintenance 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 		/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Automotive painting/body shop 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(10)(a) 
	Automotive wrecker service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Transmission shop 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Boat and marine rental and sales 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	U 	
	Truck stop 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 		/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Vehicle Sales and Services, Light 	Automotive parts and installation 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(10)(b) 
	Automobile repair and servicing (without painting/bodywork) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(10)(c) 
	Automobile sales or rentals 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(10)(d) 
	Automotive wrecker service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(10)(e) 
	Car wash or auto detailing 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(10)(f) 
	Motorcycle sales 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(10)(d) 
	Recreational vehicle sales or rentals 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(10)(d) 
	Taxicab service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Tire/muffler sales and mounting 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(10)(g) 
Visitor Accommodations 	Bed and breakfast inn 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(12)(a) 
	Campground or recreational vehicle (RV) park 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Hotel or motel, extended stay 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(12)(b) 
	Hotel or motel, full service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	40.1-4.3(C)(12)(c) 
	Tourist Home 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(C)(12)(d) 
INDUSTRIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Industrial Services 	Building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractor 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Electric motor repair 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(1)(a) 
	Fuel oil/bottled gas distributor 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Fuel oil storage 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(1)(b) 
	General industrial service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Heavy equipment sales, rental, or storage 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(1)(c) 
	Heavy equipment servicing and repair 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Laundry, dry cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(1)(d) 
	Machine shop 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(1)(a) 
	Repair of scientific or professional instruments 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Research and development 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Tool repair 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(1)(a) 
Manufacturing and Production 	Manufacturing, heavy 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 		/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(2)(a) 
	Asphalt Plants 								U 										
	Concrete Plants 								U 										
	Manufacture of chemicals, fertilizers, paint and turpentine 								U 										
	Petroleum refining 								U 										
	Rendering 								U 										
	Manufacturing, light 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(2)(b) 
	Brewery/Distillery/Winery/Cidery 							P 	P 										
Warehouse and Freight Movement 	Bulk fuel sales and storage 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(3)(a) 
	Cold storage plant 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Outdoor storage (as a principal use) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(3)(b) 
	Parcel services 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(3)(c) 
	Shipping container storage yard 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(3)(d) 
	Truck or freight terminal 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(3)(c) 
	Warehouse (distribution) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Warehouse (storage) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Waste-Related Services 	Construction/demolition/ 
debris landfill (CDD) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(4)(e) 
	Energy recovery plant 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(4)(e) 
	Hazardous waste collection sites 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(4)(a) 
	Incinerator 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Recycling and salvage center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(4)(b) 
	Recycling drop-off center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(4)(c) 
	Salvage and junkyard 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(4)(d) 
	Transfer station 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(4)(f) 
	Tire disposal or recycling 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(4)(d) 
	Waste composting 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Wholesale sales 	All uses 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	P 	P 		A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.3(D)(5) 
NOTES: 
[1] The Residential Mobile Home (RMH) District is not included in the table. Amendments to the official zoning map establish new RMH districts are prohibited. 
[2] The tables of permitted uses for the Downtown (D1) and (D2) districts are included in Appendices A and B of this Ordinance. 
 
(Ord. No. 2016-70, Amd. 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 2), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 4), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-4.2 - Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types 
(A)  General   
(1)  Purpose This section is intended to provide a systematic framework for identifying, describing, categorizing, and consolidating or distinguishing land uses in a way that makes it easier to determine how a particular land use activity, or combination of activities, is to be considered in applying the use table and other provisions in this Ordinance. This section is also intended to provide support in identifying instances where a new or unanticipated land use not identified in the use table is of such a nature, function, or duration that the impact of allowing it in a particular zoning district is so similar to that of a use type already identified in the use table as allowed in the zoning district that allowing the new or unanticipated land use should be interpreted as being consistent with the intent of the zoning district and the use regulations. 
(2)  Structure of this Section   
(a)  General This section identifies each of the four use classifications in Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table, and includes a section under each use classification identifying each use category. There are "characteristics" and "examples" subsections under each use category (individual use types are defined in Article 40.1-8: Definitions). 
(b)  Principal Use Characteristics and Accessory Uses The "characteristics" subsection describes common characteristics of each use category. Principal uses are assigned to the use category that most closely describes the nature of the principal use. Also listed are examples of common accessory uses that, unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance, are allowed in conjunction with a principal use. 
(c)  Examples The "examples" subsection lists common examples of use types included in the respective use category. The names of these example uses are generic. They are based on common meanings and not on what a specific use may call itself. For example, a use that calls itself "wholesale sales," but sells mostly to consumers, is included in the Retail Sales and Service Use Category rather than the Wholesale Sales Use Category. This is because the activity on the site matches the characteristics of the Retail Sales and Service Use Category. 
(3)  Developments with Multiple Principal Uses When all principal uses of a development fall within one use category, the entire development is assigned to that use category. A development that contains a coffee shop, bookstore, and bakery, for example, would be classified in the Retail Sales and Service Use Category because all of the development's principal uses are in that use category. When the principal uses of a development fall within different use categories, each principal use is classified in the applicable use category and each use is subject to applicable regulations for that use category. Developments with multiple principal uses, such as shopping centers, shall incorporate only those use types allowed in the applicable zoning district. 
(4)  Interpretation of Unlisted Uses   
(a)  Procedure for Interpreting Unlisted Uses as Permitted The Zoning Administrator may interpret a particular land use not expressly listed in the use table as allowed in a particular zoning district, in accordance with the procedure in Section 40.1-2.3(J), Interpretation, and based on the standards in Section 40.1-4.2(A)(4)(b), Standards for Approving Unlisted Uses. 
(b)  Standards for Interpreting Unlisted Uses as Permitted The Zoning Administrator shall interpret an unlisted land use as permitted in a particular zoning district only after determining that the nature, function, and duration of the use and the impact of allowing it in the zoning district are so similar to those of a use type or use category allowable in the zoning district that the unlisted land use should be deemed allowable in the same manner as the similar use type or use category. In making such determination, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the purpose and intent statements in this Ordinance concerning the zoning district, the character of use types allowable in the district, and all relevant characteristics of the unlisted use, including but not limited to the following: 
(i)  The volume and type of sales, retail, wholesale, etc.; 
(ii)  The size and type of items sold and nature of inventory on the premises; 
(iii)  Any processing done on the premises, including assembly, manufacturing, warehousing, shipping, distribution; 
(iv)  Any dangerous, hazardous, toxic, or explosive materials used in the processing; 
(v)  The nature and location of storage and outdoor display of merchandise, whether enclosed, open, inside or outside the principal building; 
(vi)  Predominant types of items stored (such as business vehicles, work-in-process, inventory, and merchandise, construction materials, scrap and junk, and raw materials including liquids and powders); 
(vii)  The type, size, and nature of buildings and structures; 
(viii)  The number and density of employees and customers per unit area of site in relation to business hours and employment shifts; 
(ix)  Transportation requirements, including the modal split for people and freight, by volume type and characteristic of traffic generation to and from the site; 
(x)  Trip purposes and whether trip purposes can be shared by other use types on the site; 
(xi)  Parking requirements, turnover and generation, ratio of the number of spaces required per unit area or activity; 
(xii)  The amount and nature of any nuisances generated on the premises, including but not limited to noise, smoke, odor, glare, vibration, radiation, and fumes; 
(xiii)  Any special public utility requirements for serving the proposed use type, including but not limited to water supply, wastewater output, pre-treatment of wastes and emissions required or recommended, and any significant power structures and communications towers or facilities; and 
(xiv)  The impact on adjacent lands created by the proposed use type, which should not be greater than that of other use types allowed in the zoning district. 
(c)  Effect of Approval of Unlisted Use   
(i)  After interpreting an unlisted land use as permitted in a particular zoning district, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the unlisted use is likely to be common or to recur frequently, or whether its omission from the use table is likely to lead to public uncertainty and confusion. On determining that the unlisted use is likely to be common or would lead to confusion if unlisted, the Zoning Administrator shall initiate an application for a text amendment to this Ordinance to list the use in the use table. Until final action is taken on the text amendment application, the Zoning Administrator's interpretation shall be binding. 
(ii)  If after interpreting an unlisted land use as permitted in a particular zoning district, the Zoning Administrator determines that the unlisted use is of an unusual or transitory nature, and unlikely to recur frequently, the interpretation shall be binding in accordance with Section 40.1-4.4.2(A)(4), Interpretation of Unlisted Uses, without further action or amendment of this Ordinance. 
(iii)  Appeals of the Zoning Administrator's decision shall be submitted in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
(B)  Residential Use Classification   
(1)  Household Living   
(a)  Characteristics The Household Living Use Category includes use types that provide for the residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Accessory uses commonly associated with household living are recreational activities, raising of pets, hobbies, and parking of the occupants' vehicles. Home occupations are accessory uses that are subject to additional regulations (See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(6), Home Occupation). 
(b)  Examples Example use types include Detached Single-Family Dwellings, Two-to-Four Family Dwellings, Townhouse Dwellings, Multi-Family Dwellings, and Live/Work Dwellings. 
(2)  Group Living   
(a)  Characteristics The Group Living Use Category includes use types that provide for the residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of "household." The size of the group may be larger than the average size of a household. Tenancy is arranged on a monthly or longer basis. Generally, group living structures have a common eating area for residents. The residents may receive care, training, or treatment. Common accessory uses include recreational facilities, dining facilities, and parking of vehicles for occupants and staff. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses, family care homes, group homes, and rooming or boarding houses, as well as single room occupancy (SRO) facilities. 
(c)  Exceptions Nursing homes, assisted living facilities, halfway houses, and shelters are classified as Institutions. 
(C)  Public and Institutional Use Classification   
(1)  Community Services   
(a)  Characteristics The Community Services Use Category includes use types of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature that provide a local service to people of the community. Generally, such uses provide ongoing continued service on-site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. Community centers or facilities that have membership provisions that are open to the general public (for instance, any senior citizen could join a senior center) are included in the Community Services Use Category. The use type may provide special counseling, education, or training of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature. Accessory uses may include offices, meeting, food preparation, parking, health, and therapy areas; and athletic facilities. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include community centers, cultural facilities, libraries, museums, senior centers, and youth club facilities. 
(c)  Exceptions Parks are classified as Parks and Open Space. 
(2)  Day Care   
(a)  Characteristics The Day Care Use Category is characterized by use types that provide care, protection, and supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence, and typically for less than 24 hours per day. Care can be provided during daytime or nighttime hours. Accessory uses include offices, food preparation, recreation areas, and parking. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include adult day care centers, child day care centers, family child care homes, or home child day care. 
(c)  Exceptions The Day Care Use Category does not include drop-in or short-term day care provided in connection with employment or shopping, recreational facility, religious institution, hotel, or other principal use, where children are temporarily cared for while parents or guardians are employed part-time or temporarily occupied on the premises or in the immediate vicinity. 
(3)  Educational Facilities   
(a)  Characteristics The Educational Facilities Use Category includes use types such as public and private schools at the elementary, middle, or high school level that provide state-mandated basic education or a comparable equivalent. This use category also includes colleges, universities, and other institutions of higher learning such as vocational or trade schools that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree or certification. Accessory uses at schools include offices, play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and before- or after-school day care. Accessory uses at colleges or universities include offices, dormitories, food service, laboratories, health and sports facilities, theaters, meeting areas, athletic fields, parking, maintenance facilities, and supporting commercial. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include public and private elementary schools (including kindergarten schools), middle or junior high schools, and senior high schools that provide state-mandated basic education, as well as colleges or universities, and vocational or trade schools. 
(4)  Government Facilities   
(a)  Characteristics The Government Facilities Use Category includes use types that provide for the general operations and functions of local, state, or federal governments. Accessory uses include maintenance, storage (indoor and outdoor), fueling facilities, satellite offices, and parking areas. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include post offices, government offices, and government maintenance, storage, and distribution facilities. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Fire, police, and EMS facilities are classified as Public Safety. 
(ii)  Passenger terminals for airports and surface transportation are classified as Transportation. 
(iii)  City, county, and state parks are classified as Parks and Open Space. 
(iv)  Water, wastewater, gas, electric, and other infrastructure services, whether public or private, are classified as Utilities. 
(5)  Health Care Facilities   
(a)  Characteristics The Health Care Facilities Use Category includes use types that provide medical or surgical care and treatment to patients as well as laboratory services. Hospitals and medical treatment facilities offer overnight care, as well as outpatient care. Accessory uses include offices, laboratories, teaching facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, parking, maintenance facilities, housing for staff or trainees, and limited accommodations for family members. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include hospitals, medical and dental clinics, outpatient facilities, medical and dental labs, medical treatment facilities, drug and alcohol treatment facilities, and blood/tissue collection facilities. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Uses that involve provision of residential care for the elderly or disabled are classified Institutions. 
(ii)  Uses that provide exclusive care and planned treatment or training for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents and participants in a program, are considered Institutions. 
(6)  Institutions   
(a)  Characteristics The Institutions Use Category includes use types that provide a variety of facilities, including buildings that provide meeting areas for religious activities, civic or fraternal club activities, convention centers or auditoriums, housing and care for the elderly or disabled, and housing related to treatment programs. Accessory uses include school facilities, limited medical treatment facilities, kitchens/cafeterias, recreation areas, offices, meeting rooms, parking, and staff residences. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include auditoriums and convention centers, religious institutions (with cemeteries, columbaria, and mausoleums as accessory uses), private civic, social, or fraternal clubs or lodges, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, halfway houses, psychiatric treatment facilities, and shelters. 
(c)  Exceptions Adult care homes where individual units meet the definition of dwelling unit in Article 40.1-8: Definitions, family care homes, and group homes are classified as Group Living. 
(7)  Parks and Open Areas   
(a)  Characteristics The Parks and Open Areas Use Category includes use types that focus on open space areas largely devoted to vegetative landscaping or outdoor recreation, and that tend to have few structures. Accessory uses may include clubhouses, recreational structures, statuary, fountains, maintenance facilities, concessions, parking, and columbaria and mausoleums (as accessory to cemeteries). 
(b)  Examples Example use types include arboretums or botanical gardens, parks, public squares or plazas, community gardens, public golf courses, cemeteries, and equestrian facilities. 
(c)  Exceptions Privately owned golf courses are classified as Outdoor Recreation/Entertainment. 
(8)  Public Safety   
(a)  Characteristics The Public Safety Use Category is characterized by use types that provide public safety services to the general public. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include fire and EMS facilities, police stations, substations for fire and police, and fire training facilities, police firing ranges, and correctional facilities. Accessory uses include offices, teaching facilities, meeting areas, lunch rooms and cafeterias, sleeping quarters, storage, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
(9)  Transportation   
(a)  Characteristics The Transportation Use Category includes use types that provide for the landing and takeoff of airplanes and helicopters, including loading and unloading areas. This use category also includes passenger terminals for surface transportation. Accessory uses include freight handling areas, concessions, offices, parking, maintenance, and fueling facilities. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include airports, helicopter landing facilities, and passenger terminals for ground transportation (train, light rail, bus). 
(c)  Exceptions Transit route facilities such as bus stops, bus shelters, and park-and-ride facilities are classified as Utilities. 
(10)  Utilities   
(a)  Characteristics The Utilities Use Category includes both major utilities, which are infrastructure services that provide regional or community-wide service, and minor utilities, which are infrastructure services that need to be located in or near the neighborhood or use type where the service is provided. Wireless telecommunications towers also are a type of utility. Services may be publicly or privately provided. Accessory uses may include parking and control, offices, monitoring, storage areas, or data transmission equipment. 
(b)  Examples   
(i)  Examples of major utilities include wastewater treatment plants, potable water treatment plants, and electrical substations. 
(ii)  Examples of minor utilities include water towers, water and sewage pump stations, stormwater retention and detention facilities, facilities for the drop off or collection, and temporary holding, of household or business recyclables (e.g., recycle drop boxes and reverse vending machines), telephone exchanges, ground-based electrical/telephone/cable vaults, and transit route facilities such as bus stops, bus shelters, and park-and-ride facilities. 
(iii)  Examples of telecommunications towers (free-standing, collocated, and roof-mounted) include facilities for transmitting wireless phones and pager services, and television and radio broadcasting equipment. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Recycling and salvage centers and waste composing uses are considered Waste-Related Services. 
(D)  Commercial Use Classification   
(1)  Adult Uses   
(a)  Characteristics The Adult Uses Category includes use types that sell, distribute, or present material or feature performances or other activities that emphasize the depiction or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein. 
(b)  Examples Example use types in the Adult Uses category include adult bookstores and adult motion picture theaters (distinguished by being largely devoted to selling, renting, or presenting media emphasizing sexually explicit content), and adult entertainment uses (featuring live performances or services emphasizing the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas). 
(2)  Animal Care   
(a)  Characteristics The Animal Care Use Category is characterized by use types related to the provision of medical services, general care, and boarding services for domestic animals. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include animal shelters, animal grooming, kennels (outdoor and indoor), and veterinary clinics. 
(3)  Conference and Training Centers   
(a)  Characteristics The Conference and Training Center Use Category is characterized by facilities used for business or professional conferences, seminars, and training programs. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include conference centers, meeting facilities, and corporate retreat facilities. 
(4)  Eating Establishments   
(a)  Characteristics The Eating Establishments Use Category includes use types that prepare and sell food and beverages for immediate or direct on- or off-premise consumption. Accessory uses may include bars or cocktail lounges associated with the establishment, decks and patios for outdoor seating, drive-through facilities, customer and employee parking areas, and valet parking facilities. 
(b)  Examples Examples include restaurants with indoor and outdoor seating, restaurants with drive-through service, specialty eating establishments (ice cream parlors, bakery shops, dessert shops, juice or coffee houses), and dinner theaters. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Establishments that provide live entertainment, amplified music, or dancing are Entertainment Establishments. 
(5)  Entertainment Establishments   
(a)  Characteristics Uses in the Entertainment Establishment Use Category include uses that offer some form of entertainment (e.g., dancing, comedy performances, amplified music, etc.) while on the premises. Such uses may also serve alcohol or spirits, charge patrons a membership fee or cover charge to enter, and serve food for on-site consumption. 
(b)  Examples Nightclubs, discotheques, music halls, comedy clubs, live performance venues, and cabarets are Entertainment Establishments. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Cabarets that feature performances displaying specified anatomical areas are classified as Adult Uses. 
(ii)  Bars or brew pubs that offer alcohol, spirits, and food to patrons, but do not allow live performances or dancing are Eating Establishments. 
(6)  Offices   
(a)  Characteristics The Office Use Category includes use types that provide for activities that are conducted in an office setting and generally focus on business, professional, or financial services. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, day care facilities, recreational or fitness facilities, parking, supporting commercial, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the business or building. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include offices for business services, professional services (such as lawyers, accountants, engineers, or architects), financial services (such as lenders, banks, brokerage houses, tax preparers), and sales (including real estate agents). 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Offices that are part of and located with a principal use in another use category are considered accessory to the establishment's primary activity. Headquarter offices that are located in conjunction with or adjacent to a principal use in another use category are considered part of the other use category. 
(ii)  Contractors and others who perform services off-site are included in the Offices Use Category if equipment and materials are not stored outside and no fabrication, services, or similar work is carried on at the site. 
(iii)  Government offices are classified as Government Facilities. 
(iv)  Medical and dental clinics, medical or dental labs, and blood collection facilities are classified as Health Care Facilities. 
(v)  Financial institutions offering drive-through or walk-up service to patrons (branch banks or credit unions) are classified as Retail Sales and Services. 
(7)  Parking, Commercial   
(a)  Characteristics The Commercial Parking Use Category includes use types that provide free-standing parking lots and structures that are not accessory to a specific principal use. A fee may or may not be charged. A parking facility that provides both accessory parking for a specific principal use and regular fee parking for people not connected to the principal use is also classified as Commercial Parking. Accessory uses may include small shelters for parking attendants. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include surface parking lots and parking structures (parking decks or garages). 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Parking facilities that are accessory to a principal use, but charge the public to park for occasional events nearby, are not considered Commercial Parking. 
(ii)  Parking facilities that are accessory to a principal use, even if the principal use leases the facility or those parking in the facility are charged a fee, are not considered Commercial Parking. 
(iii)  Park-and-ride facilities are classified as Utilities. 
(8)  Recreation/Entertainment, Indoor   
(a)  Characteristics The Indoor Recreation/Entertainment Use Category includes use types that are privately-owned and provide recreation or entertainment activities in an enclosed structure or structures. Accessory uses may include offices, concessions, snack bars, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include indoor commercial recreation uses (including fitness centers, bowling alleys, game rooms, shooting ranges, pool halls (without alcohol) skating rinks, indoor swimming pools, racquetball and squash courts, indoor tennis club facilities, and theaters (including cinemas, screening rooms, and stages). 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Banquet halls that are part of hotels (classified as Visitor Accommodation) or restaurants (classified as Eating Establishments) are accessory to those uses. 
(ii)  Private civic, social, or fraternal clubs or lodges are classified as Institutions. 
(iii)  Recreational facilities that are reserved for use by residents of particular residential developments and their guests are accessory to those residential use types. 
(9)  Recreation/Entertainment, Outdoor   
(a)  Characteristics The Outdoor Recreation/Entertainment Use Category includes use types that are large, generally commercial, and provide continuous recreation or entertainment-oriented activities that primarily take place outdoors. They may take place in a number of structures that are arranged together in an outdoor setting. Accessory uses may include concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include country clubs, private golf courses, golf driving ranges, privately-owned arenas, amphitheaters, or stadiums, and outdoor commercial recreation uses (including privately-owned miniature golf facilities; go-cart racing, race-track, or dirt-track facilities; drive-in movie theaters; privately-owned outdoor commercial tourist attractions, water parks, and amusement parks; and privately-owned active sports facilities such as ball fields, courts, and archery ranges), as well as outdoor swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields serving membership clubs. This category also includes marinas. 
(c)  Exceptions Golf courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, basketball courts, ball fields, amphitheaters, and other similar outdoor recreational or entertainment-oriented facilities that are publicly owned are classified as Parks and Open Space. 
(10)  Retail Sales and Services   
(a)  Characteristics The Retail Sales and Services Use Category includes use types involved in the sale, lease, or rent of new or used products to the general public. They may also provide personal services or entertainment, or provide product repair or services for consumer and business goods. Accessory uses may include offices, storage of goods, manufacture or repackaging of goods for on-site sale, concessions, ATM machines, outdoor display/sales areas, and parking. Use types within this use category have been categorized based on their intensity, scale, and function. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include uses from the following groups: 
(i)  Gasoline Sales Uses engaged in the retail sale of gasoline and similar vehicular fuels (gas station or service station) that may or may not provide the range of goods or services associated with a convenience store. 
(ii)  Personal Services Establishments Establishments meeting frequent or recurrent service needs of a personal nature, including financial institutions like check cashing establishments or payroll lenders, self-service laundries, laundry and dry-cleaning drop-off establishments, photographic studios, mailing or packaging services, photocopy and blueprint services, hair salons and barber/beauty shops, tanning and nail salons, massage therapy and day spas, dance or music instruction, martial arts classes, taxidermists, funeral homes, and psychics or mediums. 
(iii)  Repair Establishments Uses primarily engaged in providing repair services for TVs, bicycles, clocks and watches, shoes, guns, canvas products, appliances, and office equipment, and including tailors, locksmiths, and upholsterers. 
(iv)  Retail Sales Establishments Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods, whether new or used, including art and art supply stores, audio/video stores, bicycle sales, book stores, clothing stores, convenience stores, department stores, dry good sales, electronic equipment stores, fabric shops, furniture stores, florists, garden supply centers, gift shops, grocery stores, hardware stores, home improvement centers, household products, jewelry stores, office supply stores, pet and pet supply stores, pharmacies, plant stores, and stationery shops. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Laundry and dry-cleaning plants are considered Industrial Services. 
(ii)  Building trade contractors with on-site storage that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation are classified as Warehouse and Freight Movement. 
(iii)  Repair and service of automobiles, motorcycles, and light and medium trucks is classified as Vehicle Sales and Service (Heavy or Light). 
(iv)  Bakeries, dinner theaters, or entertainment establishments primarily engaged in the sale of food for on-site consumption are considered Eating Establishments. 
(v)  Cinemas, theaters, concert halls, and stages are considered Indoor Recreation/Entertainment. 
(vi)  Uses providing financial, professional, or business services by appointment or with only limited contact with the general public are classified as Offices. 
(vii)  Uses that involve the sales, distribution, or presentation of materials or activities emphasizing sexually explicit content are classified as Adult Uses. 
(viii)  Massage parlors, tattoo parlors, body piercing establishments, or escort services are not personal services establishments. 
(ix)  Establishments that provide live entertainment, amplified music, or dancing are Entertainment Establishments. 
(11)  Self-Service Storage (Mini-warehouse)   
(a)  Characteristics The Self-Service Storage Use Category includes use types that provide individual, self-contained units or areas leased to individuals, organizations, or businesses for self-service storage of household and personal property. The storage units or areas are designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing or removing personal property. Accessory uses include leasing offices, outdoor storage of boats and campers, and living quarters for a resident manager or security guard. Use of the storage areas for sales, service, repair, or manufacturing operations is not considered accessory to Self-Service Storage. The rental of trucks or equipment is also not considered accessory to the use. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include self-service storage establishments, also called "mini-warehouses." 
(c)  Exceptions A transfer and storage business, where there are not individual storage areas, or where employees are the primary movers of property being stored or transferred, is classified as Warehouse and Freight Movement. 
(12)  Vehicle Sales and Services, Heavy   
(a)  Characteristics The Vehicle Sales and Services Use, Heavy Category include use types involving the direct sales and servicing of medium trucks, boats, and other consumer motor vehicles intended to transport persons or goods over land or water or through the air, whether for recreation, commerce, or personal transport. Accessory uses include offices, sales of parts, maintenance facilities, parking, outdoor display, and vehicle storage. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include vehicle sales or rentals; significant automotive repair and servicing; automotive painting/bodywork; boat and marine sales or rental; aircraft parts, sales, and maintenance; transmission shops; and automotive wrecker services. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Refueling facilities for vehicles belonging to a specific principal use (fleet vehicles) are considered accessory uses if located on the site of the principal use. 
(ii)  Storage of inoperable vehicles or parts is considered a Waste-Related Service. 
(iii)  Sales of automobiles, oil change service, tire sales and service, and muffler shops are considered Light Vehicles Sales and services. 
(13)  Vehicle Sales and Services, Light   
(a)  Characteristics The Vehicle Sales and Services Use, Light Category includes use types involving the direct sales and servicing of automobiles, motorcycles, light trucks. Accessory uses include offices, sales of parts, maintenance facilities, parking, outdoor display, and vehicle storage. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include automotive sales or rentals (including the sales and rental of automobiles, motorcycles, and light trucks); light automotive repair and servicing such as oil changes, state vehicle inspections, and muffler shops; automotive parts sales and maintenance; car wash and auto detailing; and tire sales and mounting services. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Refueling facilities for vehicles belonging to a specific principal use (fleet vehicles) are considered accessory uses if located on the site of the principal use. 
(ii)  Storage of inoperable vehicles or parts is considered a Waste-Related Service. 
(iii)  Sales of major recreational equipment, bodywork, painting, transmission work, or substantial engine repair is classified as Vehicle Sales and Service, Heavy. 
(14)  Visitor Accommodations   
(a)  Characteristics The Visitor Accommodations Use Category includes use types that provide lodging units or space for short-term stays of less than 30 days for rent, lease, or interval occupancy. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities, limited storage, restaurants, bars, supporting commercial, meeting facilities, offices, and parking. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include full service hotels or motels, extended stay hotels or motels, bed and breakfast inns, tourist homes, recreational vehicle (RV) parks, and campgrounds. 
(c)  Exceptions Rooming, boarding houses, and single-room-occupancy establishments are classified as Group Living. 
(E)  Industrial Use Classification   
(1)  Industrial Services   
(a)  Characteristics The Industrial Services Use Category includes use types involving the repair or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery equipment, products, or by-products. Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Accessory activities may include limited retail or wholesale sales, offices, parking, warehousing, and outdoor storage. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include machine shops; tool repair; electric motor repair; repair of scientific or professional instruments; heavy equipment sales, rental, or storage; heavy equipment servicing and repair; building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractors; fuel oil or bottled gas distributors; research and development facilities; laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; and general industrial service uses. 
(c)  Exceptions Contractors and others who perform services off-site are included in the Offices Use Category if equipment and materials are not stored outside and no fabrication, services, or similar work is carried on at the site. 
(2)  Manufacturing and Production   
(a)  Characteristics The Manufacturing and Production Use Category includes use types involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for firms or consumers. The use category also includes custom industries (establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by use of hand tools and small-scale equipment). Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, such sales are a subordinate part of total sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site. Accessory uses may include retail or wholesale sales, offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities, truck fleets, fueling facilities, security and caretaker's quarters. 
(i)  Heavy Manufacturing Heavy Manufacturing is the manufacture or compounding process of raw materials. These activities may involve outdoor operations as part of their manufacturing process. 
(ii)  Light Manufacturing Light Manufacturing is the mechanical transformation of predominantly previously prepared materials into new products, including assembly of component parts and the creation of products for sale to wholesale or retail markets or directly to consumers. Such uses are wholly confined within an enclosed building, do not include processing of hazardous gases and chemicals, and do not emit noxious noise, smoke, vapors, fumes, dust, glare, odor, or vibration. 
(b)  Examples   
(i)  Heavy Manufacturing Example use types of heavy manufacturing include, but are not limited to: the manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment, instruments, vehicles, and appliances; rendering; concrete production; asphalt plants; glass and plastic production; cardboard fabrication; and petroleum refining. 
(ii)  Light Manufacturing Example use types of light manufacturing include: production or repair of small machines or electronic parts and equipment; sewing or assembly of textiles into consumer products; woodworking and cabinet building; publishing and lithography; computer design and development; communications equipment, precision items and other electrical items; research, development, and testing facilities and laboratories; sign making, assembly of pre-fabricated parts, manufacture of electric, electronic, or optical instruments or devices; manufacture and assembly of artificial limbs, dentures, hearing aids, and surgical instruments; manufacture, processing, and packing of food products, cosmetics, and manufacturing of components, jewelry, clothing, trimming decorations, and any similar item. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on-site and to the general public is classified as Retail Sales and Services if the manufacturing area is less than 35 percent of the development's gross floor area. 
(ii)  Manufacturing and production of goods from salvage material is classified as Waste-Related Services. 
(iii)  Manufacturing and production of goods from composting material is classified as Waste-Related Services. 
(3)  Warehouse and Freight Movement   
(a)  Characteristics The Warehouse and Freight Movement Use Category includes use types involving the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms or businesses. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the customer present. Accessory uses include offices, truck fleet parking, outdoor storage, and maintenance areas. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include separate storage warehouses (used for storage by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores); distribution warehouses (used for distribution by trucking companies; cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers; outdoor storage (as a principal use); and parcel services. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Contractor's offices that do not include storage yards are classified as Offices. 
(ii)  Use types that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are classified as Waste-Related Services. 
(4)  Waste-Related Services   
(a)  Characteristics The Waste-Related Services Use Category includes use types that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location, uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic material or processing of scrap or waste material. This use category also includes use types that receive hazardous wastes from others. Accessory uses may include offices, outdoor storage, recycling of materials, and repackaging and trans-shipment of by-products. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include recycling and salvage centers, land application of wastes, sanitary landfills, land clearing and construction debris landfills, tire disposal or recycling, waste composting, incinerators, energy recovery plants, salvage yards and junkyards, hazardous waste collection sites; and recycling drop-off centers. 
(c)  Exceptions Wastewater treatment plants and potable water treatment plants are classified as major utilities, in the Utilities use category. Facilities for the drop off or collection, and temporary holding, of household or business recyclables—such as recycle drop boxes and reverse vending machines—are classified as minor utilities, in the Utilities use category. 
(5)  Wholesale Sales   
(a)  Characteristics The Wholesale Sales Use Category includes use types involving the sale, lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or taking of orders and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. Accessory uses may include offices, product repair, warehouses, minor fabrication services, outdoor storage, and repackaging of goods. 
(b)  Examples Example use types include sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy trucks, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment and store fixtures; mail order houses; and wholesalers of food, clothing, plants and landscaping materials, auto parts, and building hardware. 
(c)  Exceptions   
(i)  Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public or on a membership basis are classified as Retail Sales and Services. 
(ii)  Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on-site business activity are classified as Warehouse and Freight Movement. 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 4), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-4.3 - Use-Specific Standards 
Use-specific standards are the requirements applied to individual use types regardless of the zoning district in which they are located or the review procedure by which they are approved. This section is intended to identify the use-specific standards for all principal uses identified in Table 40.1-4.1, Use Table, as subject to "additional requirements." These standards may be modified by other applicable requirements in this Ordinance. 
(A)  Residential Uses   
(1)  Household Living   
(a)  General All household living uses shall comply with the single-family residential design or multi-family residential design standards (as appropriate) in Article 40.1-5, Development Standards. 
(b)  Dwellings, Live/Work Live/work dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The residential portion of the building shall occupy over 50 percent of the gross floor area. 
(ii)  The nonresidential portion of the building shall be located on the ground floor. 
(iii)  The nonresidential portion of the building shall comply with all applicable nonresidential building code requirements. 
(iv)  Employees shall be limited to occupants of the residential portion of the building plus up to three persons not residing in the residential portion. 
(v)  Drive-through facilities are prohibited. 
(vi)  The use shall comply with the parking, landscaping, and open space standards for mixed uses in Article 40.1-5: Development Standards. 
(vii)  Any nonresidential off-street parking shall be located as far as practicable from existing adjacent Detached Single-Family Dwellings. 
(c)  Dwellings, Two- to Four-Family Two- to four-family dwellings shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Except for circular driveways, no two- to four-family dwelling lot shall be served by more than one driveway on the same block face. 
(ii)  Two- to four-family dwellings on lots in a GR district shall be served by a single entrance on any individual building façade. 
(iii)  Ground based, roof-based, and wall-mounted electrical equipment, HVAC equipment and other utility connection devices shall be ganged and shall be screened or located outside the view from any adjacent public street. 
(iv)  Two- to four-family dwellings shall comply with Section 40.1-5.5(D), Multi-Family Development Standards. 
(v)  Development of a Two-to-Four Family Dwelling located on a lot adjacent to a lot containing or proposed to contain a Two-to-Four Family Dwelling shall be classified as, and shall comply with all requirements for, a Multi-Family Dwelling. This will require obtaining a Use Permit in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(B). 
(2)  Group Living   
(a)  Dormitories All dormitories shall be accessory to an educational facility located on the same site or campus, and house only persons who are students at the educational facility. 
(b)  Family Care Homes Any family care home shall be located at least 2,600 feet (approximately one-half mile) from any other family care home. 
(c)  Group Homes Any group home shall be located at least 2,600 feet (approximately one-half mile) from any other group home. 
(d)  Rooming or Boarding House A rooming or boarding house shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  No more than two rooms shall be rented at any one time; 
(ii)  No more than two borders at any one time; 
(iii)  The owner shall maintain the house as a primary residence; 
(iv)  Sleeping rooms in a rooming house shall: 
a.  Not include individual kitchen facilities; and 
b.  Be accessed by a common room or hallway, and shall not have individual access to the outside (except for emergency exits). 
(e)  Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Facility   
(i)  Applications for a new SRO or modifications to an existing SRO shall contain: 
a.  A mission statement; 
b.  An operational plan approved by the city; 
c.  A business plan that addresses case management and property management; 
d.  Detailed applicant screening policies and selection criteria; 
e.  Detailed description of supporting services and providers of such services; 
f.  A set of facility regulations, including but not limited to, visitor rules, times doors are locked, unauthorized resident absences, vehicle ownership/usage by residents, and permitted unit furnishings; and 
g.  A rent schedule for residents. 
(ii)  Single room occupancy facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Be located on a lot of at least one acre in area; 
b.  Be at least 500 feet from any other SRO facility; 
c.  Include at least 6,000 square feet of lot area for the first unit and 1,400 square feet of lot area for each additional unit; 
d.  Front a public street of at least 50 feet in width; 
e.  Be located within 1,600 feet, as measured on a straight line to any portion of the land utilized for a SRO facility of an active transit stop; 
f.  Include a minimum of one automatic washer and one automatic dryer for every 20 rooms in convenient locations, and maintain the equipment in good working order; and 
g.  Require every resident to complete successfully a series of interview assessments regarding their desire for life changes prior to being granted occupancy. 
(B)  Public and Institutional Uses   
(1)  Day Care   
(a)  Child Day Care Centers Child day care centers, including pre-schools, shall be licensed as a child care center by the state and comply with all state regulations for child care centers and the following standards: 
(i)  Location If not located in a stand-alone building, a child day care center shall be located on the first floor of a principal structure, and be segregated (including the restrooms) from the remaining portion of the building in which it is located. 
(ii)  Separation Child day care centers shall be located at least 1,000 linear feet from any adult use. 
(iii)  Outdoor Play Areas Outdoor play areas shall be provided, and shall: 
a.  Be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least three-and-one-half feet in height; 
b.  Be safely segregated from parking, loading, or service areas; and 
c.  Not be operated for outdoor play activities after 6:00 P.M. 
(iv)  Parking Area, Vehicular Circulation, and Drop-Off and Pick-Up The parking areas and vehicular circulation for the child day care center shall be designed to: 
a.  Enhance the safety of children as they arrive at and leave the facility; and 
b.  Provide a designated pickup and delivery area that includes at least one parking/stacking space per 10 children configured so that children do not have to cross vehicular travelways to enter or exit the center. 
(v)  Accessory Uses If allowed as an accessory use to a Retail Sales and Service or Office use, the heated floor area of a child day care center shall not exceed 20 percent of the heated floor area of the principal use. 
(b)  Family Child Day Care Homes and Home Child Day Care Family child care homes and home child day care shall comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  Family child day care homes and home child day care shall be licensed and comply with all state regulations for family child care homes and home child day care. 
(ii)  Family child day care homes and home child day care shall be located at least 1,000 linear feet from any adult use. 
(iii)  Operation shall be limited to Monday through Friday, no earlier than 5:00 a.m. to no later than 8:30 p.m. 
(iv)  Outdoor play areas shall not be used before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. 
(v)  Parking for employees and customers shall be provided on-site or may be provided on-street adjacent to the home provided there is no explicit prohibition on on-street parking. 
(vi)  Process: For a Family Child Day Care Home a request for a Zoning Compliance Permit shall be submitted and reviewed by the Zoning Administrator. Once the request has been determined to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the adjoining property owners, including all owners across any public right-of-way, by registered or certified letter of the application for a Family Child Day Care Home. If the Zoning Administrator receives no written objection from a person so notified within thirty days of the date of sending the letter the zoning administrator may issue the permit sought. Where written objection is received from a person so notified within the 30 day time period, the Zoning Compliance Permit shall be denied. Where the Zoning Compliance Permit is denied the applicant may submit an application for a Use Permit in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(B) of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Educational Facilities All educational facilities shall be located at least 500 linear feet from any adult use, and shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Schools, Elementary/Middle/High Any temporary structures needed for the expansion of an elementary, middle, or high school located within the residential districts, and on a site or parcel with an area of 20 acres or less, shall: 
(i)  Not be located between the principal building and any abutting right-of-way, unless there is no other practical alternative due to topography, the presence of utilities or easements, the existence of undisturbed open space and buffers, or other site features beyond the landowner's control; and 
(ii)  Have the base of the structure screened from view from abutting properties and public streets. 
(3)  Health Care Facilities   
(a)  Hospitals A hospital shall: 
(i)  Be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least five acres. 
(ii)  Be located on a parcel that fronts or has direct access to an arterial or collector street. 
(iii)  Be served by a public water and wastewater system. 
(b)  Medical Treatment Facilities; Outpatient Facilities A medical treatment facility or outpatient facility located in the NMU zoning district shall: 
(i)  Be small-scale (have a gross floor area not exceeding 3,000 square feet); and 
(ii)  Design visitor and patient facilities associated with the use so as to be compatible with surrounding uses. 
(4)  Institutions   
(a)  Auditoriums and Convention Centers Auditoriums and convention centers shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The parcel or site shall have an area of at least five acres. 
(ii)  The building shall be located at least 500 feet from any NR or GR zoning district. 
(b)  Halfway House Halfway houses shall comply with the use-specific standards for a group home (See Section 40.1-4.3(A)(2)(c), Group Homes). 
(c)  Religious Institutions Religious institutions shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Religious institutions shall be located at least 500 linear feet from any adult use. 
(ii)  Religious institutions in the NR or GR districts, when permitted, that include a school or sanctuary with a capacity of 800 persons or more shall obtain a use permit in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit. 
(5)  Parks and Open Areas   
(a)  Cemeteries Except as otherwise noted, new cemeteries and the expansion of existing cemeteries shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  New cemeteries shall be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least 2.5 acres. 
(ii)  New cemeteries shall be located on a site or parcel that fronts an arterial or collector street. 
(iii)  Cemeteries shall include adequate space for the parking and maneuvering of funeral processions. 
(iv)  Interments shall take place at least 50 feet from any lot line and comply with all requirements of the Code of Virginia. 
(6)  Public Safety Facilities   
(a)  Correctional Facilities Correctional facilities shall be located at least 1,500 feet from any NR or GR zoning district. 
(7)  Transportation Facilities   
(a)  Helicopter Landing Facilities A helicopter landing facility shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The helicopter landing facility shall provide adequate land area for safe take-offs and landings in accordance with standards of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
(ii)  Where located within 500 feet of a NR or GR district, or existing single-family residential development, a helicopter landing facility shall provide an adequate buffer along the property line to ensure the facility does not adversely impact surrounding uses. 
(8)  Utilities   
(a)  Telecommunications Antennas, Collocation on Existing Tower or Placement on Existing Building A telecommunications antenna that is collocated on an existing tower or placed on an existing building shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Antennas and any accessory equipment shall be painted or colored to blend in with the structure or surrounding environment. 
(ii)  Antennas, supports and utility cabinets shall be mounted or placed in a manner which blends with the surrounding environment. Screening is required where deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator. 
(iii)  The permit application shall include a certified report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer demonstrating that the non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) to be emitted from the proposed facility, along with others on the same structure or in the immediate vicinity, will not exceed the exposure standards established by the U.S. Government and that the facility will not cause interference with any equipment operated by other users. 
(b)  Telecommunications Towers No use permit is required of any city-owned sites preapproved by the City Council. 
(c)  Utility, Major An electrical power facility, substation, or transmission station shall be set back at least 100 feet from all lot lines. Service or storage yards shall be prohibited. 
(C)  Commercial Uses   
(1)  General Unless exempted, all commercial uses shall comply with the commercial development standards in Section 40.1-5.6, Commercial Development Standards. 
(2)  Adult Uses   
(a)  Purpose Within the city, it is acknowledged that there are some uses, often referred to as adult uses, which because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity to residential neighborhoods, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing the concentration or location of these uses in a manner that would create such adverse effects. 
(b)  Location, Size, and Design The location, size, design and operating characteristics of a proposed adult use will be compatible with and will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to adjacent uses, residents, buildings, structures or natural resources. 
(3)  Animal Care Uses Animal shelters, kennels (indoor and outdoor), and veterinary clinics shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The animal care use shall be sufficiently insulated so no unreasonable noise or odor can be detected off the premises. 
(b)  Any open runs or pens used to house animals shall be located at least 75 feet from any lot line. 
(c)  Accessory uses to a kennel or veterinary clinic may include retail sales and grooming services, as long as the accessory uses do not occupy more than 25 percent of the total gross floor area of the principal building. 
(d)  Any incinerators included as an accessory use to an animal shelter shall be allowed only if a use permit is approved in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit. 
(4)  Conference and Training Centers Conference centers shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Dining and banquet facilities may be provided for employees, trainees, and conferees, provided the gross floor area devoted to such facilities does not exceed 20 percent of the total floor area of the principal building. 
(b)  On-site recreational facilities may be provided for use by employees, trainees, or conferees. 
(c)  No products shall be sold on-site except those that are clearly incidental and integral to training programs and seminars conducted in the center (e.g., shirts, glasses and mugs, pens and pencils, and similar items bearing the logo of conference or seminar sponsors or participants). 
(5)  Eating Establishments   
(a)  Restaurants with Indoor or Outdoor Seating; Restaurant, Brew-pub Restaurants having outdoor seating shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  In the WF District Outdoor dining located in a public right-of-way or on a seawall is prohibited. 
(ii)  In All Other Districts   
a.  The outdoor seating area shall be located no closer than 100 feet from any NR or GR zoning district. 
b.  The outdoor portions of the restaurant shall not operate after 11:00 P.M. 
c.  The outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public use. 
(b)  Restaurants, with Drive-Through Service Restaurants having drive-through facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Drive-through facilities shall be located at least 100 feet from any detached single-family dwelling or single-family residential zoning district (NR or GR). 
(ii)  Drive-through facilities shall be designed so as not to obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks, through areas intended for public use, or between the restaurant entrance and customer parking spaces. 
(6)  Entertainment Establishments All entertainment establishments shall: 
(a)  Be separated from the lot line of existing Group Living uses, Day Care uses, Educational Facility uses, hospitals, or religious institutions by at least 250 feet. 
(7)  Parking, Commercial   
(a)  Parking Lots A commercial parking lot shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Parking shall be the principal use of the parking lot. Parking spaces may be rented for parking, but no other business of any kind shall be conducted on the lot, including repair service, washing, display, or storage of vehicles or other goods. 
(ii)  Commercial parking lots shall not be located contiguous to a NR or GR zoning district. 
(b)  Parking Structures A commercial parking structure shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Parking shall be the principal use of the parking structure, but retail sales and service and office establishments may be located on the ground floor of the structure. 
(ii)  Parking spaces may be rented for parking, but no other business of any kind shall be conducted in the structure, including repair service, washing, display, or storage of vehicles or other goods. 
(iii)  A commercial parking structure shall not be located contiguous to a NR or GR zoning district. 
(8)  Recreation/Entertainment, Outdoor   
(a)  Arenas, Amphitheaters, and Stadiums Arenas, amphitheaters, and stadiums shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Arenas and stadiums shall be located at least 1,000 feet from residential zoning districts. 
(ii)  Stadiums shall be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least five acres. 
(iii)  Arenas and stadiums shall be located on a site or parcel that, at the primary point of access, has at least 200 feet of frontage on an arterial street. 
(iv)  Arenas and stadiums shall locate access points to minimize traffic to and through local streets in residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Marinas Marinas shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  No marina shall be established on a lot less than one acre in size. 
(ii)  Each lot containing a marina shall have a minimum lot frontage of 200 linear feet. 
(iii)  Exterior lighting shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-5.9, Exterior Lighting, and shall be directed and shielded so as to avoid glare on adjacent residential uses including residential uses across the body of water serving the marina. 
(iv)  Dry stacking of boats outside enclosed structures shall be prohibited. 
(v)  Storage buildings and other accessory structures associated with a marina located on a lot within the GR District shall be of a residential character. 
(c)  Membership Sports or Recreation Clubs   
(i)  Swimming Pools Swimming pools that are a principal use shall comply with the following standards. Swimming pools that are accessory uses shall comply with Section 40.1-4.4(C)(17), Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs. 
a.  Swimming pools for nonprofit organizations shall be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least one acre and a width of at least 200 feet at the building line. 
b.  A swimming pool shall be set back from any lot line at least a distance equal to three feet plus one foot for each foot of vertical excavation. 
c.  The area containing the pool shall be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least three feet high and has a gate that can be securely fastened. 
d.  Pools with a capacity of 2,000 gallons or more shall have filtering and purification, or automatic water exchange equipment that changes the pool water every 24 hours. 
e.  Any pump and filtering equipment and any appurtenant structures shall be located at least 10 feet from any lot line. 
f.  There shall be no commercial sales that are not an integral part of the pool use, nor shall any commercial displays be visible from the street or other property. 
(ii)  Tennis Courts Tennis courts that are a principal use shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  All lighted tennis courts open to the public shall be located at least 50 feet from any adjacent residential use on a different lot. 
b.  Lighted tennis courts open to the public shall be screened from any existing detached single-family dwelling with a Type D buffer, an accordance with Section 40.1-5.2, Landscaping and Screening. 
(9)  Retail Sales and Services   
(a)  General Any retail sales establishment selling food or beverages for off-site consumption shall maintain a litter receptacle outside all public entrances, and shall ensure that all litter receptacles are maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Public litter receptacles located within 50 feet of a pubic entrance may be used to comply with these requirements. 
(b)  Reserved.   
(c)  Gasoline Sales Uses that include the retail sales of gasoline and other automotive fuels shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Gasoline pumps, canopies, and associated service areas are prohibited in any established front yard in the UR, UR-H, and MU-H districts. 
(ii)  If the gasoline sales use is located on a corner lot, the lot shall have an area of at least 30,000 square feet and a frontage of at least 125 feet on each street side. In all other cases, the lot shall have an area of at least 15,000 square feet and a lot width of at least 150 feet. 
(iii)  The gasoline sales use shall have no more than two vehicular access points. Access points shall be located at least 75 feet from each other, at least 50 feet from any intersecting street right-of-ways, and at least 15 feet from any other lot line. 
(iv)  Vehicular access points shall be no more than 40 wide. 
(v)  The gasoline sales use shall be designed to ensure safe and adequate vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements. 
(vi)  Drive-through facilities and associated stacking lanes and circulation shall be prohibited in the front of the building or in a side yard abutting a street. 
(vii)  Trash containers shall be fully screened by a wall that is constructed of the same material as the principal structure. Trash containers shall be located so as to minimize their visibility from adjacent public streets or other public gathering areas. 
(d)  Personal Services   
(i)  Personal Services Establishments Personal service establishments in the UR-H and NMU zoning districts shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  An individual establishment shall have no more than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area. 
b.  The business activities of the establishment shall be conducted within an enclosed building, with no more than 20 percent of the gross floor area devoted to storage. 
c.  The establishment shall only sell products at retail. 
(ii)  Financial Institutions, with Drive-Through Service Financial institutions with drive-through service shall locate the drive-through to the side or rear of the primary building, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(iii)  Funeral Homes Funeral homes shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The funeral home shall have its principal frontage, access, and orientation directly on an arterial street. 
b.  The funeral home shall have a type D buffer between it and any residentially-zoned property abutting or directly across the street from the funeral home site. 
c.  On-premise signage shall be oriented toward the arterial street that provides access to the site. 
d.  All structures shall be located so as not to require access from an interior residential street. 
(iv)  Hair Salons Hair salons shall not be visible from a public street in the WF district. 
(v)  Dry Cleaning Dry cleaning facilities shall be limited to drop off and pick-up service establishments only in the WF district. 
(vi)  Massage Parlors Massage parlors shall comply with the standards in Section 24-170 of the City Code. 
(vii)  Special Events House Special events houses shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  A special events house shall be owner-occupied. 
b.  The house shall admit guests by invitation only, shall not be open to the general public, and shall not charge admission at the door. 
c.  Attendance shall be limited to a maximum of 48 guests. 
d.  Food and beverages served shall be prepared off-site, but on-site warming or chilling of food and beverages is allowed. 
e.  The serving of alcoholic beverages shall be pursuant to a one-time banquet license secured by a person other than the operator of the special events house. 
f.  The house shall use background music only from a stereo system or a musician using only one amplified instrument. Any music produced shall not be audible beyond the site's boundaries. 
g.  The house shall not be used for regular meetings. 
(viii)  Signage shall be limited to one non-illuminated wall sign not exceeding four square feet in area. 
(e)  Retail Sales   
(i)  Convenience Stores, with Gasoline Sales Convenience stores with gasoline sales shall comply with the standards for gas sales uses in Section 40.1-4.3(C)(7)(c), Gasoline Sales. 
(ii)  Drug Stores or Pharmacies, with Drive-Through Service The drive-through facility shall be located to the side or rear of the primary building, where practicable. 
(iii)  Retail Sales Establishments, Large Single tenant or two-tenant retail sales establishments located in a structure with a gross floor area of 60,000 square feet or more shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-5.6(H), Standards for Large Retail Development. 
(10)  Self-Service Storage   
(a)  General Standards for all Facilities   
(i)  If separate buildings are constructed, there shall be a minimum separation of ten feet between buildings. 
(ii)  Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate, or process goods, to service or repair vehicles, small engines or electrical equipment, or conduct similar repair activities, to conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind, or to conduct any other commercial or industrial activity on the site. The owner/operator shall be allowed to sell moving and packaging materials and related items and to hold auctions on site for the disposal of goods stored on the premises. 
(iii)  No more than one security or caretaker quarters may be developed on the site, and shall be integrated into the building's design. 
(iv)  Except as otherwise authorized in this subsection, all personal property shall be stored within enclosed buildings. 
(v)  Hours of public access to a self-service storage facility abutting a residential zoning district or existing residential use shall be restricted to the hours between 6:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M., unless modified by an approved Use Permit. 
(vi)  Appropriate access and circulation by vehicles and emergency equipment shall be ensured through the design of internal turning radii of aisleways. 
(vii)  All access ways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable paving materials. 
(viii)  Garage doors or roll-up doors serving individual storage units shall be perpendicular to a public or private street so as to not be visible from adjacent streets. 
(ix)  The maximum height of a self-service storage facility shall be in accordance with the applicable district standards contained in Article 40.1-3. 
(x)  Outdoor lighting shall be provided in accordance with Section 40.1-5.9, Exterior Lighting. 
(xi)  The exterior facades of all structures facing a public street shall be masonry (brick or split-faced CMU) or a combination of said masonry and other building products that have the appearance of a textured finish. 
(xii)  A maximum of two colors (excluding roof colors) shall be used on wall facades visible from off-site areas. Colors shall be neutral or earth-tone, and shall not be used to call attention to the use. 
(xiii)  Perimeter or exterior walls visible from a public street or detached residential dwelling shall not include metal as a primary material. 
(xiv)  All mechanical equipment and dumpsters shall be fully screened from off-site views. 
(xv)  Open storage of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, and dry storage of pleasure boats of the type customarily maintained by persons for their personal use shall be permitted within a self-service storage facility use, provided that the following standards are met: 
a.  No outdoor storage shall be visible from off-site at street level from a public right of way; 
b.  The storage shall occur only within a designated area, which shall be clearly delineated; 
c.  The size of the storage area shall not exceed 25 percent of the buildable area of the site; 
d.  Outdoor storage areas shall be located to the rear of the principal structure and be screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall at least eight feet high; 
e.  Storage shall not occur within the areas set aside for minimum building setbacks; 
f.  No dry stacking of boats shall be permitted on-site; 
g.  Portable shipping containers are prohibited; and 
(xvi)  Where an existing building is being converted to a self-storage use, the use specific standards may be varied through an approved Use Permit. 
(b)  Additional Standards for Single Story Facilities:   
(i)  The minimum lot area shall be at least two acres. 
(ii)  In a single-story self-service storage facility interior parking shall be provided in the form of aisle ways adjacent to the storage bays. These aisle ways shall be used both for circulation and temporary customer parking while using storage bays. The minimum width of these aisle ways shall be 21 feet if only one-way traffic is permitted, and 30 feet if two-way traffic is permitted. 
(iii)  All areas adjacent to a street frontage not occupied by a building shall include fencing designed in accordance with the following standards; 
a.  Fences shall be no shorter than six feet or taller than eight feet. 
b.  Fencing shall be masonry, wrought iron, steel, or aluminum and shall be painted or vinyl coated with colors that complement the buildings. 
c.  Chain link fencing is prohibited. 
d.  Metal fences shall include brick pilasters or supports located with consistent on-center spacing. 
e.  Wooden or chain link entry gates into the use are prohibited. Gates installed shall open horizontally, not vertically to ensure unencumbered access for emergency equipment. 
(iv)  In a single-story self-service storage facility the one- or two-way traffic flow patterns in aisle ways shall be clearly marked. Marking shall consist, at a minimum, of standard directional signage and painted lane markings with arrows. 
(c)  Additional Standards for Multi-Story Facilities.   
(i)  All multi-story facilities shall have interior elevators. 
(ii)  No less than 20% of the front facade facing the primary street shall consist of a non-reflective glazing material. 
(iii)  Where interior ramps are proposed for use by motor vehicles the interior aisle ways shall meet or exceed the requirements of Section 40.1-5.3(10)(b)(ii) above. 
(iv)  If approved by a Use Permit, other uses compatible with the surrounding land uses may be permitted on the first floor of the multi-story facility. 
(v)  A loading dock or loading area shall be provided. 
(vi)  Individual storage units shall not be directly accessible from the exterior of the multi-story facility. 
(11)  Vehicle Sales and Services   
(a)  Automotive Painting/Body Shop Automobile painting/body shop uses shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The use shall be located at least 500 feet from any residential zoning district, school, or day care. 
(ii)  Vehicles shall not be parked or stored as a source of parts or for the purpose of sale or lease/rent. 
(iii)  Repair and storage of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, located behind or to the side of the principal structure, and screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. 
(iv)  Vehicles that are repaired and are awaiting removal shall not be stored or parked for more than 30 consecutive days. In cases where a vehicle is abandoned by its lawful owner before or during the repair process, the vehicle may remain on site as long as is necessary after the 30 day period, provided the owner or operator of the establishment demonstrates steps have been taken to remove the vehicle from the premises using the appropriate legal means. 
(b)  Automotive Parts Sales and Installation Automobile parts sales and installation uses shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Repair of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, located behind or to the side of the principal structure, and screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. 
(ii)  The use shall provide adequate, enclosed trash storage facilities on the site. 
(c)  Automotive Repair and Service (Without Painting/Bodywork) Automotive repair and service uses not involving painting or bodywork service shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The use shall be located at least 250 feet from any residential zoning district or existing residential use, school, or day care. 
(ii)  The use shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements. 
(iii)  Repair of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, located behind or to the side of the principal structure, and screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fencing Standards. 
(iv)  The use shall provide adequate, enclosed trash storage facilities on the site. 
(v)  If gasoline is sold on-site, the use shall also comply with the standards for a gasoline sales use in Section 40.1-4.3(C) (9) (c), Gasoline Sales. 
(vi)  Vehicles shall be parked or stored as a source of parts. 
(vii)  Vehicles that are repaired and are awaiting removal shall not be stored or parked for more than 30 consecutive days. In cases where a vehicle is abandoned by its lawful owner before or during the repair process, the vehicle may remain on site as long as is necessary after the 30 day period, provided the owner or operator of the establishment demonstrates steps have been taken to remove the vehicle from the premises using the appropriate legal means. 
(d)  Automotive and Recreational Vehicle Sales or Rentals Uses primarily involving the sales or rental of automobiles, trucks, travel trailers, or recreational vehicles shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  No vehicle or equipment displays shall be located within a required setback or perimeter buffer. 
(ii)  The use shall not have more than one vehicle display pad for every 100 feet of street frontage. The vehicle display pad may be elevated up to two feet above adjacent displays or grade level. 
(iii)  No vehicles or other similar items shall be displayed on the top of a building. 
(iv)  All lights and lighting shall be designed and arranged so no source of light is directly visible from any residential district or existing residential use; 
(v)  No other materials for sale shall be displayed between the principal structure and the street. 
(e)  Automotive Wrecker Service Automotive wrecker service uses shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The use shall be located at least 500 feet from any residential district, school, or day care center. 
(ii)  The number of vehicles stored on-site shall be limited to less than 10 vehicles. 
(iii)  Vehicles shall not be stored for more than 90 days. 
(iv)  Vehicles shall be stored to the rear of the principal structure, behind a wooden fence or masonry wall in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. 
(f)  Car Wash or Auto Detailing Car wash and auto detailing uses shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements. If an automatic car wash is an accessory use to a gasoline sales use, it shall be governed by the use and dimensional standards applicable to the gasoline sales use. 
(g)  Tire/Muffler Sales and Mounting Tire sales and mounting uses or muffler shop uses shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Repair of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, located behind or to the side of the principal structure, and screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. 
(ii)  The use shall provide adequate, enclosed trash storage facilities on the site. 
(iii)  All automobile parts, dismantled vehicles, and similar materials shall be stored within an enclosed building or totally screened from view by an opaque or privacy fence. 
(iv)  The use shall not include outdoor storage lots or impound yards for towed vehicles. 
(12)  Visitor Accommodations   
(a)  Bed and Breakfast Inns Bed and breakfast inns shall be: 
(i)  Operated in a primary residential structure and not in any accessory structure. The structure to be used shall be 50 years or more of age or be of historic significance. If the structure does not meet the age requirement, it shall be the applicant's responsibility to establish, by convincing proof, that the residential structure is of historic significance. 
(ii)  Two off-street parking spaces for the owner/manager and one off-street space per guest room shall be required. In the Port Norfolk Historic District, the City Council may reduce or eliminate the requirement for the two owner/manager spaces; provided, however, that no fewer than two off-street parking spaces are provided for the inn. 
(iii)  The front yard of an inn shall not be used for parking. If parking cannot be provided on the site, it must be provided within 300 feet of the site. The following shall also apply: 
a.  There shall be no on-street parking by guests. 
b.  The municipal parking areas in the Olde Towne Parking District may be used to satisfy the above requirement with the approval of and the issuance of parking passes by the Portsmouth Parking Authority. 
c.  All parking passes provided to the owner of the facility by the Portsmouth Parking Authority shall be accounted for by the owner's keeping of a record that enumerates the date and time the pass was used and by whom it was used. The record book shall be available for inspection by the city at any time. 
(iv)  A maximum of ten guest rooms shall be allowed in the Olde Towne Historic District. In the Port Norfolk Historic District, a maximum of five guest rooms shall be allowed. 
(v)  No exterior additions or alterations shall be made for the express purpose of creating or maintaining a bed and breakfast inn other than those required for health, safety or sanitation requirements. Minimal decorative alterations may be made to the structure if such changes are deemed to be compatible with the nature of the neighborhood. Such alterations and additions that are necessary or desired must meet all zoning, building, environmental and fire code regulations and must be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
(vi)  The facility shall be occupied and managed by an individual having at least 51 percent ownership interest in the improved real estate upon which the inn is situated. 
(vii)  The maximum length of stay for a transient paying guest is limited to 14 consecutive days in any 30-day period of time. The proprietor shall keep a current guest register including names, addresses and dates of occupancy of all guests, which register shall be available for city inspection at any time. 
(viii)  For identification of the bed and breakfast inn, one wall sign of four square feet is permitted. Such sign shall not be directly illuminated, nor shall it contain the words "hotel" or "motel." Such sign shall meet all zoning requirements including approval from the HPC. 
(ix)  There shall be no retail sale of goods and merchandise on the premises. 
(x)  Receptions and other such functions, for compensation, shall not be permitted. 
(xi)  If approved as a condition of a use permit, meals may be served to transient overnight guests and to the public, between 7:00 AM and 2:00 PM. In the Port Norfolk Historic District, only one meal may be served between 7:00 AM. and 11:00 AM. Seating capacity in the dining room shall be limited to no more than four seats per bed and breakfast guest room. 
(xii)  A minimum of one full bathroom, to include a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower, shall be provided on each floor of the structure to be occupied by guests. However, additional bathrooms may be required as a condition of a use permit. 
(xiii)  A use permit is subject to review at any time and may be revoked after a public hearing by the Planning Commission and the City Council and a finding by the City Council that the use has become detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood or for any other reason allowed by law. 
(xiv)  A use permit granted to an owner for a bed and breakfast inn shall terminate when the owner transfers ownership of the property. Any such transfer shall require a new use permit from the City Council. 
(b)  Hotels and Motels, Extended Stay Extended stay hotel and motel uses shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  A hotel or motel shall have its principal frontage, access, and orientation directly on an arterial street or collector street. 
(ii)  Vehicular access from an interior residential street is prohibited. 
(iii)  A type D buffer shall be provided between a hotel or motel and any land that is in a single-family residential zoning district (NR or GR) or developed as detached single-family dwellings, and that abuts or is located directly across the street from the hotel or motel site. 
(iv)  Signage shall be oriented toward the arterial or collector street providing access to the site rather than toward a residential street. 
(v)  All services associated with the development shall be located so as not to require access from an interior residential street and shall be screened so as not to be visible from any abutting property containing detached single-family residential development. 
(vi)  Up to 15 percent of the gross floor area of a hotel or motel may be in non-living-quarter incidental uses (accessory uses), including management/employee offices, meeting rooms, banquet halls, retail services (such as newsstands and gift shops), and similar uses, provided any incidental business is conducted primarily to service guests, and there is no entrance to such places of business except from the inside of the building. 
(vii)  In addition to the accessory uses allowed in Section 40.1-4.4, Accessory Use Standards, up to an additional 20 percent of the gross floor area of a hotel or motel may be devoted to eating establishments as an accessory use. The eating establishments(s) may have an entrance from outside the principal building. 
(c)  Hotel and Motel, Full Service   
(i)  A hotel or motel that provides four or more of the following services on-site shall not be required to obtain a use permit: 
a.  Room service; 
b.  Complimentary breakfast; 
c.  Pool; 
d.  Athletic/fitness room with at least multiple machines for cardio and strength training; 
e.  Eating establishments as an accessory use; 
f.  Lounge with entertainment by a single unamplified instrument; 
g.  Meeting or banquet rooms; or 
h.  Personal services, including but not limited to barber/beauty shops, shoe shine, dry cleaning pick-up and delivery, concierge services. 
(ii)  Restaurants, located in full-service hotels shall not be required to obtain use permits. 
(iii)  Full service hotels and motels in the WF district shall provide meeting rooms and room service. 
(d)  Tourist Homes A tourist home use shall be limited to a maximum of five overnight guests per night. 
(D)  Industrial Uses Except as permitted in Section 33.1-2 of the subdivision standards, no building or other permit shall be issued for a proposed industrial use unless such use is located on a lot that abuts a fully-improved street. For the purposes of this section, "fully improved" shall mean the portion of a street abutting the lot and extending to the centerline of the street right-of-way that complies with the all subdivision standards for streets. 
(1)  Industrial Services   
(a)  Electrical Motor Repair; Machine Shop; Tool Repair Repair of all machines shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, located behind or to the side of the principal structure, and screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. The height of materials and equipment stored shall not exceed the height of the screening fence or wall. 
(b)  Fuel Oil Storage Containers used for fuel oil storage shall not exceed an individual capacity of 275 gallons nor an aggregate capacity of 550 gallons. 
(c)  Heavy Equipment Sales, Rental, or Storage Uses primarily involving the sales, rental, or storage of heavy equipment shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The use shall be located at least 500 feet from any residential district, school, or day care center. 
(ii)  No heavy equipment displays shall be located within a required setback or perimeter buffer. 
(iii)  The use shall not have more than one heavy equipment display pad for every 100 feet of street frontage. 
(iv)  No heavy equipment shall be displayed on the top of a building. 
(v)  All lights and lighting shall be designed and arranged so no source of light is directly visible from any residential district or existing residential use; 
(d)  Laundry, Dry Cleaning, and Carpet Cleaning Plants Laundry, dry cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants shall be within an enclosed building and shall use nonflammable liquids in the cleaning processes that emit no odor, fumes, or steam detectable to normal senses from off the premises. 
(2)  Manufacturing and Production   
(a)  Manufacturing, Heavy Heavy manufacturing uses shall comply with the following standards unless they are specifically waived or modified through a Use Permit process approved by the City Council in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(B) of this Ordinance: 
(i)  The use shall be located at least 500 feet from any residential district, school, or day care center. 
(ii)  The use shall locate outdoor storage areas to the rear of the principal structure and be screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall no less than eight feet in height in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. The height of materials and equipment stored shall not exceed the height of the screening fence or wall. 
(iii)  The use shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the on-site transportation circulation system. 
(iv)  The use shall have direct access onto an arterial or major collector street. 
(3)  Warehouse and Freight Movement   
(a)  Bulk Fuel Storage Sales and Storage   
(i)  Gas storage shall be limited to quantities not exceeding 500,000 cubic feet and not located within 100 feet from any lot line. 
(ii)  Gas storage with quantities not exceeding 200 cubic feet, if the pressure is greater than 100 pounds per square inch, shall not be located within 50 feet of any lot line. 
(b)  Outdoor Storage (as a Principal Use) Lots used for outdoor storage shall be fully enclosed with a fence or masonry wall no less than eight feet high and landscaped (as appropriate), in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. The height of materials and equipment stored shall not exceed the height of the screening fence or wall. Customers and vehicles shall be allowed to circulate through the area used for outdoor storage. 
(c)  Parcel Services; Truck or Freight Terminal; Warehouse (Distribution or Storage) Parcel services, truck or freight terminals, or warehouses (distribution or storage) shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The use shall be located at least 500 feet from any residential district, school, or day care center. 
(ii)  The use shall not locate storage areas within a required yard or perimeter buffer; 
(iii)  The use shall locate outdoor storage areas to the rear of the principal structure and screen them with a wooden fence or masonry wall no less than eight feet in height in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. 
(iv)  The use shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements. 
(v)  The use shall have direct access onto an arterial or major collector street. 
(d)  Shipping Container Storage Yard Shipping container storage yards shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  Drive aisles at least 50 feet wide shall be provided between rows of containers to provide sufficient space for forklifts and safe maneuvering. 
(ii)  Containers shall not be stored in groups that occupy an area measuring greater than 200 feet by 80 feet. 
(iii)  Containers shall be placed on a level, well-compacted surface of crushed stone or similar material. All entrance drives and off street parking areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. The container storage area, as well as the entrance drives and off-street parking areas, shall be maintained free of potholes. 
(iv)  Shipping containers may be stacked no higher than four containers high provided that no stacking of containers shall be located within 200 feet of any residential, mixed-use (NMU, GMU, MU-H), or light industrial zoning district. 
(v)  Only shipping containers being used in the active transport of goods, wares, or merchandise shall be placed or stored in a shipping container storage yard. 
(vi)  All shipping containers shall be placed or stored in a shipping container storage yard in an empty and ready to ship state. 
(vii)  On-site repairs of shipping containers shall be limited to minor repairs needed to ensure that they remain in a condition ready to ship—including cleaning, repairing, servicing, painting, or fumigation. 
(viii)  All shipping containers shall be kept within a fenced area. A type D buffer shall be provided around the perimeter of the site, between the fenced area and the property line. 
(ix)  The owner/operator shall maintain a log showing the dates each container was brought on the site and removed. No shipping container shall be stored on the site longer than 12 months. 
(x)  No signage shall be placed on the shipping container units. 
(xi)  Any graffiti on shipping containers that are visible from adjacent properties or public right-of-ways shall be removed immediately. 
(xii)  All truck chassis shall remain in an operable condition, be roadworthy, and display all valid vehicle license and current tags, as required. 
(xiii)  The property shall remain locked after hours or when it is unmanned. 
(4)  Waste-Related Services   
(a)  Energy Recovery Plant; Hazardous Waste Collection Site; Incinerator; Waste Composting Energy recovery plants, hazardous waste collection sites, incinerators, and waste composting uses shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The use shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any existing residential use, school, or day care use. 
(ii)  The use shall be surrounded by a solid fence that is at least eight feet high, located no less than 100 feet from any public right-of-way, and located no less than 50 feet from any adjacent property. 
(b)  Recycling and Salvage Center A recycling and salvage center shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The center shall be on a parcel with an area of at least five acres. 
(ii)  The center shall be located at least 250 feet from any residential district, school, or day care. 
(iii)  Except for a freestanding office, no part of the center shall be located within 50 feet of any lot line. 
(iv)  All recycling activities and storage areas shall be effectively screened from view by walls, fences, or buildings. Such screening shall be designed and installed to ensure that no part of recycling activities or a storage area can be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent lots. In no case shall the height of recyclable or recovered materials, or non-recyclable residue stored in outdoor areas exceed 20 feet or the height of the principal building on the lot, whichever is greater. 
(v)  All outdoor storage areas shall be surrounded by a solid fence or wall that is at least eight feet high, located no less than 100 feet from any public right-of-way, and located no less than 50 feet from any adjacent property. 
(vi)  Recyclable materials shall be contained within a leak-proof bin or trailer, and not stored on the ground. 
(vii)  There shall be no collection or storage of hazardous or biodegradable wastes on the site. 
(viii)  Space shall be provided to park each commercial vehicle operated by the center. 
(ix)  If the center is located within 500 feet of property in a residential zoning district or developed for residential use, it shall not be in operation between the hours of 7:00 PM and 7:00 AM. The facility shall be administered by on-site persons during the hours the facility is open. 
(x)  The site shall be maintained free of fluids, odors, litter, rubbish, and any other nonrecyclable materials. The site shall be cleaned of debris on a daily basis and shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present. 
(xi)  Noise levels shall be controlled in accordance with Section 24-255 of the City Code. 
(xii)  Signage shall include the name and phone number of the facility operator and indicate any materials not accepted by the center. 
(xiii)  Access to the center shall be from a collector or arterial street. 
(xiv)  No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level shall be detectable on abutting properties. 
(c)  Recycling Drop-Off Centers A recycling drop-off center shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The collection bin shall be located in or adjacent to an off-street parking area, and shall not occupy more than five percent of the total on-site parking spaces. The mobility of the collection bin shall be retained. 
(ii)  The bin and adjacent area shall be maintained in good appearance and free from trash. Containers shall be equipped with a lid to prevent access to stored material by animals or vermin and to preclude stored paper from being scattered by the wind. 
(iii)  There shall be no collection or storage of hazardous or biodegradable wastes on the site. 
(iv)  All operations shall be located at least 100 feet from any school, church, hospital, public office building, commercial or residential uses on adjoining lots. 
(v)  All collection areas shall be provided instructional signage indicating how materials are to be separated and stating any limitations on the types of materials accepted for recycling. The signage shall note the name and telephone number of the operator of the facility and the hours of operation. 
(vi)  Access to the site shall be from a collector or arterial street. 
(vii)  Four off-street parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the collection area. 
(viii)  The site shall be kept clean and free from litter and debris; weeds and rodents and other pests shall be controlled. 
(ix)  No burning, melting, or other reclamation shall be permitted. 
(x)  No materials shall be stored or deposited on the premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the premises by natural causes or forces. 
(xi)  No storage of materials shall be allowed outside of the collection receptacles. 
(d)  Salvage and Junkyard; Tire Disposal or Recycling A salvage and junkyard or tire disposal or recycling facility shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The facility shall be located on a parcel with an area of at least three acres. 
(ii)  The facility shall be located at least 250 feet from any residential district, school, or day care center. 
(iii)  The facility shall be not located within 50 feet of any property line (except for a freestanding office). 
(iv)  The facility shall be screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall no less than eight feet in height in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. The height of materials and equipment stored shall not exceed the height of the screening fence or wall. 
(e)  Construction/Demolition/Debris Landfall (CDD Landfill) In addition to the standards contained in section 40.1-2.3(B)(4), any Use Permit requested shall be approved only if the applicant has demonstrated that all of the following additional requirements are met, unless they are specifically waived or modified through the Use Permit process approved by City Council in accordance with section 40.1-2.3(B) of this Ordinance: 
(i)  Location and Siting Requirements.   
a.  CDD Landfills shall be located so that truck traffic arriving at or departing from the landfill can access an arterial street without need for travel upon a public street within or adjacent to: 
1.  Any residentially zoned area as identified in Table 40.1- 1.7(H); or 
2.  Any public park or public recreational area or recreational facility. 
b.  CDD Landfills and expansions of such facilities shall not be located within or encroach into any 100-year floodplain. 
c.  The minimum area of a parcel proposed for development as a CDD Landfill must be 20 acres. 
d.  No disposal unit (disposal cell) or leachate storage unit shall be located within: 
1.  50 feet of the lot line on which the landfill is located; or 
2.  200 feet of a lot line of a residentially zoned property as identified in Table 40.1 -1.7(H); or 
3.  200 feet of a lot line of any Educational facility, Health Care facility or religious institution. 
e.  All CDD Landfills shall comply with the requirements of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality and all required permits shall be maintained throughout all phases of operation and closure of the facility. 
(ii)  Design Requirements.   
a.  All facilities shall have an adequately lighted and heated shelter where operating personnel can exercise site control and have access to essential sanitation facilities. Lighting, heat, and sanitation facilities may be provided by portable equipment as necessary. 
b.  The facility shall be designed with sufficient off-street parking and stacking areas to accommodate all employees, visitors, and trucks. Public streets shall not be utilized at any time for parking, stacking, or storage of employee vehicles, visitor vehicles, or trucks. 
c.  The facility shall be designed with sufficient drive aisles and parking areas to avoid potential conflicts between facility operations by trucks and the use of emergency access ways and fire lanes. 
d.  The off-site road surface design shall be suitable for heavy vehicles and the road base shall be capable of withstanding all expected loads. 
e.  On-site roads shall be passable by loaded collection and transfer vehicles in all weather conditions. 
f.  The on-site road system shall be designed to avoid the need for the backing of truck traffic. 
g.  Sufficient internal storage areas shall be provided for incoming solid waste, 
h.  A CDD Landfill shall include an eight foot perimeter fence interrupted only by necessary access and maintenance gates, or otherwise secured as determined by the Zoning Administrator in order to control vehicular and public access and prevent illegal disposal. All access will be limited by gates, and such gates shall be securable and equipped with locks. Fencing shall be constructed in accordance with section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls, and may include chain link, wood, vinyl or other materials of similar aesthetic characteristics and quality. The use of barbed wire or electric fencing shall be prohibited. 
i.  The facility shall be surrounded by a buffer yard that is composed of not less than Type C plant units as identified in section 40.1- 5.2(E) so as to screen the facility from public view. The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to modify or waive the landscaping requirements where the facility is not visible from a public right-of-way or from privately owned property. 
(iii)  Operational Requirements.   
a.  Only construction waste, demolition waste, debris waste, yard waste, split tires, and white goods shall be accepted at any CDD Landfill. No other wastes shall be accepted unless specifically identified in an approved Use Permit and permitted by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
b.  Operating hours shall be limited to 7:00am to 8:00pm Monday through Saturday. 
c.  Trucks or vehicles shall not be parked or stored overnight at the landfill unless screened in a manner that will substantially prevent view of stored vehicles from public rights-of-way. Any vehicle maintenance services shall be a secondary and subordinate use of the site and shall be limited to maintenance of vehicles associated with trash delivery. Junked or inoperable vehicles shall not be stored at the landfill. 
d.  Emergency access ways and fire lanes shall be maintained at all times in an unobstructed and fully accessible condition. 
e.  The operation of the CDD Landfill shall be undertaken so as to prevent the attraction, harborage or breeding of wildlife or insects, rodents, and other vectors (e.g., flies, maggots, roaches, rats, mice, and similar vermin) and to eliminate conditions which cause or may potentially cause harm to the public health and the environment, congregation of birds, safety hazards to individuals and surrounding property, and excessive odor problems, unsightliness, and other nuisances. 
f.  CDD Landfills shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance at all times through the control of uncontained waste, trash, and litter. Operators shall cause periodic off-site policing and clean-up of trash and litter along all public rights-of-way described in the Truck Routing Plan within 1,760 feet (1/3 of a mile) of the landfill not less than once per week (or more often if needed) to ensure a neat and orderly appearance of the public rights-of-way. 
g.  Scavenging is prohibited at any CDD Landfill. 
(iv)  In addition to all other materials required by other provisions of this Ordinance or the City Code, the following materials must be submitted by the applicant as part of the Use Permit application process for a CDD Landfill: 
a.  A conceptual plan of the design and layout of the site demonstrating compliance with the design standards above. 
b.  Conceptual elevations of any proposed building demonstrating compliance with the requirements above. 
c.  A Traffic Impact Analysis in accordance with section 40.1-5.12 of this Ordinance, and including a Truck Routing Plan. 
d.  An analysis of the structural capacity of the road network serving the landfill, identifying any deficiencies and improvements necessary to accommodate the facility. This analysis shall be of sufficient scope and detail as determined by the City Engineer. 
e.  A detailed assessment of the proposed design capacity of the landfill in relationship to the overall solid waste system in the region, including, but not limited to the anticipated volumes of solid waste (including average daily volume and maximum daily volume), anticipated sources of waste (i.e. municipal, commercial, industrial, etc.), and the relationship to other facilities in the vicinity and region. 
f.  An Operation Plan demonstrating compliance with the operational requirements listed above. 
g.  Other information as required by the City of Portsmouth that is appropriate to the evaluation of the proposed landfill. 
(v)  Emergency Provisions. Deviations from the requirements above and any conditions attached to the approval of the Use Permit may be necessary during times of emergencies, as determined by the City Manager, provided they do not jeopardize public health and safety and all requirements are met upon return to normal operations. Any deviation of the standards or requirements shall be established for a specific period of time (which may be extended by the City Manager) and shall be subject to any conditions established by the City Manager. 
(f)  Transfer Station In addition to the standards contained in section 40.1-2.3(B)(4), any Use Permit requested shall be approved only if the applicant has demonstrated that all of the following additional requirements are met, unless they are specifically waived or modified through the Use Permit process approved by City Council in accordance with section 40.1-2.3(B) of this Ordinance: 
(i)  Location and Siting Requirements.   
a.  Transfer stations shall be located so that truck traffic arriving at or departing from the station can access an arterial street without need for travel upon a public street within or adjacent to: 
1.  Any residentially zoned area as identified in Table 40.1- 1.7(H); or 
2.  Any public park or public recreational area or recreational facility. 
b.  Transfer stations and expansions of such stations shall not be located within or encroach into any 100-year floodplain. 
c.  The minimum area of a parcel proposed for development as a transfer station is four acres. 
d.  No building or area in which the unloading, storage, processing, or transfer of waste or recyclable materials takes place shall be located within: 
1.  50 feet of the lot line on which the waste transfer station is located; or 
2.  200 feet of a lot line of residentially zoned property as identified in Table 40.1 -1.7(H); or 
3.  200 feet of a lot line of any Educational facility, Health Care facility or religious institution. 
e.  All transfer stations shall comply with the requirements of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality and maintain valid permits throughout all phases of operation and closure of the facility. 
(ii)  Design Requirements.   
a.  All activities associated with waste transfer, including tipping, sorting, storage, compaction, transfer, reloading, and related activities shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building. No outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted. Appropriate enclosed office and plumbed employee restroom facilities shall be provided on-site. 
b.  The facility shall be designed with sufficient off-street parking and stacking areas to accommodate all employees, visitors, and trucks. Public streets shall not be utilized at any time for parking, stacking, or storage of employee vehicles, visitor vehicles, or trucks. 
c.  The facility shall be designed with sufficient drive aisles and parking areas to avoid potential conflicts between facility operations by trucks and passenger vehicles (e.g., for household waste), and the use of emergency access ways and fire lanes. 
d.  The off-site road surface design shall be suitable for heavy vehicles and the road base shall be capable of withstanding all expected loads. 
e.  On-site roads shall be passable by loaded collection and transfer vehicles in all weather conditions. 
f.  The on-site road system shall be designed to eliminate the need for the backing of truck traffic. 
g.  The unloading area shall be adequate in size and design to facilitate efficient unloading from the collection vehicles and the unobstructed movement of vehicles. 
h.  The unloading and loading pavement areas shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt paving material and a collection and disposal system shall be maintained that will prevent liquids contained in waste materials and generated by normal operations such as washout and cleaning of equipment, trucks, and floors ("waste liquids"), from contaminating the soil, surface water, or ground water. Drains shall be connected to either the sanitary sewer system, if permitted by the service provider, or a corrosion-resistant holding tank. Alternate designs may be used with prior written approval of the City if the applicant can show that the alternate design will prevent waste liquids from contaminating the soil, surface water, and ground water. 
i.  Provisions shall be made for weighing or measuring all solid waste transferred to the facility. 
j.  Sufficient internal! storage areas shall be provided for incoming solid waste. 
k.  The transfer station design shall include an eight foot perimeter fence interrupted only by necessary access and maintenance gates. Fencing shall be constructed of brick, block, stone, wood, vinyl or other materials of similar aesthetic characteristics and quality. Use of split-face style cinder block shall be permitted if of a neutral earth-tone color (no un-textured, common gray cinder block will be permitted). 
l.  Gates shall be designed in a manner to balance the aesthetic compatibility of the station fencing materials with station security. Colored metal or wrought iron gates designed to substantially reduce public views into the station are encouraged. Use of chain link materials for gates is prohibited. 
m.  Facility layout, building materials, and building design shall, to the greatest extent possible, be planned to present an aesthetically attractive appearance from off-site locations when viewed through gated openings that will remain open during daylight or business hours. 
n.  The use of chain link fencing within the station shall be limited to areas not visible from any public right-of-way. The use of barbed wire or electric fencing shall be prohibited. 
o.  The facility shall be surrounded by a buffer yard that includes an eight foot perimeter fence and is composed of not less than Type C plant units as identified in section 40.1-5.2(E). The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to modify or waive the landscaping requirements where the facility is not visible from a public right-of-way or from privately owned property. 
(iii)  Operational Requirements   
a.  Only household waste, commercial, and industrial waste and recyclable materials shall be accepted at any transfer station. No wastes classified as hazardous in accordance with United States Public Law 96-510, as amended, shall be knowingly accepted. The operator shall employ a plan for proper identification, control, and disposal of hazardous wastes received by the waste transfer station. No asbestos waste shall be knowingly accepted at a transfer station facility. The operator shall employ a plan for proper identification, control, and disposal of hazardous and asbestos wastes. 
b.  All activities associated with processing, such as tipping, sorting, storage, compaction, transfer, reloading, and related activities shall be conducted in a fully enclosed building. 
c.  Operating hours shall be limited to 7:00am to 8:00pm Monday through Saturday. 
d.  Adequate storage space for all waste shall be available at the transfer station in a fully enclosed building. No external storage of wastes shall be permitted. Solid wastes shall not remain at the transfer station for more than 72 hours. Any solid waste that is to be kept overnight at the station shall be stored in an impervious enclosed structure. 
e.  Trucks or vehicles shall not be parked or stored overnight at the transfer station unless screened in a manner that will substantially prevent view of stored vehicles from public rights-of-way. Any vehicle maintenance services shall be a secondary and subordinate use of the site and shall be limited to maintenance of vehicles associated with trash delivery and transfer at the waste transfer station. Junked or inoperable vehicles shall not be stored at the waste transfer station. 
f.  Emergency access ways and fire lanes shall be maintained at all times in an unobstructed and fully accessible condition. 
g.  The operation of the transfer station and the storage and handling of all solid waste shall be undertaken so as to prevent the attraction, harborage or breeding of wildlife or insects, rodents, and other vectors {e.g., flies, maggots, roaches, rats, mice, and similar vermin) and to eliminate conditions which cause or may potentially cause harm to the public health and the environment, congregation of birds, safety hazards to individuals and surrounding property; and excessive odor problems, unsightliness, and other nuisances. 
h.  Transfer stations shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance at all times through the control of uncontained waste, trash, and litter. Operators shall cause periodic policing not less than once every day (or more often as needed) of the entire waste transfer station. Operators shall also cause periodic off-site policing and clean-up of waste, trash, and litter along all public rights-of-way described in the Truck Routing Plan within 1,760 feet (1/3 of a mile) of the station not less than three times per week (or more often if needed) to ensure a neat and orderly appearance of the public rights-of-way. 
i.  Sanitary conditions shall be maintained through the periodic wash- down or other appropriate cleaning method of the transfer station and transfer vehicles. Frequency of cleaning shall be sufficient to prevent odors and other nuisance conditions from developing. All residuals shall be properly disposed of following cleaning operations, 
j.  No liquids, other than those used to disinfect, to suppress dust, or to absorb or cover odors from the solid waste, shall be added to the solid waste. 
k.  Open burning is prohibited on any transfer station site. 
l.  Scavenging is prohibited at any transfer station. 
(iv)  In addition to all other materials required by other provisions of this Ordinance or the City Code, the following materials must be submitted by the applicant as part of the Use Permit application process for a Transfer Station: 
a.  A conceptual plan of the design and layout of the site demonstrating compliance with the design standards above. 
b.  Conceptual elevations of the proposed building demonstrating compliance with the requirements above. 
c.  A Traffic Impact Analysis in accordance with section 40.1 -5.12 of this Ordinance, and including a Truck Routing Plan. 
d.  An analysis of the structural capacity of the road network serving the transfer station, identifying any deficiencies and improvements necessary to accommodate the transfer station. This analysis shall be of sufficient scope and detail as determined by the City Engineer. 
e.  A detailed assessment of the proposed design capacity of the transfer station in relationship to the overall solid waste system in the region, including, but not limited to the anticipated volumes of solid waste (including average daily volume and maximum daily volume), anticipated sources of waste (i.e. municipal, commercial, industrial, etc.), and the relationship to other transfer stations in the vicinity and region. 
f.  An Operation Plan demonstrating compliance with the operational requirements listed above. 
g.  Other information as required by the City of Portsmouth that is appropriate to the evaluation of the proposed transfer station. 
(v)  Emergency Provisions Deviations from the requirements above and any conditions attached to the approval of the Use Permit may be necessary during times of emergencies, as determined by the City Manager, provided they do not jeopardize public health and safety and all requirements are met upon return to normal operations. Any deviation of the standards or requirements shall be established for a specific period of time (which may be extended by the City Manager) and shall be subject to any conditions established by the City Manager. 
(vi)  Violation Abatement Fund   
a.  As a condition of commencing operation of a transfer station to be operated by any entity other than the City of Portsmouth, the operator shall maintain at all times a cash deposit with the City of Portsmouth in an amount determined at the time of application according to a then-current resolution of the City Council establishing the minimum deposit. In the absence of such a resolution, the minimum amount shall be $2,000.00. This fund shall be known as the "Abatement Fund." 
b.  The Abatement Fund shall assure the prompt and complete performance of the operator with requirements imposed by this Ordinance and any additional conditions of the Use Permit, and, in particular, the requirement to maintain the use and the truck routes described in any required Truck Routing Plan within 1,760 feet of the use in a neat and orderly appearance. 
c.  The City of Portsmouth shall be authorized at its discretion to draw upon and use all or any portion of the Abatement Fund in order to remedy a violation, pursuant to the following procedures: 
1.  The City shall first issue a written notice of violation to the operator or supervisor of the use. Such notice shall provide the specific conditions existing that are deemed in violation of the requirements of this Ordinance or the conditions of approval of the use. 
2.  Except in cases where the City Manager or the City Manager's designee determines that the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or safety, the City shall provide twenty-four (24) hours from the delivery of notice (or such longer period as may be determined appropriate by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee) to remedy the cited violation. 
3.  If the cited violation is not remedied within the time specified by the notice, or if the City Manager or the City Manager's designee determines that the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or safety, the City may (but is not obligated to) take action to remedy the violation, and the City shall be authorized to apply all or any part of the Abatement Fund to the cost of same. 
d.  The Abatement Fund shall be maintained in an account determined by the City. Interest, if any, earned on such Abatement Fund deposit shall accrue to such account or fund for use in the same manner and purpose as the Abatement Fund. 
e.  At all times the operator shall maintain a balance in the Abatement Fund of not less than the greater of $2,000.00 or the minimum amount established by City Council from time to time in accordance with subsection (a) hereof. In the event the City draws Abatement Funds in accordance with subsection (c), then within fourteen days after the operator receives notice of the City's draw the operator shall replenish the Abatement Fund as necessary to achieve the minimum balance. Failure to maintain the required minimum balance shall constitute cause for City Council to revoke the Use Permit. 
f.  Nothing in this section shall prevent or preclude the City from pursuing any other remedy or right to enforcement or abatement of violations or nuisances resulting from the operation of a transfer station. 
(5)  Wholesale Sales Any outdoor storage component of a wholesales sales use shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-4.3.D(3)(b), Outdoor Storage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-70, Amd. 3, 4, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 2, 15, 28), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amds. 6, 7), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-4.4 - Accessory Use standards 
(A)  Purpose This section authorizes the establishment of accessory uses that are incidental and customarily subordinate to principal uses. The purpose of this section is to allow a broad range of accessory uses, so long as such uses are located on the same site as the principal use, and so long as they comply with the standards set forth in this section in order to reduce potentially adverse impacts on surrounding lands. 
(B)  General Standards and Limitations   
(1)  Compliance with Ordinance Requirements All accessory uses and accessory structures shall conform to the applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including the district standards in Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts, and the use regulations in Article 40.1-4: Use Standards, and the development standards in Article 40.1-5: Development Standards. The provisions of this section establish additional standards and restrictions for particular accessory uses and structures. 
(2)  General Standards All accessory uses and accessory structures shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  Directly serve the principal use or structure; 
(b)  Be customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use and structure; 
(c)  Be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal use or structure; 
(d)  Be owned or operated by the same person as the principal use or structure; 
(e)  Be located on the same lot as the principal use or structure; 
(f)  Together with the principal use or structure, not violate any standards of this Ordinance; 
(g)  Not be constructed or established prior to the time the principal use or structure is constructed or established; and 
(h)  Not constitute a combination use, which is the combination of two principal uses (combination uses will not meet the above standards in terms of being subordinate or providing service to the principal use). 
(3)  Approval of Accessory Uses and Structures Unless otherwise specified in this section, any accessory use or accessory structure shall be treated as a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is located. An accessory use or structure may be approved in conjunction with approval of the principal use or structure. 
(4)  Table of Permitted Accessory Uses   
(a)  Table as Guide Table 40.1-4.4(A), Table of Permitted Accessory Uses or Structures, is established as a guide to identify the appropriateness of the more common accessory uses in each zoning district. 
(b)  Listed Accessory Uses Table 40.1-4.4(A), Table of Permitted Accessory Uses or Structures, lists what types of accessory uses, structures, and activities are allowed in each of the zoning districts. If a specific accessory use or structure is allowed in a base zoning district, the column underneath the zoning district is marked with a "P." If a specific accessory use or structure is allowed in an activity center district, the column underneath the zoning district is marked with a "A." If the accessory use or structure is not allowed in a zoning district, the column is blank. If there is a reference contained in the column entitled "Additional Requirements," refer to the cited section(s) for additional standards that apply to the specific accessory use or structure. 
(c)  Interpretation of Unidentified Accessory Uses The Planning Director shall evaluate potential accessory uses that are not identified in Table 40.1-4.4(A), Table of Permitted Accessory Uses or Structures, on a case-by-case basis, as an Interpretation (See Section 40.1-2.3(J), Interpretation) In making the interpretation, the Planning Director shall apply the following standards. 
(i)  The definition of "accessory use" (See Article 40.1-8: Definitions.), and the general accessory use standards established in Section 40.1-4.4.B, General Standards and Limitations. 
(ii)  The additional regulations for specific accessory uses established in Section 40.1-4.4 (C), Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses. 
(iii)  The purpose and intent of the zoning district in which the accessory use or structure is located. (See Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts) 
(iv)  Any potential adverse impacts the accessory use may have on other lands in the area, compared with other accessory uses permitted in the zoning district. 
(v)  The compatibility of the accessory use or structure, including the structure in which it is housed, with other principal and accessory uses permitted in the zoning district. 
(d)  Table of Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures Table 40.1-4.4(A), Table of Permitted Accessory Uses, specifies types of accessory use and the zoning district where each type may be permitted. 
TABLE 40.1-4.4(A): TABLE OF PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES 
P = PERMITTED USE A = ALLOWED USE BLANK CELL = PROHIBITED USE YELLOW CELL = PLACEHOLDER 
ACCESSORY
USE TYPE 	RESIDENTIAL 
DISTRICTS 	BUSINESS DISTRICTS 	ACTIVITY 
CENTERS 	SPECIAL DISTRICTS 	ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
	N 
R 	G 
R 	U 
R 	U 
R 
- 
H 	N 
M 
U 	M 
U 
H 	G 
M 
U 	I 
L 	I 
N 	N 
A 
C 	C 
A 
C 	R 
A 
C 	H 
R 	H 
L 
O 	H 
L 
B 	P 
G 	W 
F 	
Accessory Dwelling Units (for single-family detached dwellings only) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(1) 
Amateur Home Radio/TV Antenna 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(2) 
Backyard Chickens 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(18) 
Bike Rack 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Canopies 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(3) 
Community Garden 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	40.1-4.4(C)(4) 
Fences or Walls 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	P 	
Garages/Carports 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(17) 
Greenhouse 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(5) 
Home Occupation 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	40.1-4.4(C)(6) 
Limited Fuel/Oil/ Bottled Gas Distributor 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(7) 
Outdoor Display/Sales 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(8) 
Outdoor Storage 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(9) 
Produce Stand 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(10) 
Rainwater Cisterns 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(11) 
Recycling Drop-Off Stations 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 		P 	P 	P 	P 	40.1-4.4(C)(12) 
Satellite Dish 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	40.1-4.4(C)(13) 
Solar Energy Equipment 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	A 	A 	A 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	40.1-4.4(C)(14) 
Storage or Parking of Heavy Trucks, Trailers 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	P 	P/ 	p 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(15) 
Storage or Parking of Major Recreational Equipment or Mobile Home (for single-family detached dwellings only) 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	40.1-4.4(C)(15) 
Swimming Pool/ Hot Tub 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	A 	A 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	40.1-4.4(C)(16) 
 
(e)  Location of Accessory Uses or Structures   
(i)  Except for fences and walls, all accessory structures shall comply with the minimum setback and spacing standards applicable to accessory structures in the zoning district where the structure is located. (See Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts) 
(ii)  No accessory structure shall be located within any platted or recorded easement or over any known utility. 
(f)  Maximum Height All accessory structures shall comply with the maximum height standards applicable to accessory structures in the zoning district where the structure is located. (See Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts) 
(g)  Lot Coverage The total area occupied by all accessory structures shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage standard applicable to accessory structures in the zoning district where the structure is located. (See Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts) 
(h)  Maximum Size Accessory structures serving residential uses within the NR, GR, UR, and UR-H districts shall not exceed more than 800 square feet in area. 
(C)  Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses   
(1)  Accessory Dwelling Units Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Accessory dwelling units are permitted only on lots with Single-Family Detached Dwellings, and are not permitted on lots with Multi-Family, Townhouse, or Two-to-Four Family Dwellings. 
(b)  Not more than one accessory dwelling unit per lot is permitted. 
(c)  Accessory dwelling units shall be located within (e.g., a downstairs apartment), be attached, or detached (behind the principal structure as a freestanding building or above a detached outbuilding). 
(d)  If attached: 
(i)  The accessory dwelling unit must be attached to the principal structure and have an operative interconnecting door with the principal structure. 
(ii)  Access to the unit shall only be from the side or rear yard of the principal structure. 
(e)  If detached: 
(i)  A distance of at least six feet shall separate the accessory dwelling unit from the principal structure. 
(ii)  The accessory dwelling unit must be located in the same base zoning district as the principal structure. 
(f)  The use of manufactured homes, travel trailers, campers, tractor trailers, or similar vehicles as an accessory dwelling unit shall be prohibited. 
(g)  An accessory dwelling unit shall have a floor area of at least 300 square feet and shall not exceed 25 percent of the floor area of the principal structure, subject to the standards in Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts. 
(h)  At least one, but no more than two, off-street parking spaces shall be provided for an accessory dwelling unit (in addition to the required off-street parking serving the principal use). 
(i)  Accessory dwelling units shall not be sold apart from the principal structure. 
(j)  Accessory dwelling units shall not include home occupations. 
(2)  Amateur Ham Radio & Television Antennas   
(a)  Towers associated with a ham radio operator or private television antenna shall not exceed 90 feet above grade. 
(b)  Towers or antennas attached to a principal structure shall be located on a side or rear elevation. 
(c)  Freestanding towers or antennas shall be located behind the principal structure. 
(3)  Canopies   
(a)  Canopies shall be attached to a principal structure and shall not be freestanding or attached to an accessory structure. 
(b)  Canopies covering a drive-through shall use a similar roof form, pitch, and materials to appear as an extension of the roof covering the principal structure. 
(c)  Canopies shall have a maximum height of 15 feet measured from the finished grade to the underside of the canopy. 
(d)  The design of the canopy, including any columns, shall match the design and exterior building materials of the principal building. 
(e)  Canopies covering fuel pumps may include logos or trademarks, but shall not include any other signage or advertising. 
(f)  In addition to meeting the standards in Section 40.1-5.9, Exterior Lighting, canopies shall not be internally illuminated, and any exterior lighting associated with a canopy shall be shielded so that the source of illumination is not visible from off-site areas. 
(4)  Community Garden A community garden shall be permitted as an accessory to a principal use provided that the following standards are met. 
(a)  Overhead lighting in community gardens is prohibited, unless otherwise allowed. 
(b)  Signage is limited to a single, non-illuminated, flat sign of four square feet. 
(c)  No more than two vehicles shall be parked onsite of a community garden, excluding those parked within an enclosed structure. 
(d)  Retail sales shall not be permitted, except as an approved temporary use, as specified in Section 40.4-5, Temporary Use Standards. 
(e)  Plantings in community gardens shall not obstruct roadway visibility or impede the flow of traffic. 
(f)  Perimeter fencing, including trellises, are allowed in community gardens and are subject to the standards governing fence location, maintenance, and height and design within each respective zoning district. 
(5)  Greenhouse A greenhouse shall be permitted as an accessory to a principle use provided that the following standards are met. 
(a)  Greenhouses must comply with each district's respective area standards, including setbacks, height, and lot coverage. 
(b)  All incidental equipment and supplies related to greenhouse uses, including fertilizer and empty containers, shall be kept within the greenhouse structure. 
(6)  Home Occupation A home occupation shall be permitted as accessory to any principal dwelling unit, provided that: 
(a)  The use shall be conducted entirely within the principal dwelling. 
(b)  The business or service is located within the dwelling, and does not exceed 25 percent of the heated floor area of the principal structure. 
(c)  The principal person or persons providing the business or service resides in the dwelling on the premises. 
(d)  The use shall be conducted entirely by the occupants thereof and no person who is not a resident of the principal dwelling shall be employed in connection with the home occupation. 
(e)  The home occupation causes no change in the external appearance of the existing dwelling and structures on the property. 
(f)  All vehicles used in connection with the home occupation are of a size, and located on the premises in such a manner, so as to not disrupt the quiet nature and visual quality of the neighborhood, and there are no more than two vehicles per home occupation. 
(g)  There is sufficient off-street parking for patrons of the home occupation, with the number of off-street parking spaces required for the home occupation to be provided and maintained in addition to the space or spaces required for the dwelling itself. 
(h)  There are no advertising devices on the property, or other signs of the home occupation, which are visible from outside the dwelling or accessory building. 
(i)  The property contains no outdoor display or storage of goods, equipment, or services that are associated with the home occupation. 
(j)  Wholesale or retail sales of goods do not occur on the premises. 
(k)  There shall be no personal physical service performed in the dwelling, except that a beauty/barber shop may be operated as a home occupation, provided that the operation conforms with the standards of this section and the following provisions: that no more than one customer may be provided service at the same time, and that the operator obtain and maintain in effect all required permits and licenses. 
(l)  The home occupation does not create traffic or parking congestion, noise, vibration, odor, glare, fumes, or electrical or communications interference which can be detected by the normal senses off the premises, including visual or audible interference with radio or television reception. 
(7)  Limited Fuel/Oil/Bottled Gas Distributor Limited fuel/oil/bottled gas distribution is intended to provide sales of limited quantities of gas, propane, and similar fuels as set out in Section 40.1-8: Definitions. Limited fuel/oil/bottled gas distribution is an accessory use to the following principal uses: 
(a)  Convenience stores with gas sales; 
(b)  Convenience stores without gas sales; 
(c)  Grocery stores; 
(d)  Retail sales establishments, large; and 
(e)  Other retail sales establishments. 
(8)  Outdoor Display/Sales Outdoor display or sales may be allowed as an accessory use for all retail sales and service uses and wholesale sales uses. It is the intent of this Ordinance to allow the display of merchandise for sale, but not where the display of such items impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or creates an unsafe condition. The outdoor display/sales of goods shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Outdoor display/sales areas shall be depicted upon a site plan. (See Section 40.1-2.3(C) & (D), Development Plan.) 
(b)  All outdoor display of goods shall be located immediately adjacent to the storefront, or building sides, and not in drive aisles, loading zones, fire lanes, or parking lots. 
(c)  Outdoor display areas shall be limited to no more than one-half of the length of the store front or building side. 
(d)  In the case of a shopping center, the "storefront" shall include the entire frontage of the shopping center facade, meaning that the total amount of display for all the in-line tenants combined shall not exceed 50 percent of the aggregate store front of the total shopping center. 
(e)  The area of outdoor display or sales shall not encompass the width of the entrance doors to the establishment as projected straight out from the facility. (For example, if the width of the entrance doors is 10 feet, there shall be at least a 10-foot clearance from the doors as projected straight out and away from the facility.) 
(f)  No goods shall be attached to a building's wall surface. 
(g)  The height of the outdoor display shall not exceed eight feet. 
(h)  The outdoor display area shall take place on an improved surface such as the sidewalk or pavement. 
(i)  At least five feet along the parking lot side of the display shall be maintained free of obstruction to allow for pedestrian and handicap movement, such that handicapped pedestrians and others do not have to enter the parking lot or drive aisle to walk around the display. 
(j)  Outdoor sales shall not include hazardous and flammable materials, such as gasoline, oil, antifreeze, kerosene, poisons, pesticides and similar items. 
(k)  Outdoor storage of used or second hand goods, with the exception of motor vehicles, shall be allowed only during the normal hours of operation of the associated business establishment. 
(9)  Outdoor Storage Outdoor storage may be allowed as an accessory use in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)  Each outdoor storage area shall be incorporated into the overall design of the principal structure on the site and shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure. 
(b)  Goods stored in an outdoor storage area intended for sale or resale shall be limited to those sold on the premises as part of an associated, additional principal use. 
(c)  Each outdoor storage area shall be screened from view from all property lines and adjacent rights-of-way by an opaque fence or wall that is at least six feet high in side yards and eight feet high in rear yards, and incorporates at least one of the predominant materials and one of the predominant colors used in the primary structure. Materials may not be stored higher than the height of the primary structure. A landscaped earth berm may be used instead of or in combination with a fence or wall. 
(d)  If the outdoor storage area is covered, then the covering shall include at least one of the predominant exposed roofing colors on the primary structure. 
(e)  Flammable liquids or gases in excess of 1,000 gallons shall be stored underground. 
(f)  No materials may be stored in areas intended for vehicular or pedestrian circulation. 
(10)  Produce Stands A produce stand shall: 
(a)  Be limited to the retail sale of agriculture and horticulture products; 
(b)  Be located to minimize the visual impact of the structure from adjacent public streets; 
(c)  Not remain in the same location for more than six months; 
(d)  Provide adequate ingress, egress, and off-street parking areas; and 
(e)  Be subject to the sign standards in Section 40.1-5.11, Signage. 
(11)  Rainwater Cisterns Rainwater cisterns shall comply with the following standards. 
(a)  Rainwater cisterns shall be located directly adjacent to the principle structure on a lot. 
(b)  Rainwater cisterns shall not be located within front, side, or rear setbacks, unless the cistern is less than five feet in height. 
(c)  Rainwater cisterns shall be affixed to capture rainwater from the principle structure or accessory structure's gutter system. 
(d)  Rainwater cisterns shall not serve as signage. 
(e)  Water collected from rainwater cisterns shall be used in a manner that complies with city policies and regulations on gray water use and rainwater harvesting. 
(12)  Recycling Drop-Off Stations Recycling drop-off stations shall comply with the following standards. 
(a)  General All drop-off containers and storage bins, with the exception of roll-out carts located in townhouse and multifamily developments and recycling containers located on educational facility sites, shall be screened from view to at least 50 percent of the height of the containers and bins in the station. The screen may be fencing or plantings. Fencing must be solid opaque material, and chain link with slats is prohibited. If plantings are used, the plants must reach the required height within three years of planting. Roll-out carts shall be a neutral or earth tone color, not be visible from a public street, and be located within the interior of the development. 
(b)  Litter and Debris The station shall be kept free of litter, debris, and residue. 
(c)  Signage Each station shall be allowed one on-premise freestanding sign no more than 48 inches high and 16 square feet in area (including all sides of the sign combined). The sign shall include the name and telephone number of a party responsible for management and maintenance of the station. 
(d)  Setbacks Drop-off containers and storage bins shall be located no closer than 50 feet from an existing residential use. 
(e)  Size Excluding screening, drop-off containers and storage bins shall occupy no more than 500 square feet. 
(f)  Blocking Access The station shall not occupy or block access to parking spaces or aisles. 
(g)  Use of Shipping Container Prohibited The station shall not use portable shipping containers or tractor trailers for storage. 
(13)  Satellite Dishes Satellite dishes are subject to the following standards to the maximum extent feasible, but only where there is no impairment of acceptable signal quality. These standards are not intended to impose unreasonable delays or costs on the installation, maintenance, or use of satellite dishes, and shall not be interpreted or enforced in any manner contrary to federal or state law. 
(a)  Location in Residential District Setbacks   
(i)  Satellite dishes in residential zoning districts shall not be located within the front setback of a lot's principal structure unless the lot owner can demonstrate that there is no possibility to avoid location in the front setback and still have an obstruction-free reception window to the satellite dish. 
(ii)  Satellite dishes in residential zoning districts may be located within the rear setback of the principal structure, but not closer than five feet to any lot line. 
(b)  Location on Roof Satellite dishes may be located on the roof of a principal structure provided they are no more than 15 feet higher than the applicable maximum building height standard. 
(14)  Solar Energy Equipment Solar energy equipment shall comply with the following standards. 
(a)  To minimize the visual impact, solar energy equipment, except for solar panels, is prohibited from being visible along the front street elevation. 
(b)  Solar panels may be located on any roof, irrespective of its relationship to the underlying district height limit, up to five feet above the roof surface to adequately access solar energy. 
(c)  Solar energy equipment, excluding solar panels or collectors, may project into side and rear yards but no closer than two feet to any property line, in order to permit equipment to be installed adjacent to existing, nonconforming electric meters. 
(15)  Storage or Parking of Heavy Trucks, Construction Equipment, Trailers, Major Recreational Equipment, or Mobile Home   
(a)  Intent It is the intent of this subsection to prohibit the customary or continual parking of certain vehicles and equipment on streets and within yards adjacent to streets in residential neighborhoods since the presence of such vehicles runs contrary to the intended residential character of such neighborhoods. It is not the intent of these standards to prevent the occasional or temporary parking of such vehicles or equipment as necessary for the purposes of loading, unloading, or cleaning; however, the continual or customary overnight parking of such vehicles or equipment for a portion of the day followed by removal the following day is prohibited. 
(b)  Applicability The standards in this subsection apply to. 
1.  Heavy trucks with more than two(2) axels and a gross weight of more than 20,000 pounds; or, 
2.  Construction Equipment 
3.  Major Recreational Vehicles 
4.  Trailers with more than one (1) axel These standards shall not apply to school busses used for transport of children to or from school. 
(c)  Standards   
(i)  Heavy trucks, trailers, or major recreational equipment shall not be parked or stored on public rights-of-way in accordance with Chapter 22 of the City Code. 
(ii)  No heavy truck, trailer, other major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored for longer than four days over any calendar year in any front yard or side yard immediately adjacent to a street, unless the width of the side yard is less than 11 feet. 
(iii)  Boats, campers, and recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored only to the side or rear of the dwelling they are associated with unless the width of the side yard is less than 11 feet. 
(iv)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any mobile home or camper-type trailer while used for human habitation on any street, alley, or other public place in the city, or to park any mobile home or camper-type trailer when not so used on the streets of the city for a period longer than 12 hours. 
(v)  Only one such vehicle described by this section, other than construction equipment, shall be parked on a zoning lot in the NR, GR, UR, URH, HR, HLO, or HLB zoning districts at any one time. 
(vi)  The parking or storing of construction equipment on a lot in the NR, GR, UR, URH, HR, HLO or HLB zoning districts shall be prohibited, except on lots where active construction is being undertaken. All construction equipment must be removed from the lot within 10 days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(16)  Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs that are accessory uses shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  The area containing a swimming pool, spa, or hot tub shall be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least three feet high and has a gate that can be securely fastened. In lieu of such fencing, a spa or hot tub may have a lockable cover capable of supporting a minimum of 150 pounds, and the cover shall be locked in place when the spa or hot tub is not in use. 
(17)  Garages/Carports The height of a garage or carport shall not exceed the height of the principal structure on the same lot.   
(18)  Backyard Chickens.   
(a)  Intent. With the increased awareness of self-sufficiency, sustainability and urban farming, the raising of a limited number of chickens is allowed as an accessory use to detached single family residential properties provided that the use meets certain minimum standards and does not pose a health hazard or become a nuisance to adjoining property owners. 
(b)  Standards. The keeping of backyard chickens is allowed in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  The use is an accessory use to a detached single family residence. 
(ii)  The minimum lot size shall be 5,000 square feet. No more than one chicken for every 2,000 square feet of lot area is permitted. 
(iii)  No more than six (6) chickens are permitted on any lot. 
(iv)  All housing and fencing of chickens shall be located solely in the rear yard. 
(v)  Housing and fencing of chickens must be located at least 15 feet from any side or rear property line. Chickens may not roam in other areas of the property or off the property. 
(vi)  No roosters are allowed. 
(vii)  Feed shall be stored and maintained in a secure container. Manure, and other waste products shall be properly handled and disposed of in accordance with best management practices so as to not create an odor, attract vermin, or create a nuisance for surrounding property owners. Evidence of vermin may be cause for revoking a zoning compliance permit. 
(viii)  The sale of eggs shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Process for Approval A request for a zoning compliance permit shall be submitted and reviewed by the Zoning Administrator. Once the request has been determined to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the adjoining property owners, including all owners across any public right-of-way that a zoning compliance permit will be issued for the keeping of chickens. This notice must include a copy of the requirements for the keeping of chickens and information regarding the reporting of any code violations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-33, secs. 1, 2, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 18, 24), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 8), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-4.5 - Temporary Use standards 
(A)  Purpose This section allows for the establishment of certain temporary uses of limited duration and special events, provided that such uses do not negatively affect adjacent land, and provided that such uses or events are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period. Temporary uses shall not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure. 
(B)  Table of Permitted Temporary Uses and Structures Table 40.1-4.5(A), Permitted Temporary Uses and Structures, summarizes the temporary uses and structures that are allowed within the city and any general or specific standards that apply. Temporary uses or structures not listed in Table 40.1-4.5(A), Permitted Temporary Uses and Structures, are not allowed by this Ordinance. 
TABLE 40.1-4.5(A): PERMITTED TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES 
Temporary Use or Structure 	Allowable Time Frame 	Specific Regulations 
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES 
Expansion or Replacement of Existing Facilities (including temporary offices for construction and/or security personnel) 	(A) 	Permit Required; 
see Section 40.1-4.5(F)(1) 
Real Estate Sales Office/Model Sales Home 	(A) 	Permit Required; 
see Section 40.1-4.5(F)(2) 
Construction-Related Activities for New Construction 	(A) 	Permit Required; 
see Section 40.1-4.5(F)(3) 
Temporary Family Health Care Structure 	Unlimited as long as requirements of 40.1-4.5(F) (5) are met 	Permit Required: see Section 40.1-4.5 (F) (5) 
Temporary Storage in an On-Demand Container 	(B) 	Permit Required; 
see Section 40.1-4.5(F)(4) 
TEMPORARY SALES 
Outdoor Seasonal Sales 	(B) 	Permit Required; 
see Section 40.1-4.5(F)(6) 
Farmer's Market 	(C) 	Permit Required; see Section 40.1-4.5.(F)(7) 
Food Trucks 	(A) 	Permit Required; see Section 40.1-4.5.(F)(8) 
Time Frames: 
[A] Such structures may be in place for no more than one to four years, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance. 
[B] Such structures or sales may be in place for not more than 30 days per calendar year, and no more than three occurrences per parcel, per year. 
[C] Such uses may operate on a continuous basis for up to five months per year on a single site. 
 
(C)  Prohibited Temporary Uses Without limiting the standards of this Ordinance, the following activities are prohibited in all districts: 
(1)  Retail Sales or Display of Goods From Vehicles Except as part of a permitted seasonal sale or a Food Truck permitted by the City, retail sales or display of goods, products, or services from a motor vehicle, trailer, or shipping container. 
(D)  Temporary Use Permits All temporary uses and structures except temporary construction office trailers, required to obtain a temporary use permit in accordance with Table 40.1-4.5, Permitted Temporary Uses and Structures, shall obtain a Temporary Use Permit in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(E), Temporary Use Permit. A temporary use permit shall be reviewed, approved, or denied only in accordance with the standards of this section. 
(E)  General Standards For Temporary Uses And Structures All temporary uses, structures, or special events shall comply with the following general standards, unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance: 
(1)  Obtain the appropriate permit from the city (if required); 
(2)  Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare; 
(3)  Be compatible with the principal uses taking place on the site; 
(4)  Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on any adjoining permanent uses or nearby residential neighborhoods; 
(5)  Not include permanent alterations to the site; 
(6)  Meet all the setbacks of the underlying base and overlay zoning districts, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance. 
(7)  Comply with the maximum signage size for temporary signs in Section 40.1-5.11, Signage; 
(8)  Not maintain temporary signs associated with the use or structure after the activity ends; 
(9)  Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply to a site or use on the site; 
(10)  Not interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the property; and 
(11)  Contain sufficient land area to allow the temporary use, structure, or special event to occur, as well as adequate land to accommodate the parking and traffic movement associated with the temporary use, without disturbing environmentally sensitive lands. 
(F)  Specific Regulations For Certain Temporary Uses And Structures   
(1)  Expansion or Replacement of Existing Facilities   
(a)  Purpose and Scope Factory-fabricated, transportable buildings that are designed to arrive at the site ready for occupancy (except for minor unpacking and connection to utilities), and designed for relocation to other sites, may be placed on land to serve as the following: 
(i)  Temporary Expansion Space for Religious Institutions, Heath Care Facilities, and Government Offices Expansion space for existing religious institutions, health care facilities, and government offices, provided plans for the permanent expansion of the existing facilities have been submitted to and been approved by the city. 
(ii)  Temporary Classroom Space Temporary classroom space to augment an existing public educational facility. 
(iii)  Temporary Offices Temporary offices for construction and security personnel during the construction of a development for which the city has issued a building permit. 
(iv)  Temporary Quarters for Recreational Facilities Temporary quarters for recreational facilities that are being provided in conjunction with a new residential development, provided the city has approved a development plan (Section 40.1-2.3(C) & (D), Development Plan) for the development. 
(v)  Temporary Quarters for Other Nonresidential Uses Temporary quarters for other nonresidential uses when the permanent building has been destroyed by a fire or other physical catastrophe, provided a building permit for the permanent facility is obtained within four months after approval of the temporary quarters. The Planning Director may approve a written request for an extension of an additional six months for good cause shown. Failure to obtain a Building Permit within the time frame allowed will revoke approval for the temporary quarters. 
(vi)  Temporary Office One temporary office per site to include but not be limited to, the following uses: hiring, membership solicitation, multifamily development office/leasing, and other general office uses. The number of modular buildings housing such uses shall be limited to one, in addition to those already allowed by this section. Such modular buildings shall not be placed on the property prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(vii)  Temporary Residence A temporary residence used for housing occupants of an on-site existing principal dwelling unit subject to casualty damage. 
(b)  Standards In addition to meeting the general standards of Section 40.1-4.5(E), General Standards for All Temporary Uses and Structures, all temporary structures approved in accordance with this section shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  The structure may be located anywhere on the site except within the following areas: 
a.  Existing required landscaping or perimeter buffer areas; 
b.  Areas designated as future required landscaping areas, whether or not vegetation currently exists; and 
c.  Other areas designated on the site for open space, vehicular use, or ingress/egress. 
(ii)  The temporary structure shall be factory-fabricated and transportable; 
(iii)  In addition to any other off-street parking required on the site in accordance with Section 40.1-5.1, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Circulation, adequate off-street parking shall be provided for the temporary use; 
(iv)  All permits required by applicable building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes shall be obtained prior to installation of the temporary structure; and 
(v)  The temporary structure shall be compatible with the existing buildings on the site in terms of exterior color. 
(c)  Duration   
(i)  General Temporary structures under this subsection may remain on the site for no more than 12 months. This period may be renewed for two 12-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request for such extension, submitted to the Planning Director, 30 days prior to the expiration of the temporary use permit. Except for temporary classrooms, in no event, shall the extension allow the temporary structure to remain on the site for more than three years. 
(ii)  Temporary classrooms Temporary classrooms for use as part of an existing public educational facility may be allowed to remain on the site for longer than three years. 
(2)  Real Estate Sales Office and Model Sales Home   
(a)  General Standards One temporary real estate sales office or model sales home may be allowed as incidental to a new residential or nonresidential development, provided that: 
(i)  The use is located on a lot approved by the city as part of the development. 
(ii)  Signage complies with the standards of Section 40.1-5.11, Signage. 
(iii)  The temporary use is aesthetically compatible with the character of surrounding development in terms of exterior color, predominant exterior building materials, and landscaping. 
(iv)  The temporary use complies with the minimum yard and setback standards of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(v)  Off-street parking provided for the temporary use complies with the standards of Section 40.1-5.1, Off-Street Parking, Loading and Circulation. 
(vi)  Upon termination of the temporary real estate sales office or model sales home, the structure shall be converted into, or removed and replaced with, a permanent use. 
(vii)  In approving or renewing approval of a real estate sales office, the Planning Director may impose other conditions as is deemed necessary to avoid adverse impacts that the use as a sales office may have on adjacent properties or the community as a whole. 
(viii)  All temporary trailers shall be removed from the site prior to the issuance of the last certificate of occupancy for the site. 
(b)  Duration   
(i)  Temporary Real Estate Sales Office Temporary real estate sales offices may be approved for a period of up to one year. This period may be renewed for three additional 12-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request for such an extension, submitted to the Planning Director, 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. In no event shall the extension allow the temporary structure to remain on the site for more than four years. 
(ii)  Model Sales Home Model sales homes may be approved for a period of up to four years. This period may be renewed for additional six-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request for such an extension submitted to the Planning Director, 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. There is no time limit on the use of model sales units. 
(3)  Construction-Related Activities for New Construction   
(a)  General Temporary construction-related activities for new construction, including construction offices, storage buildings, outdoor storage, and employee parking areas, may be approved for a period of up to one year. This period may be renewed for additional 12-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request for such an extension, submitted to the Zoning Administrator, 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. Such uses shall be removed within 30 days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Adjacent Site Because of site constraints, construction-related activities may need to occur on a site that is adjacent to or nearby the construction site. In such cases, a temporary use permit is required. (See Section 40.1-2.3(E), Temporary Use Permit.) Such uses shall be removed within 30 days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and the site is restored to its previous condition. 
(4)  Temporary Storage in an On-Demand Container Temporary storage in an on-demand container shall be permitted to serve an existing residential use, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Containers shall not exceed 20 feet in length; 
(b)  Containers shall not be located in the front yard; 
(c)  Containers shall not be located within 10 feet of any lot line; 
(d)  Containers shall not be located on an individual parcel or site for more than 14 consecutive days per site per calendar year; and 
(e)  The standards in this sub-section related to container location shall not apply to lots with a frontage of 50 feet or less. 
(5)  Temporary Family Health Care Structure A temporary family health care structure shall be allowed as an accessory use in any residential zoning district on lots zoned for and occupied by a single-family detached dwelling provided they comply with the standards of this section. 
(a)  Standards   
(i)  The structure shall be used solely for and occupied by a mentally or physically impaired person as defined in § 63.2-2200 of the Code of Virginia, and as certified in writing provided by a physician licensed by the Commonwealth. 
(ii)  The structure must be located on property owned or occupied by the caregiver as his residence. The caregiver shall be either related by blood, marriage, or adoption to or the legally appointed guardian of the mentally or physically impaired person for whom he is caring. 
(iii)  Such structures shall comply with all setback requirements that apply to the primary structure and with any maximum floor area ratio limitations that may apply to the primary structure. 
(iv)  Only one family health care structure shall be allowed on a lot or parcel of land. 
(v)  The structure shall be a transportable residential structure primarily assembled at a location other than its site of installation that complies with applicable provisions of the Industrialized Building Safety Law and the Uniform Statewide Building Code containing no more than 300 gross square feet. Placing the temporary family health care structure on a permanent foundation shall be prohibited. 
(vi)  The structure shall be connected to any water, sewer, and electric utilities that are serving the primary residence on the property and shall comply with all applicable requirements of the City. 
(b)  Duration   
(i)  The applicant shall provide evidence of compliance with this section on an annual basis as long as the temporary family health care structure remains on the property. 
(ii)  Any temporary family health care structure installed pursuant to this section shall be removed within 30 days in which the mentally or physically impaired person is no longer receiving or is no longer in need of the assistance provided for in this section. 
(iii)  The City may inspect the temporary family health care structure at reasonable times convenient to the caregiver to ensure compliance with the standards and intent of this section. 
(6)  Outdoor Seasonal Sales   
(a)  Applicability Merchants may display and/or sell goods in the city on a temporary basis without establishing a permanent place of business, subject to the standards of this section. 
(b)  Location   
(i)  The outdoor display and/or sale of goods consistent with the provisions of Section 40.1-4.4(C)(9), Outdoor Display/Sales, is considered an accessory use and does not require a temporary use permit. 
(ii)  All other sales/displays of goods (other than agricultural products) require a temporary use permit in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(E), Temporary Use Permit, and this subsection. 
(c)  Standards A temporary use for the temporary display and/or sale of products shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The property contains an area not actively used that will support the proposed temporary sale of products without encroaching into or creating a negative impact on existing vegetated areas, open space, landscaping, traffic movements, or parking-space availability. 
(ii)  The display or sale of goods, products, and/or services shall not occur in the public right-of-way or within 100 feet of an existing residential use. 
(iii)  The display or sale of products, goods and/or services shall be limited in scope to similar or complementary products, goods, and/or services to those offered by the existing principal use located on the same site. The temporary sale of non-agricultural products, goods, and/or services that differ from the normal range of those offered by an existing principal use shall be prohibited. 
(iv)  Tents and other temporary structures shall be located so as not to interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the property. 
(v)  Tents and other temporary structures shall be located on an improved surface such as asphalt, gravel, or other improved surface. 
(vi)  Off-street parking shall be adequate to accommodate the proposed sale of products. 
(vii)  The temporary display or sale of products shall not cause interference with the movement of emergency vehicles to such an extent that adequate police, fire, or other emergency services cannot be provided. 
(viii)  The hours of operation of the temporary sale of products shall be from no earlier than 7:00 AM to no later than 10:00 PM, or the same as the hours of operation of the principal use. 
(d)  Duration; Sales per Year   
(i)  The temporary sale of non-agricultural products shall be allowed on an individual parcel or site for no more than 30 total days per calendar year. 
(ii)  The number of temporary sales of products per site per calendar year shall not exceed three. 
(7)  Farmer's Market Farmer's markets shall: 
(a)  Renew all applicable temporary use permits once per calendar year; 
(b)  Be limited to the retail sale of agriculture and horticulture products; 
(c)  Be located to minimize the visual impact of the structure from adjacent public streets; 
(d)  Provide adequate ingress, egress, and off-street parking areas; and 
(e)  Be subject to the sign standards in Section 40.1-5.11, Signage. 
(8)  Food Trucks on Private Property   
(a)  Location Food trucks that have been permitted by the City may operate on private property in all zoning districts, subject to the compliance with subsection 40.1- 4.5(F)(8)(b) below. 
(b)  Standards   
(1)  All food trucks must have a valid city food truck permit. 
(2)  All food trucks must possess a valid and unrescinded signed letter from the owner of the property stating that the owner has given permission for the food truck to operate in a specific location during a specific time period not to be earlier than 7:00 a.m. or later than 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  Food trucks shall not vend on vacant or unimproved properties, unless the property is owned or leased by the City and permission has been granted by the City. 
(4)  Food trucks shall operate in accordance with the requirements of Article X of Chapter 32 of the City Code, as the same may be amended, moved or superseded, and with all regulations and guidelines adopted by the City Manager pursuant thereto. 
(5)  Food trucks operating in all business districts, activity center districts, or special districts (as categorized in Table 40.1-3.2) shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  Food trucks must park only in a designated parking area. Food trucks shall not park in or in any way block or infringe on drive aisles, sidewalks, other access to loading/service areas, or emergency access and fire lanes. 
(6)  Food trucks operating in residential districts (as categorized in Table 40.1-3.2) shall meet the following standards: 
(i)  Food trucks may operate on residential property only for the purpose of catering private events. In such cases, food trucks may only sell food and beverages to people attending the private event and who are entirely on the property owned by the person or persons holding the event. Food trucks shall not operate on the same parcel more than three times in the same calendar month. The property owner must inform the Planning Department prior to allowing a food truck to operate on residential property. 
(ii)  Food trucks must be located on a paved surface. 
(iii)  No portion of the food truck shall extend onto an adjacent property or into any right-of-way. 
(iv)  The owner and employees of a food truck may not use the food truck for catering or any other such uses on their own property. 
(7)  Notwithstanding subsection (6) hereinabove, food trucks operating with City permission on City-owned or leased property in any zoning district shall be subject to the regulations governing food trucks operating in business districts, activity center districts, or special districts set forth in subsection (5) hereinabove. 
(8)  Food trucks operating in conjunction with and at the request of a microbrewery or microdistillery shall be subject to the same regulations as food trucks operating in business districts, activity center districts, or special districts as described above, with the exception that they shall not be subject to the buffer separating food trucks and restaurants. 
(9)  Food trucks operating in conjunction with and at the request of a microbrewery or microdistillery shall be allowed to operate in the Downtown area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 19, 25), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amds. 9—11), 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 2, 4), 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 2018-59 , § 1(Exh. A), 7-24-2018)  
ARTICLE 40.1-5: - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
40.1-5.1 - Off-Street Parking, loading, and circulation 
(A)  Purpose and Intent The purpose of this section is to ensure provision of off-street parking and loading facilities in proportion to the generalized parking, loading, and transportation demand of the different uses allowed by this Ordinance The standards in this section are intended to provide for adequate off-street parking while allowing the flexibility needed to accommodate alternative solutions. The standards are also intended to achieve city policies of supporting development and redevelopment of the activity centers, commercial corridors, and downtown areas. The standards are proposed to accommodate appropriate infill development and encourage pedestrian-oriented development, while avoiding excessive paved surface areas, promoting low impact development, and safeguarding historic resources. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  General Except where exempted by Section 40.1-5.1(E) (2) (b), Exceptions, the off-street parking, loading, and circulation standards of this section shall apply to all new development in the city. 
(2)  Time of Review Review of proposed development to ensure compliance with the standards of this section shall occur at time of Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3 (C) & (D)), Master Plan associated with an Amendment to the Zoning Map to establish an Activity Center (AC) district (Section 40.1-3.5), Preliminary Subdivision Plat (Chapter 33.1 of the City Code) or Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(E)), whichever occurs first. 
(C)  General Standards for Off-Street Parking, Stacking, and Loading Areas   
(1)  Use of Parking Area, Stacking Area, or Loading Space All vehicular parking areas, stacking areas, methods of vehicular ingress and egress, internal aisles, and loading spaces required by this section may be referred to as "vehicular use area" as well as off-street parking areas. This section, 40.1-5.1(C), does not apply to bicycle parking areas. 
(a)  Business, Activity Center, and Special Districts A vehicular use area or off-street parking area shall be used solely for the parking of licensed motorized vehicles in operating condition. Required spaces may not be used for the display of goods for sale or lease or storage of vehicles, boats, motor homes, campers, mobile homes, or building materials. 
(b)  Residential Districts In addition to the standard driveway parking spaces provided in conjunction with any single-family residence, up to one additional off-street parking space may be provided for a commercial vehicle on a single-family lot in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-5.1(F), Off-Street Parking Within Residential Districts, and Section 40.1-4.4(C) (15), Storage or Parking of Heavy Trucks, Trailers, Major Recreational Equipment, or Mobile Homes. 
(2)  Identified as to Purpose and Location Off-street parking areas of four or more spaces and off-street loading areas shall include painted lines, wheel stops, or other methods of identifying individual parking spaces and loading areas and distinguishing such spaces from aisles and other circulation features. 
(3)  Surfacing   
(a)  All off-street parking and loading areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, brick, stone pavers, aligned concrete strips, or an equivalent material. 
(b)  Single-family detached residential development may use an alternative surfacing material in accordance with Section 40.1-5.1(F), Off-Street Parking Within Residential Districts. 
(c)  Development subject to the standards of this section may include an alternative surfacing material as part of an alternative parking plan in accordance with Section 40.1-5.1(M), Off-Street Parking Alternatives, except industrial development in the IN district is not required to submit an alternative parking plan for use of crushed stone or a comparable surfacing material. 
(d)  In cases where alternative surfacing materials are allowed, the surfaces shall be maintained in a smooth, well-graded, and dust-free condition. 
(4)  Arrangement   
(a)  Convenient Access Off-street parking and loading areas shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles. Off-street parking areas with four or more spaces shall be arranged so no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall occur on a public street or sidewalk, and an automobile may be parked or un-parked without moving another automobile (except as provided in Section 40.1-5.1(K)(6), Tandem Parking). 
(b)  Backing onto Streets Prohibited Except for parking areas serving Single-Family Detached, Townhouse, and Two-to Four-Family Dwellings, all off-street parking and loading areas shall be arranged so that no vehicle is required to back from such areas directly onto a street. 
(5)  Drainage All off-street parking and loading areas shall be properly drained so as not to cause any nuisance on adjacent land. Drainage may be directed to shared, community stormwater management devices. 
(a)  Calculations Stormwater calculations must address material used on site including entrances, parking areas and sidewalks. 
(6)  Exterior Lighting When lighted, off-street parking and loading areas shall be lighted so as to prevent glare or illumination exceeding maximum allowable levels on adjacent land (See Table 40.1-5.9(E)(3), Maximum Illumination Levels), and unless exempted, shall comply with the standards of Section 40.1-5.9, Exterior Lighting. 
 
(7)  Landscaping Except for off-street parking areas serving Single-Family Detached Dwellings, as well as Two-to-Four-Family Dwellings and Townhouse Dwellings of 5,000 square feet or less in floor area, all off-street parking and loading areas shall comply with the standards of Section 40.1-5.2(D), Vehicular Use Area Landscaping. 
(8)  Maintained in Good Repair   
(a)  Maintained at All Times All off-street parking, loading, and circulation areas shall be maintained in a safe condition and good repair at all times so as not to constitute a hazard to public safety or a visual or aesthetic nuisance to surrounding land. Poorly maintained parking shall not count toward required parking minimum. 
(b)  Periodically Restored All off-street parking, loading, and circulation areas shall be periodically painted or otherwise restored to maintain a clear identification of separate parking stalls or loading areas. 
(9)  Markings   
(a)  General Each required off-street parking space and off-street parking facility must be identified by surface markings and must be maintained in a manner so as to be readily visible and accessible at all times. Such markings must be arranged to provide for orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking, and storage of vehicles. Markings required to be maintained in a highly visible condition includes striping, directional arrows, lettering on signs and in handicapped-designated areas. 
(b)  Car Accessible One-way accesses into required parking facilities must be identified by directional arrows. Any two-way access located at any angle other than 90 degrees to a street must be marked with a traffic separation stripe the length of the access. This requirement does not apply to aisles 
(10)  Placement The location or placement of off-street parking areas on a development site shall be limited in accordance with the standards of this section, Section 40.1-5.5, Multi-Family Development Standards, Section 40.1-5.6, Commercial Development Standards, and Section 40.1-5.7, Transitional Standards, as appropriate. 
(11)  Minimum Separation   
(a)  All off-street parking areas shall be separated at least seven feet from buildings in order to allow room for sidewalks, landscaping, and other plantings between the building and the parking area. 
(b)  In the event foundation plantings are required in accordance with Section 40.1-5.2(G), Site Landscaping and Building Foundation Priming, additional minimum separation may be needed to maintain a minimum five-foot-wide pedestrian clear zone along with the minimum area needed for landscaping. 
(c)  This separation may be eliminated to the rear of buildings in areas designed for unloading and loading of materials. 
(12)  Completion All off-street parking, loading, and circulation areas shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development they serve. In the case of phased development, off-street parking, loading, and circulation areas should only be provided for portions of the development with development plan or subdivision approval. 
(D)  Calculation of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces   
(1)  Fractions When computation of the number of required parking spaces results in a fraction, the result shall be rounded upward to the next highest whole number. 
(2)  Multiple Uses or Mixed Use Development Unless otherwise approved, development containing more than one use must provide off-street parking in an amount equal to the total requirements of all individual uses. This does not apply to multi-tenant retail centers. 
(3)  Seat Based Standards Except as otherwise provided in this section, where the minimum number of off-street parking spaces is based on the number of seats, all computations shall be based on the design capacity of the areas used for seating. 
(4)  Floor-Area Based Standards Where the minimum number of off-street parking spaces is based on square feet of floor area, all computations shall be based on gross floor area. 
(5)  Occupancy or Capacity-Based Standards Except as otherwise provided in this section, where the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required is based on the number of employees, students, or residents, all computations shall be based on the largest number of persons working on any single shift (for employees), maximum enrollment (for students), or the maximum fire-rated capacity (for residents), whichever is applicable. 
(6)  On-Street Parking When available, on-street parking on public or private streets, driveways, or drives may be used to satisfy the off-street parking standards of this section. 
(7)  Driveways Used to Satisfy Requirements For Single-Family Detached, Townhouse, and Two-to-Four Family Dwellings, driveways may be used to satisfy minimum off-street parking standards, provided sufficient space is available to satisfy the standards of this section and this Ordinance. 
(E)  Off-Street Parking   
(1)  Parking Plan Required Off-street parking areas of four or more spaces and off-street loading areas shall include painted lines, wheel stops, or other methods of identifying individual parking spaces and loading areas and distinguishing such spaces from aisles and other circulation features. 
(a)  Uses with four or more spaces, or parking areas proposed that could accommodate four (4) or more standard parking spaces and access facilities, shall submit a parking plan along with an application for a Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3(C) & (D)), or a master plan associated with a Zoning Map Amendment to establish an AC District (Section 40.1-3.5), as appropriate. 
(b)  The parking plan shall be drawn to scale, and accurately designate the required parking spaces, access aisles, and driveways, and the relation of the off-street parking facilities to the development the facilities are designed to serve. 
(2)  Minimum Number or Spaces Required Unless otherwise expressly stated in this section, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 40.1-5.1(E)(2). Off-Street Parking Standards. Any property that has commercial sales, and does not fall into a use category listed in Table 40.1-5.1(E)(2), shall be required to have a minimum of two (2) parking spaces on site that meet the Section 40.1-5.1(K). 
(a)  Exclusions to Parking Requirements The following areas shall be excluded from the calculation of parking requirements established in Table 40.1-5.1(E)(2), Off-Street Parking Standards. 
(i)  Indoor areas used for vehicle storage or display. 
(ii)  Outdoor storage, display, or sales areas, unless otherwise specified. 
(iii)  Service bays for vehicles, including repair, painting, fueling, washing, and detailing. 
(iv)  Animal kennel cage space, indoor and outdoor. 
(v)  Parking located in the D2 District will be as shown in table 40.1-5.1(E)(4), D2 Parking Requirements. 
(b)  Exceptions to Parking Requirements 
(i)  Existing Development 
a.  Change in Use 
1.  A change in use of an existing development shall provide the additional off-street parking and loading facilities required to comply with this section, except as follows: 
A.  No additional automobile or bicycle parking spaces are required if the change in use would result in an increase of spaces of less than 25%. The percent increase is calculated by dividing the number of additional spaces required by the number of spaces required before the increase. 
B.  When two or fewer additional automobile or bicycle parking spaces are required under this subsection as a result of a change in use, such additional parking is not required to be installed. 
C.  Where there is any change of use of an existing development, on-site surface parking must comply with Section 40.1-5.1 (K). 
b.  Expansion and Enlargement 
1.  Unless otherwise modified by Section 40.1-6.6, the off-street parking, loading, landscaping and circulation standards of this section apply when an existing structure or use is expanded or enlarged, except as follows: 
A.  No additional automobile or bicycle parking spaces are required if the expansion or enlargement would result in an increase of spaces of less than 25%. The percent increase is calculated by dividing the number of additional spaces required by the number of spaces required before the increase. 
B.  When two or fewer additional automobile or bicycle parking spaces are required under this subsection as a result of an expansion or enlargement, such additional parking is not required to be installed. 
C.  When an existing structure or use is expanded or enlarged by 25% or more of GFA, on-site surface parking must comply with Section 40.1-5.1(K). 
(c)  Nonconforming Parking or Loading Facilities Expansion or enlargement of an existing development on a site that does not comply with the standards of this Section 40.1-5.1(E) (2) shall require a Special Exception approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
TABLE 40.1-5.1(E)(2): MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS 
USE CATEGORY 	USE TYPE 	AUTO SPACES
(MINIMUM) 	BICYCLE SPACES
(MINIMUM) 	MINIMUM NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES [1] 
RESIDENTIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Household Living 	Dwelling, live/work 	1 per DU 	1 per 4 DU 	85% 
	Dwelling, upper 			
	Dwelling, multi-family 	1.5 per DU 	1 per 4 DU 	85% 
	Dwelling, townhouse 			
	Dwelling, two- to four-family 	2 per DU 	None 	
Group Living 	Dormitory 	1 per every 2 resident beds 	1 per 4 beds 	85% 
	Family care home 	3 per home 	None 	
	Fraternity or sorority house 	1 per every 2 resident beds 	1 per 4 beds 	85% 
	Group home 	1 per employee + 1 per every 3 adults 	None 	
	Rooming or boarding house 	1 per guest room 	None 	
	Single room occupancy (SRO) facility 	0.75 per guest room 	1 per 4 beds 	
PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Community Services 	Community center 	1 per 500 sf 	10% of automobile parking provided 	25% 
	Cultural facility 			
	Library 			
	Museum 			
	Senior center 			
	Youth club facility 			
Day Care 	Adult day care 
center 	3 per home 	None 	
	Child day care 
center 			
	Family child day care home (6 to 12 children) 	2 plus minimum residential parking requirement 	None 	
	Home child day care for 5 or fewer children 	1 plus residential minimum requirement 	None 	
Educational Facilities 	College or university 	1 per 500 sf, exclusive of dormitories 	5% of automobile parking provided 	25% 
	School, elementary 	1 per classroom 	3 per classroom 	50% 
	School, middle 			
	School, high 	2 per 500 sf 	5% of automobile parking provided 	50% 
	Vocational or trade school 	1 per 500 sf 	5% of automobile parking provided 	25% 
Government Facilities 	Government maintenance, storage, or distribution facility 	1 per 1,000 sf 	None 	
	Government offices 	1 per 500 sf 	5% of automobile parking provided 	25% 
	Other Government Facilities 			
	Post office 			
Health Care Facilities 	Hospital 	1 per 300 sf 	5% of automobile parking provided 	25% 
	Medical or dental clinic 	1 per 500 sf 	5% of automobile parking provided 	
	Blood/tissue collection facility 			
	Drug or alcohol treatment facility 			
	Medical or dental clinic 			
	Medical treatment facility 			
	Outpatient facility 			
Institutions 	Auditorium 	1 per 500 sf 	5% of automobile parking provided 	
	Convention Center 			
	Halfway house 	3 per house 	1 per 4 beds 	85% 
	Assisted living facility 	1 per 2 beds 	None 	
	Nursing home 			
	Psychiatric treatment facility 			
	Religious institution 	1 per every 6 seats in worship area 	1 per 1,500 sf of assembly area 	
	Civic, social, or fraternal clubs or lodges 	1 per 500 sf 	5% of automobile parking provided 	
	Shelter 	1 per 2 beds 	None 	
Parks and 
Open Areas 	Arboretum or botanical garden 	None 	None 	
	Cemetery, columbaria, mausoleum 			
	Community garden 			
	Golf course, public 
(publicly owned) 	2 per tee plus 1 per 200 sf of clubhouse, restaurant and event facilities 	1 per 2,500 sf of clubhouse, restaurant and event facilities 	
	Park, public 	Less than 1 acre, none 1 acre or more, see table 40.1-5.1(E)(2)(A) 	Greater of 10 or 5% of automobile parking provided 	
	Park, private 			
Public Safety 	Correctional facility 	1 per employee on largest shift plus 2 per maximum visitors allowed at one time plus 1 per 1,000 sf 	None 	
	Fire or EMS facility 	1 per employee on largest shift 	None 	
	Fire or police substation 			
	Police station 			
Transportation 	Airport 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 
	Helicopter landing facility 	None 	None 	
	Passenger terminal, surface transportation 	1 per 500 sf of office space, plus 1 per 4 seats in waiting area when there are more than 20 seats 	None 	
Utilities 	Telecommunications antenna, collocation on existing tower 	1 	None 	
	Telecommunications antenna, placement on existing building 			
	Telecommunications tower, freestanding 			
	Utility, minor 			
	Utility, major 	Lesser of 1 per 500 sf or 1 per 2 employees on largest shift 	None 	
COMMERCIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Adult Uses 	Adult bookstore 	1 per 500 sf 	10% of automobile parking provided 	
	Adult entertainment establishment 	1 per 500 sf 	10% of automobile parking provided 	
	Adult motion picture theatre 	1 per 500 sf 	10% of automobile parking provided 	
Animal Care 	Animal grooming 	1 per 500 sf 	1 per 2,500 sf 	
	Animal shelter 			
	Veterinary clinic 			
	Kennel, indoor 			
	Kennel, outdoor 			
Conference and Training Centers 	Conference or training center 	1 per 5 persons of design capacity 	5% of automobile parking provided 	
Eating Establishments 	Dinner theatre 	1 per 4 seats 	10% of automobile parking provided 	10% 
	Restaurant, with indoor and outdoor seating 	1 per 200 sf plus 1 per 5 seats for any outdoor seating areas 	10% of automobile parking provided 	
	Restaurant, with drive-through service 			
	Restaurant, without drive-through service 			
	Restaurant, Brew-pub 			
	Specialty eating establishment 			
Offices 	Offices, business services 	1 per 500 sf 	10% of automobile parking provided 	25% 
	Offices, financial services 			
	Offices, professional services 			
	Offices, sales (including real estate) 			
	Radio and television broadcasting studio 			
Parking, Commercial 	Parking lot 	None 	None 	
	Parking structure 			
Recreation/ 
Entertainment, 
Indoor 	Commercial recreation, indoor 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 
	Theatre 	4 seats 	10% of automobile parking provided 	10% 
	Arena, amphitheatre, or stadium 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 
	Commercial recreation, outdoor 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 
	Country club 	2 per tee plus 1 per 200 sf of clubhouse, restaurant and event facilities 	1 per 2,500 sf 	
Recreation/ 
Entertainment, 
Indoor 	Golf course, public 
(privately owned) 	200 sf of clubhouse, restaurant and event facilities 	1 per 2,500 sf 	
	Golf driving range 	1 per tee 	1 per 2,500 sf 	
	Marina 	1 per every 2 slips + 1 per every 4 dry storage spaces 	1 per 2,500 sf 	
	Marina, pleasure boats only 			
	Membership sports or recreation club 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(5)outdoor facility capacity 
Retail Sales & Services 	Multi-tenant retail center 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(2)(d) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(2)(d) 	See Section 40.1-5.1(E)(2)(d) 
	Bar, nightclub, or cocktail lounge 	1 per 250 sf 	1 per 2,500 sf 	
	Entertainment establishment 			
	Microbrewer/Micro-Distillery/Micro-Winery/Micro-Cidery 	1 per 1,000 sf plus 1 per 250 sf of areas of accessory use for patrons 	1 per 2,500 sf 	
	Gasoline sales 	2 	None 	
	Crematory 	None 	None 	
	Dry cleaning and laundry drop-off establishment 	1 per 500 sf 	None 	
	Laundry, self-service 			
	Funeral home 	1 per 5 seats in viewing area 	None 	
	Flea Market 	1 per 500 sf 	None 	
	Special events house 	1 per 200 sf + 1 per every 4 persons of maximum outdoor facility capacity 	None 	
	Tattoo parlor/body piercing establishment 	1 per 500 sf 	1 per 2,500 sf 	
	Massage therapy 			
	Personal services establishment 			
	Repair establishment 			
	Convenience store, with gas sales 	1 per 500 sf 	1 per 2, 500 sf 	
	Convenience store, without gas sales 			
Retail Sales & Services 	Financial institution, without drive-through service 	1 per 500 sf 	1 per 2,500 sf 	
	Financial institution, with drive-through service 			
	Drug store or pharmacy, without drive-through service 			
	Drug store or pharmacy, with drive-through service 			
	Grocery store 			
	Retail sales establishment, large 			
	Other retail sales establishments 			
Self-Service Storage 	Mini-warehouse 	3 for single-level facilities 
3 plus 1 per 25 storage units for multi-level facilities 	None 	
Vehicle Sales and Services, Heavy 	Aircraft parts, sales, and maintenance 	1 per 500 sf 	None 	
	Automotive paint and body shop 			
	Automotive wrecker service 			
	Transmission shop 			
	Boat and marine rental and sales 			
	Truck stop 			
Vehicle Sales and Services, Light 	Automotive parts and installation 	1 per 500 sf 	None 	
	Automobile repair and servicing, without painting/body work 			
	Automobile sales or rentals 			
	Automobile wrecker service 			
	Car wash auto detailing 			
	Motorcycle sales 			
	Recreational vehicle sales or rental 			
	Taxicab service 			
	Tire/muffler sales and mounting 			
Visitor Accommodations 	Bed and breakfast 	1 per guest bedroom 	None 	
	Tourist home 			
	Campground or recreational vehicle park 	Visitor parking at 1 per 4 campsite or similar 	None 	
	Hotel or motel, extended service 	1 per every 2 guest rooms plus 25% of spaces required for on-site accessory uses 	1 per 20 guest rooms 	85% 
	Hotel or motel, full service 			
INDUSTRIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Industrial Services 	Port facilities 	Lesser of 1 per 500 sf or 1 per 2 employees on largest shift 	None 	
	Building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractor 			
	Electric motor repair 			
	Fuel oil/bottled gas distributor 			
	Fuel oil storage 			
	General industrial service 			
	Heavy equipment sales, rental, or storage 			
	Heavy equipment servicing and repair 			
	Laundry, dry cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants 			
	Machine shop 			
	Repair of scientific or professional instruments 			
	Research and development 			
	Tool repair 			
Manufacturing and Production 	Brewery/Distillery/Winery/Cidery 	1 per 1,000 sf plus 1 per 250 sf of areas of accessory use for patrons 	None 	
	Concrete plants 	Lesser of 1 per 500 sf or 1 per 2 employees on largest shift 	None 	
	Asphalt plants 			
	Manufacturing of chemicals, fertilizers, paint and turpentine 			
	Manufacturing, heavy 			
	Manufacturing, light 			
	Petroleum refining 			
	Rendering 			
Warehouse and Freight Movement 	Bulk fuel sales and storage 	Lesser of 1 per 500 sf or 1 per 2 employees on largest shift 	None 	
	Cold storage plant 			
	Outdoor storage, as principal use 			
	Parcel services 			
	Shipping container storage yard 			
	Truck or freight terminal 			
	Warehouse (distribution) 			
	Warehouse (storage) 			
Waste-Related Services 	Energy recovery plant 	Lesser of 1 per 500 sf or 1 per 2 employees on largest shift 	None 	
	Hazardous waste collection site 			
	Incinerator 			
	Recycling and salvage center 			
	Salvage and junkyard 			
	Tire disposal or recycling 			
	Waste composting 			
Wholesale sales 	All uses 	Lesser of 1 per 500 sf or 1 per 2 employees on largest shift 	None 	
NOTES: 
[1] DU = dwelling unit; sf = square feet (or floor area unless otherwise noted) 
 
TABLE 40.1-5.1(E)(2)(A): MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PARK ACTIVITIES 
USE CATEGORY 	AUTO SPACES 
Sports fields 	20 per field 
Tennis and other courts for fewer than 8 players 	2 per court 
Basketball and other courts for 8 or more players 	4 per court 
Swimming facilities 	25 per pool or sprayground 
Golf facilities 	2 per tee plus 1 per 200 sf of clubhouse, restaurant and event facilities 
Group picnic shelter 	25 per shelter 
Individual picnic table 	1 per table 
 
(d)  Multi-Tenant Retail Center Parking Requirements 
(i)  Parking requirements for multi-tenant retail centers are calculated based on the gross floor area total for all uses, rather than by individual uses. 
(ii)  The minimum required automobile parking is 1 space per 500 sf. The minimum required bicycle parking is 1 per 2,500 sf. Loading requirements are per Section 40.1-5.1(P)(1), Number of Required Off-street Loading Berths. 
(iii)  Where a retail center also includes residential space, the residential parking requirements shall be additional, per Table 40.1-5.1(E)(4), D2 Parking Requirements, depending on zoning. 
(3)  Parking Requirements for Certain Elderly Housing Multi-family that is designated as "housing for older persons" by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development under the Fair Housing Act is allowed a 20 percent reduction of the required parking in Table 40.1-5.1(E)(2), Off-Street Parking Standards. 
(4)  Parking Requirements for the D2 District Parking requirements for the D2 District shall be provided in accordance with Table 40.1-5.1(E)(4), D2 Parking Requirements. As indicated in the table, for multifamily residential uses and non-residential uses, some of the required minimum automobile spaces shall be unrestricted, that is, available to any resident or visitor. Spaces that are not reserved for specific residents or employees are subject to the maximum parking requirements shown in the table. There are no maximum parking requirements for spaces that are unrestricted. 
TABLE 40.1-5.1(E)(4): D2 PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
	AUTO SPACES MINIMUM 	AUTO SPACES MINIMUM UNRESTRICTED 	AUTO SPACES MAXIMUM RESERVED 	BICYCLE SPACES MINIMUM 
RESIDENTIAL 
Single Family 	1 per DU 	None 	2 per DU 	None 
Multi-family—1 bedroom 	1 per DU 	0.25 per DU 	1 per DU 	1 per 4 DU 
Multi-family—2 bedroom 	1 per DU 	0.25 per DU 	1 per DU 	1 per 4 DU 
Multi-family—3 bedroom 	1 per DU 	0.25 per DU 	2 per DU 	1 per 4 DU 
Dwelling, live/work and upper 	0.5 DU 	None 	1.5 per DU 	1 per 4 DU 
NON-RESIDENTIAL 
< 5,000 sf 	None 	None 	None 	None 
> 5,000 sf 	1.25 per 1,000 sf 	1.25 per 1,000 sf 	1 per 1, 0000 sf 	10% or automobile parking provided 
 
(a)  Achieving parking requirements 
(i)  Surface parking may not exceed 150 percent of the required parking. Structured or underground parking may exceed the required quantity of parking without the imposition of maximum standards. 
(b)  Existing parking and loading facilities 
(i)  Required off-street parking and loading facilities in existence on the effective date of this ordinance shall not be reduced below or, if already less than, shall not be further reduced below, the requirements of this ordinance. 
(5)  Uses with Variable Parking Demand Characteristics Uses that reference this subsection in Table 40.1-5.1(E)(2), Off-Street Parking Standards, have widely varying parking and loading demand characteristics, making it difficult to establish a single off-street parking or loading standard. Upon receiving a development application for a use subject to this subsection, the Zoning Administrator shall apply the off-street parking and loading standard specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or establish minimum off-street parking standards on the basis of a parking and loading demand study prepared by the applicant. Such a study shall include estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or other acceptable estimates as approved by the Zoning Administrator, and should include other reliable data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. The study shall document the source of data used to develop the recommendations. 
(6)  Unlisted Uses Upon receiving a development application for a use not expressly listed in this section, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to apply the off-street parking standard in the listed use that is deemed most similar to the use, or establish the off-street parking requirements by reference to standard parking resources published by the National Parking Association or the American Planning Association. Alternatively, the Planning Director may require the applicant to submit a parking demand study that justifies estimates of parking demand based on the recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), and includes relevant data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same or comparable to the proposed use in terms of density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. 
(F)  Off-Street Parking within Residential Districts   
(1)  Parking in Vehicular Use Area Required Commercial vehicles, whether parked or stored, shall be located in a vehicular use area. For the purposes of this subsection, "vehicles" shall include but not be limited to, passenger vehicles, all trucks under 20,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight (GVW), vans, golf carts, or other similar vehicles, whether operable or otherwise. Vehicles exceeding 20,000 pounds GVW are subject to the standards in Section 40.1-4.4(C)(15), Storage or Parking of Heavy Trucks, Trailers, Major Recreation Equipment, or Mobile Home. 
(2)  Maximum Area Available for Vehicular Use Vehicular use areas located within the front or corner side yard (as measured from the edge of the lot line to the closest portion of the building) shall be limited to the lesser of 33 percent of the entire front and/or corner side yard area, or 880 square feet. For parcels with lot widths less than 50 feet, the vehicular use area shall be limited to the lesser of 50 percent of the entire front/or corner side area yard area (as measured from the edge of the lot line to the closest portion of the building), or 500 square feet. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the size of the vehicular use area located beyond the setback line of a front or corner side yard area, nor does it apply to indoor parking. This not applicable to historic districts or any other "district" that has specific or special parking provisions. 
(3)  In Historic Districts Off-street parking in the Front yards is prohibited except as normally exists in driveways. 
(G)  Motorcycle Parking   
(1)  Parking for motorcycles, mopeds and motor-driven cycles may substitute for up to 2 spaces, or 5 percent of required automobile parking, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Motorcycle parking spaces shall be a minimum of 4' wide and 8' deep, accessible by an aisle at least 5' wide. 
(H)  Low-Emission Vehicles Spaces within parking lots and structures may include designated parking spaces for battery-electric vehicles, hybrid vehicles, and fuel cell vehicles. Spaces reserved for low-emission vehicles count towards minimum parking space requirements. 
(I)  Provision of Electric Vehicle Changing Stations Spaces within parking lots and structures may include designated parking spaces for electric vehicle charging. Spaces reserved for electric vehicle charging count towards minimum parking space requirements. 
(1)  Spaces available for public use 
(a)  Where electric vehicle charging stations are available for public use, spaces reserved for electric vehicle charging counts towards minimum parking space requirements at the rate of two per each space reserved for electric vehicle charging. 
(b)  To be considered "available for public use", spaces reserved for electric vehicle charging shall be available and accessible to the public during all hours that the parking facility is open. 
(J)  Accessible Parking Spaces for Physically Disabled Persons Development required to provide off-street parking spaces shall ensure that a portion of the total number of required off-street parking spaces shall be specifically dimensioned. designated, located, and reserved for use by persons with physical disabilities, in accordance with the standards in the federal American with Disabilities Act. 
(K)  Dimensional Standards for Automobile Parking Spaces and Aisles   
(1)  General Car parking spaces and parking lot aisles shall comply with the minimum dimensional standards established in Table 40.1-5.1(K)(1), Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles, and the illustrations in Figure 40.1-5.1(K)(1), Parking Stall Measurement. The following dimensional standards apply to automobile parking spaces other than those provided per Section 40.1-5.1(J): 
TABLE 40.1-5.1(I)(1): DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR PARKING SPACES AND AISLES 
PARKING ANGLE (A) 	STALL WIDTH (B) 	CURB WIDTH (C) 	AISLE WIDTH FOR ONE-WAY
TRAFFIC (D) 	AISLE WIDTH FOR TWO-WAY
TRAFFIC (E) 	STALL DEPTH PERPENDICULAR TO AISLE (F) 
STANDARD SPACES 
Parallel 	8.0 ft 	22.0 ft 	12 ft 	24 ft 	8.0 ft 
45 degrees 	9.0 ft 	12.7 ft 	14 ft 	n/a 	19.0 ft 
60 degrees 	9.0 ft 	10.4 ft 	18 ft 	24 ft 	20.0 ft 
90 degrees 	9.0 ft 	9.0 ft 	n/a 	24 ft 	17.0 ft 
					
COMPACT SPACES 
Parallel 	8.0 ft 	20.0 ft 	12 ft 	24 ft 	8.0 ft 
45 degrees 	8.0 ft 	11.3 ft 	12 ft 	24 ft 	18.0 ft 
60 degrees 	8.0 ft 	9.3 ft 	16 ft 	24 ft 	19.0 ft 
90 degrees 	8.0 ft 	8.0 ft 	n/a 	24 ft 	17.0 ft 
NOTES: 
For parking other than 90 degrees or parallel, the stall depth perpendicular to aisle may be reduced by 2' if the rows of angle parking are interlocked rather than abutting a wall or curb. 
 
(2)  Compact Spaces Up to 25% of all spaces may be reduced to compact spaces. All compact spaces must be clearly marked for "Compact Cars Only". 
(3)  Vertical Clearance All off-street parking spaces must have a minimum overhead clearance of seven feet. 
 
(4)  Vehicle Overhang When a parking space abuts a public right-of-way, sidewalk, walkway, landscape area, or adjacent property, off-street parking and loading areas shall provide curbs, motor vehicle stops, or similar devices at a minimum distance of 2 feet as to prevent vehicles from overhanging (see Figure 40.1-5.1(K)(2). Wheel Stops). 
 
(5)  Spaces Near Obstructions   
(a)  When the side of a parking space abuts a wall, column, or other structure that is taller than six inches, the width of the parking spaces shall be increased by two feet on the obstructed side. This does not apply to columns in a parking garage. 
(b)  Columns, poles, bollards or similar, positioned at the front of a parking space, may protrude up to 6 inches into the required parking stall dimensions. 
(c)  Columns, poles, bollards or similar, positioned at the front corner of a parking space, may protrude up to 12 inches along the front or side of the required parking stall dimensions. 
(6)  Tandem Parking Tandem parking is allowed for residential projects, including the residential component of mixed-use projects, when both tandem spaces are assigned to the same dwelling unit. Up to 75 percent of the total off-street parking spaces provided for residential projects may incorporate tandem parking. 
(L)  Bicycle Parking Bicycle Parking Spaces may be classified as Long-Term or Short-Term. Long-term bicycle parking spaces are intended to primarily serve residents and employees whose bicycles will be left for longer periods of time and require a safe and weatherproof storage area. Long term bicycle parking shall be located in an enclosed, limited access area designed to protect bikes from precipitation and theft. Short-term bicycle parking spaces are intended to primarily serve visitors, such as retail patrons, whose bicycles will be left for short stops, requiring a high degree of convenience. 
(1)  Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces 
(a)  General:   
(i)  The required number of bicycle parking spaces is shown in Tables 40.1-5.1(E)(2), Off-Street Parking Standards, and 40.1-5.1(E)(4), D2 Parking Requirements. 
(ii)  The minimum number of parking spaces provided when required shall be two (2). 
(iii)  For residential land uses with individual garages, each garage shall account for one (I) long term bicycle space up to a maximum of 90% of long-term bicycle parking requirement. 
(b)  Exemptions:   
(i)  No bicycle parking spaces are required for any commercial facility of less than 1,000 sf. 
(ii)  Requirements for a percentage of bicycle parking to be Long-Term shall not apply when the required amount of Long-Term bicycle parking is two (2) or fewer. 
(c)  Design of Bicycle Parking Spaces   
(i)  Location   
a.  Short-term bicycle parking spaces shall be located as close as the closest vehicular parking space or within 50 feet of a publicly accessible entrance to the building or buildings containing the use or uses it serves, whichever is greater. 
b.  Long-term bicycle parking spaces shall be located indoors or fully covered, which can be achieved through use of an overhang or covered walkway, weatherproof outdoor bicycle lockers, or an indoor storage area. Where bicycle parking is not located within a building or locker, the cover design shall be of permanent construction, designed to protect bicycles from rainfall, snow, and inclement weather, and with a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet. Required bicycle parking for residential uses may not be provided within dwelling units. 
c.  Bicyclists shall not be required to travel over stairs to access parking. Access routes to bicycle parking areas must have a minimum five-foot width, with an allowable constriction of no less than 3' for distances totaling no more than 5'. Access and egress for bicycle parking in a parking structure shall not be via gated or ramped entrance/exit lane shared with motor vehicles. 
d.  The property owner may make suitable arrangement to place required bicycle parking spaces in the public right-of-way as approved by the City Engineer. 
(M)  Off-Street Parking Alternatives The Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to approve an alternative parking plan that proposes alternatives to providing the number of required off-street parking spaces required by Tables 40.1-5.1(E)(2), Off-Street Parking Standards and 40.1-5.1(E)(4), D2 Parking Requirements, in accordance with the standards listed below. The alternative parking plan shall be submitted with an application for a Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3(C) & (D)), Master Plan associated within an Amendment to the Zoning District Map to establish an AC district (Section 40.1-3.5), or Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(E)), as appropriate. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the utilization of one or more of the following off-street parking alternatives by a single use. 
(1)  Shared Parking Shared parking is feasible when the same parking spaces can be used to serve two or more individual lands uses without conflict or encroachment. Requests for shared parking shall comply with all of the following standards: 
(a)  Location   
(i)  Shared parking spaces shall be located within 800 linear feet of the building served. 
(ii)  Shared parking spaces shall not be separated from the use they serve by an arterial or collector road unless the shared parking area or parking structure is served by an improved pedestrian crossing. 
(b)  Pedestrian Access Adequate and safe pedestrian access must be provided from and to the shared parking areas. 
(c)  Maximum Shared Spaces The maximum reduction in the total number of parking spaces required for the uses sharing the parking area shall be 50 percent of the total required parking for each individual use. 
(d)  Directional Signage Directional signage that complies with the standards of this Ordinance shall be provided to direct the public to the shared parking spaces. It is preferable for the employees of an establishment to utilize these spaces. 
(e)  Shared Parking Plan   
(i)  Justification Those requesting to use shared parking as a means of satisfying the off-street parking standards must submit a shared parking plan as part of an alternative parking plan that justifies the feasibility of shared parking. Justification shall include information on the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces. 
(ii)  Recorded Agreement A shared parking plan portion of an alternative parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement among all owners of record. A shared parking agreement may be revoked only if all required off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with the requirements of Table 40.1-5.1(E)(2), Off-Street Parking Standards. 
(2)  Off-Site Parking Requests to locate required off-street parking spaces on a separate lot from the lot on which principal uses are located, shall comply with all of the following standards. 
(a)  Ineligible Uses The off-site parking shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking standards for residential uses (except for guest parking), convenience stores or other convenience-oriented uses. In addition, required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities may not be located off-site. 
(b)  Location No off-site parking space shall be located more than 800 feet from the primary entrance of the use served (measured along the shortest legal pedestrian route), unless a remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. Off-site parking spaces may not be separated from the use served by a street right-of-way with a width of more than 80 feet, unless a grade-separated pedestrian walkway is provided or other traffic control or a remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. 
(c)  Zoning Classification The zoning district classification of the off-site parking area is the same or a more intensive zoning classification than that required for the use served. 
(d)  Agreement for Off-Site Parking   
(i)  In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, the off-site parking arrangement shall be established in a written agreement between the record owners. 
(ii)  An off-site parking plan portion of an alternative parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement among all owners of record. 
(3)  On-Street Parking As approved by the City Engineer, the use of on-street parking to meet a portion of the minimum off-street parking requirements shall comply with the following: 
(a)  Adequate on-street parking exists within 800 linear feet from the primary entrance of the proposed development; 
(b)  The developer plans on utilizing on-street parking; and 
(c)  There is no negative impact to existing or planned traffic circulation patterns or on-street parking demand. 
(N)  Vehicular Circulation   
(1)  Stacking Spaces for Drive-through and Related Uses 
(a)  In addition to meeting the off-street parking standards in Tables 40.1-5.1(E)(2), Off-Street Parking Standards and 40.1-5.1(E)(4), D2 Parking Requirements, uses with drive-through facilities and other auto-oriented uses where vehicles queue up to access a service facility shall provide the minimum number of stacking/standing spaces established in Table 40.1-5.1(N)(1), Required Stacking/Standing Spaces. 
(b)  The entrance to any building with a bay (i.e. car wash, auto shop, etc.) shall be located to allow the required stacking/standing distance without encroaching on public right-of-way. 
(c)  Stacking spaces shall be provided between the drive-through window and the menu board. Additional spaces shall be provided past the menu board to allow for stacking. If two or more drive-through lanes are provided, then stacking/standing spaces required beyond the menu board may be divided by the number of available stacking lanes. 
(2)  Design and Layout Required stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards. 
(a)  Size Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet by 20 feet in size. 
(b)  Location Stacking spaces shall not impede onsite or offsite traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces. 
TABLE 40.1-5.1(N)(1): REQUIRED STACKING/STANDING SPACES 
USE OR ACTIVITY [1] 	MINIMUM NUMBER OF STACKING/STANDING SPACES 	MEASURED FROM [2] 
Automated teller machine 	3 	Teller machine 
Automobile repair and service (all types) 	2 per bay 	Bay entrance 
Bank Teller 	3 	Teller window 
Car wash, automatic 	2 	Bay entrance 
Car wash, self-service 	1 per bay 	Bay entrance 
Drug store or pharmacy, with drive-through service 	4 per lane 	Agent window 
Dry cleaner, with drive-through service 	4 per lane 	Window 
Nursing home 	3 	Main building entrance 
Personal services with drive-through (e.g., laundry/dry-cleaning establishment) 	4 per lane 	Agent window 
Restaurant, with drive-through service 	4 	Pick-up window 
	Plus 3 	Menu board 
Other 	Uses not specifically listed are determined by the Planning Director based on standards for comparable uses, or alternatively based on a parking demand study. 
NOTES: 
[1] See Table 40.1-4.1(A): Use Table 
[2] Distance measured from window where products are delivered, when more than one window is present. 
 
(3)  Stacking Lanes for Parking Lot Entrances. Except in the UR-H, NMU, NAC, D-1 and D-2 districts, nonresidential uses shall provide stacking areas for entering vehicles in accordance with the minimum stacking lane distance established in Table 40.1-5.1(N)(2), Stacking Lanes for Parking Lot Entrances: 
 
TABLE 40.1-5.1(N)(2): STACKING LANES FOR PARKING LOT ENTRANCES 
NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES 
(1) 	MINIMUM STACKING LANE DISTANCE (FEET) 
1-24 	10 
25-49 	20 
50-249 	40 
250 or more 	100 
NOTES: 
(1) Entrances into parking structures may be credited towards the stacking lane distance requirement provided the parking structure entrance Is accessed from a development driveway and not a primary drive aisle. 
(2) Stacking lane distance is measured within the driveway apron from the right-of-way line along the centerline of the stocking lane to its intersection with the centerline of the adjacent drive aisle. 
 
(a)  Design and Layout Required stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards. 
(i)  Size Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet by 20 feet in size. 
(ii)  Location Stacking spaces shall not impede onsite or offsite traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street parking areas. 
(iii)  Design Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal driveways by raised medians if deemed necessary by the Planning Director for traffic movement and safety. 
(4)  Medians in Driveway Entrances Medians may be provided within driveway entrances provided: 
(a)  The median is surrounded by valley or "roll" curbing, 
(b)  No signage is included within sight triangles; 
(c)  Planted material within the median is limited to understory trees, shrubs. and ground cover to not block sight triangles and sight distance; and 
(d)  The minimum aisle width is maintained for each travel and turning lane. 
(O)  Driveway Standards   
(1)  Any required parking area shall have direct access to a public or private street via a driveway. 
(2)  Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, no driveway shall exceed 50 feet in width at the curbline or more than 35 feet at the front lot line. 
(3)  One-way driveways shall have a minimum width of 15 feet, and two-way driveways shall be at least 24 feet wide. 
(4)  Driveway aprons shall be constructed to standards furnished by the City Engineer and shall be provided between the curbline and the front lot line. 
(5)  No driveway shall be located within 15 feet of a corner side lot line or closer than five feet from the end of a curb radius. 
(6)  Lots with two or more driveways along the same street frontage shall provide at least 75 feet between driveways. 
(7)  In no instance shall the number of driveways serving a single lot along a single street frontage exceed a maximum of four. 
 
(P)  Loading Space Standards   
(1)  Number of Required Off-Street Loading Berths The following uses shall provide on-site loading areas or berths in accordance with the requirements in Table 40.1-5.1(P)(1), Required Off-Street Loading Berths. 
(a)  Exceptions for Older Buildings Buildings that were built prior to 2017 and do not currently have any loading berths are exempt from off-street loading requirements. 
(b)  Maximum Number of Required Off-Street Loading Berths No property is required to provide more than three loading berths. 
TABLE 40.1-5.1(P)(1): REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING BERTHS 
USE OR ACTIVITY 	GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) (1) 	MINIMUM NUMBER OF LOADING BERTHS 
Offices and personal service establishments 	50,000 sf or more 	1 
All other commercial or industrial use types 	20,000 sf—70,000 sf 	1 
	Greater than 70,000 sf 	1 + 1 per every additional 50,000 sf of GPA 
NOTES: 
  
(1) Residential floor area within a mixed-use development is not included within the GFA. 
 
(c)  Design of Off-Street Loading Berths Minimum Dimensions Each loading space required by this subsection shall be at least 10 feet wide by 35 feet long (or deep), with at least 15 feet of overhead clearance. Each off-street loading space shall have adequate, unobstructed means for the ingress and egress of vehicles. 
(d)  Location Where possible, loading areas shall be located to the rear of the use they serve. In addition, the loading area shall be located adjacent to the buildings loading doors, in an area that promotes their practical use. 
(e)  Delineation of Loading Spaces All loading spaces shall be delineated by signage and striping and labeling of the pavement. 
(f)  Access to a Street Every loading area shall be provided with safe and convenient access to a street, but in no case shall the loading space extend into the required aisle of the parking lot. Off-street loading spaces shall be configured to avoid the need for vehicles to back up within the street right-of-way, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(g)  Paving The ground surface of loading areas shall be paved with a durable, dust free, and hard material, such as surface and seal treatment, bituminous hot mix, Portland cement, concrete, or some comparable material. Such paving shall be maintained for safe and convenient use at all times. 
(h)  Landscaping Loading areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 40.1-5.2(D), Vehicular Use Area Landscaping. 
(i)  Exterior Lighting Exterior lighting for loading areas shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-5.9, Exterior Lighting. 
 
Figure 40.1-5.1(P)(1): Loading Zone 
Loading zones shall be striped and located to the side of rear of buildings 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amds. 14—16), 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 2017-96 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 14), 10-24-2017)  
40.1-5.2 - Landscaping and screening 
(A)  Section Organization These landscaping standards are organized into eight main sub-sections: 
(1)  Section 40.1-5.2(B), Purpose and Intent, sets out the purpose and intent for the standards; 
(2)  Section 40.1-5.2(C), General Requirements for Landscaping, includes the applicability provisions, requirements for landscaping plans, and standards for new plantings; 
(3)  Section 40.1-5.2(D), Vehicular Use Area Landscaping, includes the standards for landscaping around the perimeter and within vehicular use areas; 
(4)  Section 40.1-5.2(E), Perimeter Buffers, includes the landscaping buffer standards applied to the edges of some base zoning districts; 
(5)  Section 40.1-5.2(F), Screening, includes the screening requirements for site features like refuse, loading, and service areas; 
(6)  Section 40.1-5.2(G), Site Landscaping, includes the standards for foundation plantings around some buildings; 
(7)  Section 40.1-5.2(H), Alternative Landscaping Plan, includes the procedures and standards for review of alternative landscaping plans; and 
(8)  Section 40.1-5.2(I), Other Landscaping Standards, includes the other standards for landscaping installation, timing, maintenance, monitoring for compliance, and incentives. 
(B)  Purpose and Intent It is the purpose of this section to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the planting, maintenance, and preservation of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city. The intent of this section is to promote this purpose by: 
(1)  Ensuring and encouraging the planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of trees, shrubs, and groundcover; 
(2)  Ensuring the protection of community residents and visitors from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the city from property damage, caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance or removal of trees, shrubs, or other plants; 
(3)  Mitigating against erosion and sedimentation; 
(4)  Reducing stormwater runoff and the costs associated therewith; 
(5)  Preserving and protecting the water table and surface waters; 
(6)  Reducing audible noise from automobiles and land uses; 
(7)  Restoring soils and land denuded as a result of construction or grading; 
(8)  Increasing the tree canopy to provide shade and moderate the effect of urban heat islands; 
(9)  Limiting glare created by exterior lighting; 
(10)  Reducing visual pollution from the urban environment and increasing privacy between incompatible uses; 
(11)  Protecting and enhancing property values and aesthetic qualities; 
(12)  Helping to differentiate streets and other areas of the public realm from private lands; 
(13)  Providing additional improvements to air quality through the carbon dioxide uptake process provided by trees and landscaping; and 
(14)  Providing visual screening, where appropriate. 
(C)  General Requirements for Landscaping   
(1)  Applicability of Landscaping Standards   
(a)  General Except where exempted by Section 40.1-5.2(C)(1)(c), Exemptions, these standards shall apply to all development in the city. 
(b)  Review for Compliance Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of a Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3 (C) & (D)), Preliminary Subdivision Plat (Chapter 33.1 of the City Code), Master Plan associated with an Amendment to the Zoning Map to establish a new AC district (Section 40.1-3.5(B)), or Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(F)), as appropriate. 
(c)  Exemptions Development in the D1 and D2 districts in addition to the general requirements applicable to all landscaping and screening set forth in this article, shall comply with the regulations of the sections found in Appendix sections 1 and 2 where they apply. The more restrictive regulations shall apply in cases of conflict. 
(d)  Landscape Plan   
(i)  To ensure compliance with the standards of this section, a landscape plan demonstrating how landscaping will be planted on a development site shall be included as a part of any application an Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3(C) & (D)), Preliminary Subdivision Plat (Chapter 33.1 of the City Code), Master Plan associated with an Amendment to the Zoning Map to establish a new AC district (Section 40.1-3.5(B)), or Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(F)), as appropriate. 
(ii)  New developments not required to provide landscaping (e.g., new single-family detached residential development adjacent to existing single-family detached residential development) are exempt from the requirement to provide a landscape plan. 
(2)  Planting Standards Plantings provided in accordance with this section shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Deciduous and evergreen canopy or shade trees shall be a minimum of two inches in caliper at the time of planting, as determined in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004, as amended, and shall be a minimum of eight feet in height above ground level at the time of planting. 
(b)  Understory, small maturing, or ornamental trees shall have a caliper of one-and-one-half inches at time of planting, as determined in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004, as amended, and shall be a minimum of six feet in height above ground level at the time of planting. 
(c)  Deciduous or evergreen shrubs shall be upright in nature and be a minimum of 24 inches in height at the time of planting. 
(d)  In cases where an aggregate caliper inch (ACI) requirement is utilized to derive a required amount of vegetation, and the ACI figure includes a fraction, an applicant may: 
(i)  Utilize a tree or trees with a caliper inch measurement exceeding the minimum size at time of planting standard of this subsection in order to meet the required ACI; or 
(ii)  Round the ACI figure upwards until the figure corresponds with a whole number of trees meeting the minimum size at time of planting standard. 
When trees exceeding the minimum size at time of planting standard are proposed, the minimum calipers of such trees shall be clearly noted on the Master Plan, Development Plan, or Preliminary Subdivision Plat, as appropriate. 
(e)  In cases where application of the requirements in this subsection result in a fraction in the number of shrubs to be provided, the minimum number of shrubs or trees to be provided shall be rounded upwards to the next highest whole number. 
(f)  All landscape plant materials shall conform to the latest version of the American Standard of Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1, as amended). Plant material shall be of standard quality or better, true to name and type of species or variety. 
(g)  The use of native, drought tolerant vegetation is encouraged to reduce dependency upon irrigation. 
(h)  To curtail the spread of disease or insect infestation in a plant species, new tree plantings shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  When fewer than 20 trees are required on a site, at least two different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions. 
(ii)  When more than 20 but fewer than 40 trees are required to be planted on site, at least three different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions. 
(iii)  When 40 or more trees are required on a site, at least four different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions. 
(iv)  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed so as to prevent the utilization of a larger number of different species than specified above. 
(i)  All planting materials shall correspond to the city's approved plant materials, unless alternative materials are proposed as part of an alternative landscape plan (See Section 40.1-5.2(H), Alternative Landscape Plan). 
(3)  Existing Vegetation Existing healthy, well-formed canopy and understory trees as well as healthy shrubs shall be credited toward the requirements of this section, provided the vegetation meets the minimum size standards of this Ordinance, and is protected before and during development of the site in accordance with Section 40.1-5.3(B), Tree Protection During Construction, and maintained thereafter in a healthy growing condition. 
(4)  Stabilization All required landscape planting areas shall be stabilized and maintained with lawn, ground covers, mulches, or other approved materials to prevent soil erosion and allow rainwater infiltration. 
(5)  Berms All berms shall comply with the following design standards: 
(a)  The slope of all berms shall not exceed a two-to-one (2:1) ratio (horizontal to vertical), shall have a top width at least one-half the berm height, and a maximum height of four feet above the toe of the berm. 
(b)  All berms, regardless of size, shall be stabilized with a ground cover or other suitable vegetation. 
(c)  Berms proposed to be placed along street right-of-way shall be designed and constructed to provide adequate sight distances at intersections and shall not impair safe operation of vehicles. 
(d)  Berms shall in no case damage the roots or trunks of existing healthy vegetation designated to be preserved. 
(6)  Easements Nothing except groundcover shall be planted or installed within any underground or overhead utility, drainage, gas easement, or within five feet of a fire protection system without the consent of the utility provider, easement holder, or the city, as appropriate. 
 
(D)  Vehicular Use Area Landscaping Except where exempted by Section 40.1-5.2(D)(1), Exemptions, all vehicular use areas shall include landscaping both within the interior of the vehicular use area and around its perimeter, as a means of mitigating the parking area's microclimate and visual impacts. 
(1)  Exemptions The following uses shall be exempt from the requirements to provide vehicular use area landscaping: 
(a)  Single-Family Detached Dwellings; 
(b)  Two- to four-family dwellings; and 
(c)  Off-street surface vehicular use areas with four or fewer spaces. 
(2)  Interior Landscaping Standards All vehicular use areas shall provide and maintain landscaped planting areas within the interior of the vehicular use area in accordance with the standards in this subsection. These standards shall not apply to parking structures or vehicle display areas. 
(a)  Configuration Interior planting areas shall be designed in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  Islands shall be located at the end of parking bays and have a minimum size of 153 square feet for single loaded parking bays, and a minimum size of 306 square feet for double loaded bays. 
(ii)  Off-street surface parking areas with 100 or more spaces shall be organized into a series of modules of 15,000 square feet or less per module, and be visually separated by eleven-foot-wide continuous landscaped islands containing pedestrian pathways located at least every six parking bays (see Figure 40.1-5.1(D)(2): Interior Planting Configuration). 
(iii)  No single row of parking spaces shall exceed 12 spaces without including an island. 
(iv)  Landscaped planting areas shall be distributed throughout the parking area for the purpose of heat abatement. 
(v)  Driveway and primary drive aisle medians shall have a minimum width of four feet for medians with shrubs and six feet for medians with shrubs and understory trees. 
(vi)  Each interior planting island shall contain at least one canopy or understory tree per every 153 square feet, or portion thereof, of the total landscape island area. 
(vii)  Shrubs shall be planted within landscaping islands at a minimum rate necessary to ensure that at least 25 percent of the total land area occupied by landscaping islands is planted with shrubs. 
(b)  Screened Backfill Soil utilized in vehicular use area islands, driveway medians, and other areas internal to a vehicular use area shall be screened prior to deposition in planting areas. 
(c)  Protection of Planting Areas All planting areas shall be protected from vehicle damage by the installation of curbing, wheel stops, or other comparable methods. This standard shall not prohibit the use of planting areas as on-site stormwater management devices. 
(3)  Perimeter Landscaping Standards Where a vehicular use area serving a use subject to these standards abuts a street right-of-way, vacant land, or any other development (except another vehicular use area), perimeter landscaping strips shall be provided and maintained between the vehicle use area and the abutting right-of-way or property line in accordance with the following standards. 
(a)  Location   
(i)  Perimeter landscaping strips shall be located on the same land where the vehicular use area is located, and shall be placed to assure visibility and safety of pedestrians on the public street, as well as those within the vehicular use area. 
(ii)  Perimeter landscaping strips may not be placed within future street rights-of-way as identified in the Master Transportation Plan. 
 
(b)  Minimum Width When a vehicular use area is located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way, the perimeter landscaping shall be located within a planting strip at least ten feet wide. In all other instances, the strip shall be the minimum width necessary to assure required landscaping is not damaged by vehicles or other on-site activity. In no instance shall the strip be less than three feet wide. 
(c)  Continuous, Opaque Visual Screen Required Perimeter landscaping for vehicular use areas shall form a continuous, opaque visual screen, excluding required sight clearances at driveways. The perimeter landscaping strip shall meet all city, state, and federal highway sight distance standards. 
(d)  Protection of Landscaping Strip The perimeter landscaping strip shall be protected from vehicular damage by the installation of curbing, wheel stops, extra width in the landscaping strip, or other method approved by the Planning Director. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the configuration of vehicular use area landscaping as a stormwater management device. 
(e)  Required Materials   
(i)  In cases where the visual screen is comprised of vegetation, evergreen shrubs shall be used to form the continuous, opaque visual screen in the perimeter landscaping strip. 
(ii)  A decorative fence or wall with a minimum transparency of 50 percent or more may be substituted for the evergreen shrubs (see Figure 40.1-5.1(D)(2): Alternative Perimeter Screening). In no instance shall chain link fencing qualify as decorative fencing for the purpose of providing vehicular use area landscaping. 
(iii)  In addition to the evergreen shrub requirements, each perimeter landscaping strip shall include at least eight aggregate caliper inches (ACI) of canopy trees per 100 linear feet of landscaping strip. Understory trees may be used beneath overhead utilities. 
(f)  Minimum Height   
(i)  Shrubs associated with the perimeter landscaping shall be maintained at a minimum height of at least three feet above the surface elevation of the adjacent vehicular use area pavement within four years of planting. 
(ii)  Fences or walls used in-lieu of shrubs shall maintain a height of 48 inches above the adjacent grade, except where there is a requirement for a lower height because the fence or wall is located within a sight triangle. 
(g)  Adjacent to Perimeter Buffers Perimeter landscape strips associated with a vehicle use area may be credited towards perimeter buffer standards (See Section 40.1-5.2(E), Perimeter Buffers), provided the minimum buffer standards of this section are met. 
(h)  Adjacent to Off-Street Surface Parking on Other Lots Where two or more off-street surface vehicular use areas are located adjacent to one another, but upon different lots, no perimeter landscaping strip shall be required between the two vehicular use areas. 
(i)  Stormwater Management Generally   
(i)  The location of Stormwater retention and detention ponds shall be in accordance with this section for all development, except single family lots. Slight swales used to channel water to another portion of the lot or bio-retention swales, filters and basins are not regulated by this section. 
(ii)  Only Stormwater retention and detention facilities below ground shall be located in between the building and any street. 
(iii)  Stormwater retention ponds not designed and landscaped as a site amenity shall be fully screened from off-site views. 
(iv)  Landscape plantings may be used to increase infiltration and decrease runoff. Alternative designs, such as landscaping islands configured with a lower grade than adjacent parking, or rain gardens are encouraged. 
(4)  Incentives The total aggregate caliper inch requirements for canopy and understory trees in this subsection may be reduced by five percent when: 
(a)  At least 65 percent of the provided parking is located to the side or rear of the building; 
(b)  At least 30 percent of the total required parking is subject to a shared parking agreement (See Section 40.1-5.1(J)(2), Shared Parking; and 
(c)  When pervious parking surfacing is used for 20 percent or more of the total vehicular use area. 
Nothing shall prohibit the combination of these incentives or the resulting cumulative reduction in the amount of required tree ACI. 
(E)  Perimeter Buffers   
(1)  Purpose and Intent Perimeter landscape buffers are intended to mitigate potential negative effects of different contiguous uses. 
 
(2)  Applicability Except for single-family detached residential uses and uses in the D1 and D2 districts, all development shall provide a perimeter landscape buffer to separate it from uses in a different use classification in accordance with Table 40.1-5.2(E)(3), Buffer Types, and Table 40.1-5.2(E)(4), Buffer Type Application. 
(3)  Types of Buffers Table 40.1-5.2(E)(3), Buffer Types, describes four different buffering types in terms of their function, opacity, width, and planting requirements. Where a particular buffer type is required in Table 40.1-5.2(E)(4), Buffer Type Application, the requirement may be met with the combination of minimum buffer width and minimum screening requirements specified under either Option 1 or Option 2. Where an option utilizing a fence or wall is selected, the fence or wall shall comply with the standards of Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. 
TABLE 40.1-5.2(E)(3): BUFFER TYPES 
BUFFER TYPE AND CONFIGURATION 
  
ACI = AGGREGATE CALIPER INCHES 	MINIMUM PERIMETER BUFFER [1] [2] [3] 
	OPTION 1: MINIMUM WIDTH 20 FEET 	OPTION 2: MINIMUM WIDTH 10 FEET [4] 
TYPE A—BASIC 
This perimeter buffer functions as basic edge demarcating individual properties with a slight visual obstruction from the ground to a height of ten feet. 
 
2 ACI of canopy trees + 10 ACI of understory trees + 15 shrubs per 100 linear feet 
TYPE B—AESTHETIC 
This perimeter buffer functions as an intermittent visual obstruction from the ground to a height of at least 20 feet, and creates the impression of spatial separation without eliminating visual contact between uses. 
 
8 ACI of canopy trees + 10 ACI of understory trees + 15 shrubs per 100 linear feet 	2 ACI of canopy trees +14 ACI understory trees + 35 shrubs per 100 linear feet 
TYPE C—SEMI-OPAQUE 
This perimeter buffer functions as a semi-opaque screen from the ground to at least a height of six feet. 
 
12 ACI of canopy trees + 14 ACI of understory trees + 25 shrubs per 100 linear feet 	One 4-foot-high berm or one 4-foot-high solid fence + 2 ACI of canopy trees + 16 ACI understory trees per 100 linear feet 
TYPE D—OPAQUE 
This perimeter buffer functions as an opaque screen from the ground to a height of at least six feet. This type of buffer prevents visual contact between uses and creates a strong impression of total separation. 
 
18 ACI of canopy trees + 20 ACI of understory trees + 55 shrubs per 100 linear feet 	One 6-foot-high solid fence + 12 ACI of canopy trees per 100 linear feet 
NOTES: 
[1] Any required perimeter buffer width can be reduced to five feet with the provision of a solid masonry wall at least five feet in height, along with ten large shrubs per every 100 linear feet. 
[2] Perimeter buffer widths (but not vegetation amounts) may be reduced in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(H), Administrative Adjustment. 
[3] In cases where an adjacent use is designed for solar access, understory trees can be substituted for canopy trees. 
[4] Fences and walls shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. 
 
(4)  Buffer Type Application Table 40.1-5.2(E)(4), Buffer Type Application, specifies the type of perimeter landscape buffer that new development shall provide between it and adjacent property, based on the zoning district of the development site and that of the adjacent property. The buffer type is indicated by a letter corresponding to one of the four buffer types depicted in Table 40.1-5.2(E)(3), Buffer Types. 
TABLE 40.1-5.2(E)(4): BUFFER TYPE APPLICATION [1]
A = Type A Buffer B = Type B Buffer C = Type C Buffer D = Type D Buffer
N/A = Not Applicable (No Buffer Required) 
PROPOSED USE TYPE [2] [3] 	EXISTING USE TYPE ON ABUTTING LAND 
	SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 	ALL OTHER RESIDENTIAL 	MIXED-USE & PUBLIC/ INSTITUTIONAL 	COMMERCIAL 	INDUSTRIAL 
Single-Family Residential 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
All other Residential 	A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
Mixed-Use and Public/Institutional 	B 	A 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
Commercial 	C 	B 	A 	N/A 	N/A 
Industrial 	D 	D 	D 	C 	N/A 
NOTES: 
[1] Letters in cells correspond to the buffer types depicted in Table 40.1-5.2(E)(3), Buffer Types. 
[2] Development in AC districts is subject to perimeter buffer requirements in the AC district standards. In cases where development is proposed next to an existing PD district having no perimeter buffer, the proposed development shall provide a perimeter buffer that is consistent with the type of buffer required if the adjacent use was in a differing base district appropriate for the type of use. 
[3] Multi-family, townhouse, multi-building campus, or shopping center developments shall provide buffers around the perimeter of the development instead of around individual buildings. 
 
(5)  Location of Buffers   
(a)  Perimeter buffers required by this section shall be located only along the outer perimeter of the parcel where it abuts another parcel, and shall extend to the parcel boundary line or right-of-way line. 
(b)  Perimeter buffers are not required along lot lines abutting streets, except as needed to screen outdoor industrial operations or storage on lots in an industrial district. Industrial uses with outdoor operations or storage components shall include perimeter buffers as necessary to screen outdoor use areas from off-site views. 
(c)  A perimeter buffer may be located along shared access easements between parcels in nonresidential developments. 
(6)  Responsibility for Buffer Installation Where a developing parcel is adjacent to an existing use and a perimeter buffer is required in accordance with this section, the developing parcel shall provide the full perimeter buffer required adjacent to the existing use in accordance with Table 40.1-5.2(E)(3) Buffer Types, and Table 40.1-5.2(E)(4), Buffer Type Application, unless a portion or all of a perimeter buffer that complies with the standards of this section already exists between the lots. Where all or part of a perimeter buffer exists, but the buffer does not fully comply with the standards of this section, the developing parcel shall be responsible for providing all the additional planting material necessary to meet the standards of this section. 
(7)  Development within Required Buffers   
(a)  The required buffer shall not contain any development, impervious surfaces, or site features (except fences or walls) that do not function to meet the standards of this section or that require removal of existing vegetation, unless otherwise permitted in this Ordinance. 
(b)  Sidewalks, trails, and other elements associated with passive recreation may be placed in perimeter buffers if all required landscaping is provided and damage to existing vegetation is minimized to the maximum extent practicable. 
(c)  Overhead and underground utilities required or allowed by the city are permitted to cross a required buffer in a perpendicular fashion, but shall minimize the impact to vegetation to the maximum extent practicable. Where required landscaping material is damaged or removed due to utility activity within a required buffer, the landowner shall be responsible for replanting all damaged or removed vegetation necessary to ensure the buffer meets the standards in this Ordinance. 
(8)  Sight Triangles No fencing, berms, walls, or other landscaping features may exceed 36 inches above grade within required sight triangles for streets, alleys, or driveways(See Section 4.1-8.2(C)(4). 
(9)  Credit for Existing Vegetation Existing vegetation meeting the size standards of Section 40.1-5.2(C)(2), Planting Standards, located within the perimeter buffer area may be preserved and credited toward the perimeter buffer standards. 
(F)  Screening   
 
(1)  General Requirements In addition to the other forms of required landscaping, screening shall be required to conceal specific areas of high visual or auditory impact or hazardous areas from off-site views. Such areas shall be screened at all times, unless otherwise specified, regardless of adjacent uses, districts, or other proximate landscaping material. 
(2)  Items to be Screened The following areas shall be screened in accordance with this section: 
(a)  Large waste receptacles (e.g., dumpsters and cardboard recycling containers) and refuse collection areas; 
(b)  Loading and service areas; 
(c)  Outdoor storage areas (including, but not limited to: inoperable vehicles, appliances, tires, manufactured homes, building materials, equipment, raw materials, and above-ground storage tanks) located within 600 feet of a public right-of-way; 
(d)  Ground-level mechanical equipment and utility meters; and 
(e)  New construction, demolition, or other site conditions that could be unsafe for pedestrian or vehicles. 
(3)  Screening Methods The following items are permitted for use as screening materials, and more than one method may be used on a lot or site. 
(a)  Vegetative materials that provide a fully opaque screen to the minimum height necessary to fully screen the facility from off-site views; or 
(b)  An opaque fence or wall consistent with the standards in Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls. 
Alternative screening materials that are not listed or alternative configurations may be proposed as part of an alternative landscaping plan (see Section 40.1-5.2(H)), if the alternative materials or configuration provide an equivalent or superior screening function. 
(4)  Configuration of Vegetative Materials In cases where vegetative materials are used for screening in accordance with this subsection, the vegetative materials shall: 
(a)  Be planted around the perimeter of the site feature to be screened in a manner that screens the site feature from all off-site views; 
(b)  Be configured in two staggered rows or other arrangement that provides maximum screening; 
(c)  Be upright, large evergreen shrubs and capable of reaching at least six feet in height within three years of planting; and 
(d)  Be spaced no farther than three feet on-center. 
(5)  Large Waste Receptacles and Refuse Collection Areas Except for facilities serving individual Single-Family Detached or Two-to-Four Family Dwellings, or un-manned uses that do not generate any waste, all large waste receptacle and refuse collection areas shall be subject to the following standards. 
(a)  Depicted on Master Plans or Development Plans The location and configuration of screening for large waste receptacles and refuse collection areas shall be depicted on all AC master plans and development plans. 
(b)  Screening Configuration In cases where access to large waste receptacles and refuse collection areas faces a public right-of-way, the accessway shall be screened with an opaque gate. Chain link shall not be used for such gates. 
(c)  Setbacks Large waste receptacles and refuse collection areas and the fences or walls screening them shall maintain setbacks applicable for accessory buildings in the district where located, and shall not be located within front or corner side yards. 
(d)  Surfacing Requirements Areas intended for large waste receptacles and refuse collection shall be surfaced with concrete that meets or exceeds minimum city standards. 
(e)  Drainage Eating establishments and other uses that produce significant amounts of liquid waste shall configure areas intended for large waste receptacles and refuse collection to drain to the sanitary sewer system through grease traps or similar devices as required by the Planning Director. 
(G)  Site Landscaping   
(1)  Purpose and Intent Site landscaping material is intended to soften the visual impact of building foundations and provide for the even dispersal of trees across a development site. 
(2)  Distinguished from Other Required Landscaping Site landscaping, for the purpose of this section, is landscaping that is not: 
(a)  Required vehicular use area landscaping; 
(b)  Located within a required perimeter buffer strip; or 
(c)  Required screening. 
(3)  Site Landscaping Standards Except for Single-Family Detached and Two-to Four-Family Dwellings, site landscaping shall be required for all development, and shall be supplied in the amounts identified in Table 40.1-5.2(G)(3), Required Site Landscaping Plantings. Site landscaping shall meet the minimum size standards for new planting specified in Section 40.1-5.2(C)(2), Planting Standards. 
TABLE 40.1-5.2(G)(3): REQUIRED SITE LANDSCAPING PLANTINGS 
USE TYPE [1] 	REQUIRED PLANTINGS PER SITE [2] [3] 
Multi-family dwellings 	16 caliper inches of canopy trees (including at least 5 evergreen trees) per acre + at least 2 shrubs per each 10 feet of building perimeter 
Public and Institutional uses 	14 caliper inches of canopy trees (including at least 2 evergreen trees) per acre + at least 1 shrub per each 10 feet of building perimeter 
Commercial and mixed-uses 	10 caliper inches of canopy trees (including at least 1 evergreen tree) per acre, + at least 2 shrubs per each 10 feet of outer building perimeter 
Industrial uses 	4 caliper inches of canopy trees (including at least 1 evergreen) per acre + at least 1 shrub per every ten feet of building wall facing a public right-of-way 
NOTES: 
[1] See Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table. 
[2] At least one-half of the required shrubs shall be of an evergreen variety. 
[3] Each evergreen tree meeting the minimum size standards of this section shall count as two caliper inches towards the total number of required canopy tree caliper inches. 
 
(4)  Shrub Placement Required shrubs shall be placed around the building perimeter, a minimum of three feet from the building, with emphasis placed on building foundations visible from the public right-of-way. Required shrubs may be planted up to 15 feet from the building provided there is a sidewalk located between the planting area and the building wall. 
(5)  Tree Placement Trees serving as site landscaping shall be dispersed across a site in accordance with good planting practice and the following priority listing: 
(a)  In yards between a building façade and a street right-of-way where no vehicular use area landscaping is required; 
(b)  Between a building and an adjacent lot with an existing use that provides more than 50 percent of the vegetative material associated with a required perimeter buffer; 
(c)  Between a building façade and an abutting lot with the same or a more intense zoning district classification (where no perimeter buffering is required); 
(d)  Within open-space set-aside areas with no existing or reforested trees; 
(e)  Adjacent to on-site areas of pedestrian or vehicular circulation where no other vegetative material is required (e.g., drive-throughs or stacking lanes); or 
(f)  Other areas near accessory structures or accessory uses. 
 
(H)  Alternative Landscape Plan   
(1)  Purpose In cases where development conditions require a deviation from the landscaping standards in this section, or the tree protection standards in Section 40.1-5.3, Tree Protection, an alternative landscaping plan shall be required. An alternative landscaping plan shall indicate how compliance with the standards in this Ordinance is impossible or impractical, and shall illustrate how compliance can be achieved to the maximum extent practicable. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a development configuration that meets or exceeds the landscaping and tree protection standards in this Ordinance. 
(2)  Justification Alternative plans, materials, or methods may be justified due to: 
(a)  Natural conditions, such as streams, natural rock formations, or topography; 
(b)  The likelihood that landscaping material would be ineffective at maturity due to topography, placement, or other existing site conditions; 
(c)  Lot size or configuration; 
(d)  The presence of utility or other easements; 
(e)  The potential for interference with public safety; and 
(f)  Other situations where strict adherence to the landscaping or tree protection standards in this Ordinance are determined to be impractical by the Director of Planning and Development Services. 
(3)  Allowable Deviations With input from other city departments, the Planning Director shall approve an alternative landscape plan if it meets the purpose and intent of the landscaping standards in Section 40.1-5.2, Landscaping and Screening, or Section 40.1-5.3, Tree Protection, as appropriate. Allowable deviations from the standards of this section include, but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Reduced Planting Rates due to Public Facilities An adjustment to planting locations or reduction of up to 20 percent in the type or total number of required caliper inches may be allowed when underground connections to public facilities or public utilities, or public easements or right-of-way, are located upon or in close proximity to the parcel. 
(b)  Reduction in Standards due to Nature of Parcel A reduction in the count, spacing, or species diversity standards by up to 20 percent may be allowed where the reduction is desirable in terms of protection of existing natural resources, better consistency with the goals of the comprehensive plan, or a site design that exceeds the quality of what would otherwise result under a strict application of the standards in this Ordinance, in the opinion of the Planning Director. 
(c)  Redevelopment of Nonconforming Sites The installation of required landscaping during redevelopment of existing nonconforming sites shall occur in accordance with Section 40.1-6.6, Nonconforming Site Aspects. 
(I)  Other Landscape Standards   
(1)  Time for Installation of Required Landscaping   
(a)  Time Limit All required landscaping (including mulching and seeding) shall be installed in accordance with the required planting standards set forth in this section prior to issuance of a permanent or non-temporary certificate of occupancy unless the Planning Director grants an extension to this time limit in accordance with Section 40.1-5.2(I)(1)(b), Extensions. 
(b)  Extensions   
(i)  The Planning Director may, for good cause shown, grant extensions to the above time limit, allowing a developer/owner to delay the installation of required landscaping. Circumstances that may warrant an extension include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Unusual environmental conditions, such as drought, ice, hurricanes, or over-saturated soil (deep mud); 
b.  It is not yet the appropriate planting season for the approved plant species; or 
c.  Credible evidence that the approved plant species or required plant sizes are not commercially available and cannot be substituted within a reasonable time despite an applicant's diligent effort to secure the required materials. 
(ii)  Upon receipt of a performance guarantee, the city may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a maximum period of up to 180 days. 
(2)  Maintenance of Landscaping Materials The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas not in the public right-of-way. Such areas shall be maintained in accordance with the approved landscape plan or alternative landscape plan and shall present a healthy and orderly appearance free from refuse and debris. All plant life shown on an approved landscape plan or alternative landscape plan shall be replaced if it dies, is seriously damaged, or removed. 
(a)  Damage Due to Natural Occurrence In the event that any vegetation or physical element functioning to meet the standards of this section is severely damaged due to an unusual weather occurrence or natural catastrophe, or other natural occurrence such as damage by wild or domestic animals, the owner or developer may be required to replant if the landscaping standards are not being met. The owner shall have one growing season to replace or replant. The Planning Director shall consider the type and location of the landscape buffer or required vegetation area as well as the propensity for natural re-vegetation in making a determination on the extent of replanting requirements. 
(b)  Protection during Operations The owner or developer shall take actions to protect trees and landscaping from unnecessary damage during all facility and site maintenance operations. Plants shall be maintained in a way that does not obstruct sight distances at roadway and drive intersections, obstruct traffic signs or devices, or interfere with the use of sidewalks or pedestrian trails. 
(c)  Maintain Shape All required trees (whether canopy, understory, or otherwise) shall be maintained in their characteristic natural shape, and shall not be severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as shrubs. Trees (including but not limited to Crape Myrtles) that have been severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as shrubs no longer serve the intended buffering or screening function and shall be considered as damaged vegetation in need of replacement in accordance with Section 40.1-5.2(I)(2)(a), Damage Due to Natural Occurrence, and shall be replaced within one growing season. 
(d)  Natural Death The natural death of existing vegetation within any required landscape area does not necessarily constitute a violation and does not require re-vegetation to replace the plant material unless the required landscape area no longer complies with the required standards of this section. In no instance shall this provision be construed to prevent re-planting if, in the opinion of the Planning Director, the required performance standard of the landscaping is not being met. 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amds. 14—16), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-5.3 - Tree Protection 
(A)  Protection of Specimen Trees   
(1)  Applicability   
(a)  General All development in the city, except that exempted in accordance with Section 40.1-5.3(A)(1)(b), Exemptions, shall be required to protect specimen trees in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Exemptions The following development shall be exempt from these standards: 
(i)  Land within the Downtown D1 and D2 districts; and 
(ii)  Existing Single-Family Detached Dwellings on lots of record established prior to May 1, 2010. 
(2)  Depiction on Landscaping or Development Plan The location, species, and size of all specimen trees to be retained in accordance with this section shall be depicted on the development plan or landscaping plan associated with the development. 
(3)  General Requirement No specimen tree may be removed, except in accordance with Section 40.1-5.3(A)(4), Removal of a Specimen Tree. In addition, all specimen trees shall have the following protections, whether located on public or private land: 
(a)  Cutting, Removal, or Harm Prohibited Specimen trees shall not be cut, removed, pushed over, killed, or otherwise harmed. 
(b)  Paving or Soil Compaction Prohibited The area within the dripline of any specimen tree shall not be subject to paving or soil compaction. 
(4)  Removal of a Specimen Tree Specimen trees may be removed if the landowner demonstrates to the Planning Director one of the following conditions: 
(a)  Removal of a Healthy Specimen Tree A specimen tree is in healthy condition, and all of the following standards are met: 
(i)  The landowner is otherwise in compliance with this section; 
(ii)  The specimen tree prevents development of a lot platted prior to May 1, 2010 in a way that limits building area to less than otherwise allowed, or hinders compliance with the standards in Article 40.1-3: Zoning Districts, Article 40.1-4: Use Standards, or Article 40.1-5: Development Standards. 
(iii)  Mitigation is provided in accordance with Section 40.1-5.3(A)(5), Replacement/Mitigation of Specimen Trees. 
(b)  Removal of a Severely Diseased, High Risk, Damaged, or Dying Specimen Tree A specimen tree is certified by an arborist or other qualified professional as severely diseased, high risk, damaged by an act of God, or dying. Removal of a severely diseased, high risk, or dying specimen tree shall not require mitigation in accordance with Section 40.1-5.3(A)(5), Replacement/Mitigation of Specimen Trees. 
(5)  Replacement/Mitigation of Specimen Trees Those causing the destruction or removal of a healthy specimen tree, unless exempted in accordance with Section 40.1-5.3(A)(4), Removal of a Specimen Tree, shall be responsible for the following mitigation: 
(a)  Replacement Trees Required Each healthy specimen tree removed or destroyed shall be replaced with three replacement trees, measuring at least six inches in diameter by American Nurseryman Standard. The replacement trees shall be replanted within 12 months of the removal or destruction of the specimen tree. 
(b)  Location of Replacement Trees Replacement trees shall be either planted on the parcel of land from which the specimen tree was removed if sufficient space is available, or placed on nearby lands in accordance with Section 40.1-5.2(H), Alternative Landscape Plan. 
(c)  Establishment Period Replacement trees shall be maintained through an establishment period of at least three years. The applicant shall guarantee the survival and health of all replacement trees during the establishment period and guarantee any associated replacement costs. If the replacement trees do not survive the establishment period, the applicant shall purchase and install new replacement trees. 
(B)  Tree Protection During Construction   
(1)  Owner's Responsibility During development, the owner or developer shall be responsible for the erection of any and all barriers necessary to protect any existing or installed vegetation from damage both during and after construction. 
(2)  Tree Protection Fencing   
(a)  Where Required Specimen trees and other existing trees being used for credit towards landscaping requirements in accordance with Section 40.1-5.4(A)(1)(b), Credit Applied Towards Required Plantings, shall be fenced with a sturdy and visible fence before grading or other development activity begins. Fencing shall be erected no closer than one linear foot to the tree's dripline. The Planning Director shall consider the existing site conditions in determining the exact location of tree protection fencing. Areas located inside of tree protection fencing are considered as "tree save areas". 
(b)  Inspection All tree protection measures shall be inspected and approved by the city prior to start of any land disturbing activities. Failure to have tree protection measures prior to the commencement of construction is a violation of this Ordinance. 
(c)  When Required No construction, grading, equipment or material storage, or any other activity shall be allowed within the fenced area. Fencing shall be maintained until after the final site inspection. 
(3)  Encroachments into Tree Save Areas Encroachments into specimen tree save areas shall occur only when no other alternative exists. If such an encroachment is anticipated, the following preventive measures shall be employed: 
(a)  Soil Compaction Where compaction might occur due to construction traffic or materials delivery through a tree save area, the area must first be mulched with a minimum four inch layer of wood chips. Equipment or materials storage shall not be allowed within a tree save area. 
(b)  Fill No fill shall be placed within a specimen tree save area without adequate venting to allow air and water to reach the roots. 
(c)  Chemical Contamination Trees located within a specimen tree save area shall be protected from chemical contamination from liquids or other materials, including but not limited to paint, chemical solvents, gasoline, oil, diesel fuel, hydraulic fluid, concrete spoils, or rinse water from vehicle cleaning, including rinsing of concrete truck tanks and chutes. 
(d)  Paving Limitations Except for driveway access points, sidewalks, curb, and gutter, no paving shall occur within a tree save area unless authorized through an alternative landscaping plan (See Section 40.1-5.2(H), Alternative Landscaping Plan). 
(C)  Tree Preservation Incentives   
(1)  Tree Preservation Credits In order to encourage the preservation of as many trees as practical on a development site, credit towards the minimum landscaping requirements shall be applied to all existing trees retained on a site that are not specimen trees that comply with the credit standards of this subsection. Credits are offered only for trees that are not required to be retained by other sections of this Ordinance. Credits shall be granted in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)  Credit Amount A credit of one-and-one-quarter (1.25) multiplied by the aggregate caliper of trees that are not specimen trees shall be credited and applied towards the landscaping standards in Section 40.1-5.2, Landscaping and Screening, when the trees that are saved complies with the following minimum size standards: 
(i)  Canopy Trees Canopy trees, whether deciduous or evergreen, of seven inches in caliper or greater, measured six inches above ground level. 
(ii)  Understory/Ornamental Trees Understory or ornamental trees, whether deciduous or evergreen, of four inches in caliper or greater, measured four inches above ground level. 
(b)  Credit Applied Towards Required Plantings The credit shall be applied to the aggregate tree caliper inch standards for landscaping. In no case shall credits substitute for more than 75 percent of the required landscaping material. 
(2)  Reduction in the Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces Up to a five percent reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required on a development site shall be allowed if the reduction in the amount of required pavement will preserve the root zones of existing healthy specimen trees. The amount of reduction can be determined only after taking into consideration any unique site conditions and the impact of the reduction on parking needs for the use, and must be agreed upon by both the applicant and the Planning Director. Alternative paving materials (See Section 40.1-5.1(D)(4), Alternative Materials) may be required by the Planning Director in cases where required parking areas encroach upon root zones. 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 17), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-5.4 - Open Space Standards and Set-Asides 
(A)  Purpose and Intent Open space set-asides are for the use and enjoyment of a development's residents, employees, and users. Open space set-asides serves numerous purposes, including preservation of natural areas, ensuring resident access to open areas and recreation, reducing the heat island effect, enhancing stormwater quality, and providing other public health benefits. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  General Unless exempted, the provisions of this section shall be applied to development of all land in the city at the time of Preliminary Subdivision Plat (Chapter 33.1 of the City Code),Master Plan associated with an Amendment to the Zoning Map to establish an AC district (Section 40.1-5.1(B)), Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3(C) & (D)), or a Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(F)), whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Exemptions Development on lots within the D1 and D2 districts, and development on a platted lot in existence on May 1, 2010 shall be exempt from the open space set-aside standards in this section. 
(C)  Open Space Set-Aside Standards   
(1)  Amounts of Open Space Set Aside Required All development not exempted from the requirements of this section shall set-aside the minimum amounts of open space set-aside identified in Table 40.1-5.4(C)(1), Required Open Space Set-Aside, below: 
TABLE 40.1-5.4(C)(1): REQUIRED OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE 
USE CLASSIFICATION [1] 	MINIMUM OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE AREA
(PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL DEVELOPMENT SITE AREA) 
Residential development of 20 or more dwelling units 	15% 
Mixed-use development with less than 20 dwelling units 	10% 
Mixed-use development with 21 or more dwelling units 	15% 
NOTES: 
[1] See Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table 
 
(2)  Types of Open Space Set-Aside Features Each of the features and areas identified in Table 40.1-5.4(C)(2), Common Open Space Set-Aside Features, meeting the minimum standards in the table shall be credited towards the open space set-aside requirements of this section. 
TABLE 40.1-5.4(C)(2): COMMON OPEN SPACE SET ASIDE FEATURES 
AREA COUNTED AS COMMON OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE 	DESCRIPTION 	MINIMUM STANDARDS 
NATURAL FEATURES 
 
Includes any of the following: 
1. Water features, including wetlands, natural ponds, streams, rivers, drainage channels, and lakes, and other riparian areas; 
2. Flood hazard areas; 
3. Slopes of 15% or more; and 
4. Wildlife habitat areas 	Where natural features exist, the developer or owner shall give priority to their preservation as common open space. In reviewing the proposed location of common open space set-asides, the Planning Director shall use all applicable plans, maps, and reports to determine whether significant resources exist on a proposed site that should be protected. Maintenance is limited to a minimum removal and avoidance of hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy conditions. 
ACTIVE RECREATIONAL AREAS 
 
Land occupied by active recreational uses such as pools, playgrounds, tennis courts, jogging trails, ball fields, and clubhouses used primarily for recreational purposes. 	Active recreation areas may occupy up to 100 percent of the common open space set-aside (if no natural features exist on the site), but in no case shall active recreation constitute less than 40% of the total open space set-aside area within a residential or mixed-use development. 
Land shall be compact and contiguous unless the land is used to link or continue an existing or planned open space resource. The site shall be bounded by at least one street, if reasonably practical. 
FORMAL PLANTINGS AND GARDENS 
 
Formally planned and regularly maintained open areas that provide passive recreation opportunities including arranged plantings, gardens, gazebos or similar structures. 	Formal plantings and gardens shall have at least one direct access road, and be oriented to surrounding development. 
Roof gardens are also acceptable. 
SQUARES, FORECOURTS, PLAZAS, AND PARKS 
 
Squares, forecourts, plazas, and parks provide active and passive recreational opportunities and help create special places. 	Where provided, such features shall have a Minimum size of 200 square feet, and a maximum size of one acre. 
They shall have at least one direct access road. 
Surrounding buildings shall be oriented toward the square, forecourt, or park when possible and a connection shall be made to surrounding development. 
REQUIRED LANDSCAPE AREAS 
 
Required landscape areas serve as a buffer to surrounding areas. Except for landscaped areas within parking lots and areas occupied by street trees, all areas occupied by required landscaping may count as common open space. 	Where landscaping and tree protection areas exist, they shall be counted toward open space set-asides. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DEVICES 
 
Up to 75 percent of the land area occupied by stormwater management devices, including retention ponds, and other bio-retention devices may be counted towards the common open space set-aside requirement when such features are treated as a site amenity. 	To qualify, stormwater management devices shall support passive recreation uses by providing access, gentle slopes less than 3:1, and pedestrian elements such as paths and benches. 
PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENTS 
 
Public access easements, which often combine utility easements, with paths or trails, are available for passive recreational activities such as walking, running and biking. 	They shall include at least one improved access from a public sidewalk, street, trail, or easement that includes signage designating the access point. 
 
(3)  Not Counted as Open Space Set-Asides   
(a)  Not Counted as Open Space The following areas shall not be counted as open space set-aside: 
(i)  Private yards not subject to an open space or conservation easement; 
(ii)  Public street rights-of-way or private street easements, including sidewalks located within those rights-of-way or easements; 
(iii)  Open parking areas and driveways for dwellings; 
(iv)  Land covered by structures not designated for active recreational uses; and 
(v)  Designated outdoor storage areas. 
(4)  Design Standards for Open Space Set-Asides Land used as an open space set-aside shall meet the following design standards: 
 
(a)  Location Open space shall be located so as to be readily accessible and useable by residents and users of the development. Where possible, a portion of the open space set-aside should provide focal points for the development. 
(b)  Access For commercial and mixed uses, a reasonable portion of the open space set-aside shall abut at least one direct street access, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(c)  Configuration   
(i)  Lands set aside as open space shall be compact and contiguous unless the land is used as a continuation of an existing trail, or specific natural or topographic features require a different configuration. 
(ii)  Where open areas, trails, parks, or other open space resources are planned or exist adjacent to development, the open space set-aside shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be located to adjoin, extend, and enlarge the trail, park, or other open area land. 
(d)  Orientation of Adjacent Buildings Buildings adjacent to required open space set-asides shall have at least one entrance facing the open space set-aside. 
(e)  Provision in Multi-Phase Developments   
(i)  Multi-phase development shall preserve open space set-asides in phases, so that the first phase of development does not contain 100 percent of the open space allotted for the entire development, but does contain, at a minimum, its pro rata share of the total amount of required open space set aside. 
(ii)  Open space set-asides shall be apportioned among phases such that the total amount of open space set aside in a phase and any previously approved phases meets the open space set-aside standard as applied to the total area of the phase and previously approved phases. 
(f)  Prioritization of Open Space Set-Aside To the maximum extent possible, the open space set-aside should be located and organized to include, protect, or enhance as many of the following open areas and features as possible, in the following order: 
(i)  Natural features; 
(ii)  Lands that may extend or enhance existing park or open space features; 
(iii)  Water features such as drainages, canals, ditches, lakes, natural ponds, and retention and detention ponds; 
(iv)  Landscaped buffers or visual transitions between different types or intensities of uses; 
(v)  Natural or geologic hazard areas or soil conditions, such as unstable or potentially unstable slopes, faulting, landslides, rockfalls, expansive soils, or floodplains; 
(vi)  Areas that accommodate multiple compatible open space uses rather than a single use. 
(5)  Use of Open Space Set-Asides Open space set-asides required by this section shall not be disturbed, developed, or improved with any structures, except for those identified in Table 40.1-5.4(C)(2), Common Open Space Set-Aside Features, or other comparable uses. 
(6)  Ownership of Open Space Set-Asides   
(a)  Method of Ownership   
(i)  Open space set-aside areas shall be maintained as permanent open space through one of the following options: 
a.  A property or home owner's association which holds the land in deed-restricted private ownership and in common, and is responsible for managing and maintaining the land in common; or 
b.  Dedication of the land to a third party beneficiary like a non-profit environmental or civic organization. 
(ii)  All methods utilizing private ownership shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney, who shall review the documents to ensure perpetual maintenance, preservation, and restricted use, where appropriate. 
(iii)  If an open space set-aside is deeded to a property or home owners' association, it shall be established in accordance with the following: 
a.  The landowner shall submit documents for the creation of the home or property owners association to the city for review and approval, including the association's bylaws, all documents governing ownership, maintenance, and use restrictions for the open space set-aside, and a legal description of open space set-aside areas. 
b.  The landowner shall agree that the association shall be established by the landowner or applicant and shall be operating (with financial subsidization by the owner or applicant, if necessary) before approval of the first subdivision or building permit for the development, whichever occurs first. 
c.  Membership in the association shall be automatic (mandatory) for all purchasers of land, dwelling units, or structures in the development, and their successors in title. 
(iv)  If the open space set-aside is to be held by a third party beneficiary like a non-profit civic organization, then it shall include deed restrictions that: 
a.  Govern the use of the open space set-asides, consistent with the standards in this section; 
b.  Run with the land in perpetuity; and 
c.  Include any other provisions the City Attorney deems necessary and appropriate to fulfill the requirements of this section.  
40.1-5.5 - Multi-Family Development Standards 
(A)  Purpose and Intent These multi-family development standards are intended to: 
(1)  Promote greater compatibility between two- to four-family residential, townhouse, and multi-family development and other allowable uses in the city; and 
(2)  Establish a minimum level of quality for multi-family development. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  General Except where exempted in accordance with Section 40.1-5.5(B)(2), Exemptions, these standards apply to all new two- to four-family residential, townhouse, and multi-family development in the city. 
(2)  Exemptions Development within the Downtown (D1 and (D2) districts shall comply with the regulations of this article and shall also comply with the sections found in Appendix sections A and B where they apply. The more restrictive regulations shall apply in cases of conflict. 
(3)  Redevelopment Redevelopment of an existing two- to four-family residential, townhouse, or multi-family development that exceeds 33 percent of the building's reproducible value (exclusive of foundations) shall require the newly redeveloped portions to comply with the standards of this section, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(4)  Review for Compliance Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of a Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3(C) & (D)), Preliminary Subdivision Plat (Chapter 33.1 of the City Code), Master Plan associated with an Amendment to the Zoning Map to establish a new AC district (Section 40.1-3.5(B)), or Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(F)), as appropriate. 
(C)  Plan for Development Required Development subject to the standards of this section shall provide a development plan, master plan, or other plan for development illustrating how the proposed development complies with these standards. 
(D)  Multi-Family Development Standards New two- to four-family residential, townhouse, and multi-family development shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Street Network   
(a)  On sites including new streets, an interconnected network of streets shall be provided, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(b)  The internal network of streets shall connect to adjacent existing streets to better integrate the development with its context. 
(c)  Street design shall conform to the city street design standards, but narrower-width streets are encouraged in the URH and NMU districts to promote pedestrian scale. 
(d)  Vehicular access driveways shall be at least 100 feet away from any major intersection, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  Vehicular ingress and egress shall align with access points located across the street, whenever possible. 
(f)  Driveways shall be consolidated in order to reduce curb cuts, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(2)  Access and Circulation   
(a)  Pedestrian Circulation   
(i)  A clearly defined, visible, and identifiable pedestrian network (combination of walkways, low shrub or ground cover plantings, and trees) shall be provided between parking lots, public street sidewalks, open spaces, recreational facilities, and individual buildings. 
(ii)  Pedestrian walkways shall be at least five feet in width. 
(iii)  The owner or an owners association shall maintain pedestrian walkways outside public rights-of-way. 
(iv)  Where possible, pedestrian walkways shall be connected within parks, open spaces or common areas internal or external to the site. 
 
(v)  Both vehicular and pedestrian access must be visible from the street or alley serving the development. 
(vi)  Pedestrian entrances to the site shall be accentuated through the use of landscaping, special paving, gateways, or smaller features. 
(b)  Parking Area Design and Location   
(i)  No more than 50 percent of the required parking shall be provided between the front yard and side yard, if the site is a corner lot, of the principal building and the street it fronts unless the principal building and the parking is screened from view by other development and landscaping. 
(ii)  Vehicular access to the development shall be provided from a secondary street or an alley, when present. 
(iii)  Site design, including entrances and parking lots, shall be coordinated with the location of existing and planned transit facilities. 
(c)  Garage Standards   
(i)  Street-facing garages on corner lots shall be located to the side or rear of buildings. 
(ii)  Street-facing garages on interior lots shall be located at least two feet behind the front façade plane of the structure served. 
(iii)  Attached garages shall be accessed from alleyways or secondary streets, wherever possible. 
(iv)  The exterior materials, design features, and roof form of garages shall be compatible with the building they serve. 
(d)  Service Area Placement and Screening   
(i)  Outdoor storage and trash collection areas shall be integrated with overall design of the building, or be screened in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-5.2(F), Screening. 
(ii)  When specified in an approved master plan or other development approval, establishing multi-family development, private trash pick-up shall be provided. 
(3)  Building Design   
(a)  Building Orientation and Entryways   
(i)  All building with shared building entrances shall be oriented so that primary entrance(s) faces the street. In case of corner lots, the primary entrance(s) shall face the street from which the building derives its street address. 
(ii)  Long linear corridors and hidden entrance(s) to buildings shall be avoided. 
 
(iii)  Buildings that do not have a direct and visible pedestrian entrance from a public street shall at a minimum have windows or patios facing the street. 
(iv)  Common open spaces and children's play areas shall be clearly visible from the dwelling units on the site. 
(b)  Building Size   
(i)  Individual building floorplates for townhouse and Multi-Family Dwelling shall be in accordance with Table 40.1-5.5(D)(3)(b), Maximum Building Size: 
TABLE 40.1-5.5(D)(3)(B): MAXIMUM BUILDING SIZE 
DISTRICT WHERE LOCATED 	MAXIMUM FLOORPLATE SIZE (SQUARE FEET) [1] 
Urban Residential (UR) 	15,000 [2] 
High Density Urban Residential (UR-H) 	20,000 
Neighborhood Mixed-Use (NMU) 	15,000 
General Mixed Use (GMU) 	20,000 
High-Intensity Mixed-Use (NMH) 	25,000 
NOTES: 
[1] Maximum building sizes apply only to portions of a building devoted to residential use. 
[2] Townhouse buildings only. 
 
 
(ii)  The maximum length of any Townhouse or Multi-Family Dwelling shall be 200 linear feet, regardless of number of units. In no instance shall provision of a firewall between differing building sections constitute two separate structures. 
(c)  Maximum Height Buildings subject to the standards of this section shall have a maximum height of three stories within 100 feet of a lot with an existing Single-Family Detached Dwelling, without an intervening public street. This standard shall apply regardless of any incentives, administrative adjustments, or master plans. 
(d)  Building Design and Placement   
(i)  Developments abutting public street corners shall provide one or more of the following elements: 
a.  Plaza; 
b.  Placement of primary pedestrian entry; 
c.  Distinctive roof form; or 
d.  Other architectural features (e.g. porches, canopies). 
(ii)  Building details, including roof forms, siding materials, windows, doors, and trim shall reflect a similar level of quality and architectural detailing on all sides facing: 
a.  A street; 
b.  Abutting existing single-family development; and 
 
c.  Vacant land designated as a single-family district on the official zoning map. 
(e)  Facade Articulation   
(i)  Street-facing building facades shall be articulated with wall offsets at least two feet deep for every 30 feet of facade frontage. 
(ii)  In addition to wall offsets, front facades facing streets shall provide a minimum of three of the following articulation elements: 
a.  A covered porch; 
b.  One or more dormer windows or cupolas; 
c.  Pillars, posts or pilasters; 
d.  One or more bay windows with a minimum twelve-inch projection from the façade plane; 
e.  Multiple windows with a minimum of four-inch-wide trim; 
f.  Raised corniced parapets over the door; 
g.  Eves with a minimum of four-inch-wide trim; or 
h.  Integral planters that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting. 
(iii)  Side facades shall maintain at least ten percent of the facade area as windows. 
(f)  Roof Form   
(i)  Development shall incorporate roof pitches between 3:12 and 12:12, or shall incorporate a three-foot parapet with a three-dimensional cornice around a flat roof. Alternative roof forms or pitches may be allowed for small roof sections over porches, entryways, or similar features. 
(ii)  All roof vents, pipes, antennas, satellite dishes, and other roof penetrations and equipment (except chimneys) shall be located on the rear elevations or otherwise be configured to the degree practicable, to have a minimal visual impact as seen from the street. 
(g)  Accessory Structures   
(i)  Access to accessory structures (such as garages, carports, storages, mailboxes, trash receptacles) shall be provided from alleys or secondary streets to the maximum extent practicable. 
(ii)  Accessory buildings shall be designed to be consistent with the principal structure through the use of materials, massing and color. 
(iii)  Accessory structures shall not physically obstruct pedestrian entrances. 
(iv)  Trash receptacles shall be located in an enclosed area. 
(v)  Fencing of multi-family development recreational amenities such as tennis courts, swimming pool must provide visibility and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amds. 18—20), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-5.6 - Commercial Development Standards 
(A)  Purpose and Intent These commercial development standards are intended to: 
(1)  Promote a strong sense of place and pedestrian-friendly development; 
(2)  Encourage a pedestrian-friendly environment though attention to site features and human scale design; 
(3)  Foster greater compatibility between commercial development and adjacent residential neighborhoods; and 
(4)  Address the visual impact and compatibility of large-scale retail buildings. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  General Except where exempted by Section 40.1-5.6((C), Exemptions, these commercial development standards apply to all uses in the Commercial Use Classification in Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table. 
(2)  Redevelopment   
(a)  Redevelopment of an existing building established before May 1, 2010 by 25 percent or more of the floor area devoted to commercial activities shall be subject to these standards. 
(b)  The standards in this section are applied only to the redeveloped portions of buildings. 
(c)  All redevelopment activities within any five-year period shall be treated as a single redevelopment for the purposes of determining the need for compliance with these standards. 
(3)  Commercial Development in the UR, UR-H, and NMU Districts Commercial development in the UR, UR-H, and NMU districts shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-5.6(F), General Commercial Standards, and Section 40.1-5.6(G), Additional Standards for Lots in the UR, UR-H, and NMU District. 
(4)  Large Retail Development Single-tenant buildings of 60,000 gross square feet in size or more, with 60 percent or more of the total floor area occupied by retail sales activities, shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-5.6(F), General Commercial Standards, and Section 40.1-5.6(G), Standards for Large Retail Buildings. 
(5)  Master-Planned Development Within an Activity Center District These standards may be modified on in an activity center district through a master plan associated with an Amendment to Modify the Zoning Map to establish an AC district (Section 40.1-3.5(B)). 
(C)  Exemptions Commercial development in the Downtown (D1) and (D2) districts and historic districts shall comply with the regulations of this article and shall also comply with the sections found in Appendix sections A and B where they apply. The more restrictive regulations shall apply in cases of conflict. 
(D)  Review for Compliance Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of a Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3 (C) & (D)), Preliminary Subdivision Plat (Chapter 33.1 of the City Code),Master Plan associated with an Amendment to the Zoning Map to establish a new AC district (Section 40.1-3.5(B)), or Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(F)), as appropriate. 
(E)  Plan for Development Required Development subject to the standards of this section shall provide a development plan, master plan, or other plan for development illustrating how the proposed development complies with these standards. 
(F)  General Commercial Standards Except otherwise noted, these general commercial standards are intended to apply for all commercial development in the city. 
(1)  Street Access Except as permitted in Section 33.1-2 of the City Code, no building or other permit shall be issued for a proposed commercial use unless such use is located on a lot that abuts a fully-improved street. For the purposes of this section, "fully improved" shall mean a street that abuts the lot and extends to the centerline of the street right-of-way that complies with the all subdivision standards for streets. 
(2)  Street Network   
(a)  For development including new streets, an interconnected network of streets shall be provided, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(b)  The internal network of streets shall connect to adjacent existing streets to better integrate the development with its context. 
(c)  Street design shall conform to the city street design standards, but narrower-width streets are encouraged in the UR-H and NMU zoning districts to promote pedestrian scale. 
(d)  Vehicular access driveways shall be at least 100 feet away from any major intersection, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(e)  Vehicular ingress and egress shall align with access points located across the street, whenever possible. 
(f)  Driveways shall be consolidated in order to reduce curb cuts, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(3)  Street Trees   
(a)  Buildings subject to the standards in this section shall provide canopy trees along all street frontages (except alleys) located between the curb and sidewalk, or within five feet of the right-of-way when no sidewalk exists. 
(b)  Street trees shall be placed a maximum of 40 feet on-center. 
(c)  Understory trees may be used in cases where overhead utilities will remain after development is complete. 
(4)  Building Orientation   
(a)  The building façade containing the primary entrance shall be considered as the primary façade. 
(b)  The primary facades of all buildings shall face a public street serving the development. 
(c)  In the case of multi-building development, the perimeter buildings shall be oriented so that the primary facade faces a public street. Buildings interior to the site may be oriented to private streets or accessways. 
(5)  Multi-Building Development Development composed of multiple buildings totaling 30,000 gross square feet or more shall be configured in one or more of the following ways: 
(a)  Break up the site into a series of smaller "blocks" defined by on-site streets, pedestrian walkways, or other circulation routes; 
(b)  Frame the corner of an adjacent street intersection or entry point to the development; 
(c)  Frame and enclose parking areas, public spaces, or other site amenities on at least three sides; or 
(d)  Frame and enclose outdoor dining or gathering spaces for pedestrians between buildings. 
 
(6)  Outparcel Development   
(a)  To the extent practicable, outparcels and their buildings shall be configured and located to define street edges, development entry points, and spaces for gathering between buildings. 
 
(b)  Spaces between buildings shall be enlivened with pedestrian amenities such as plazas, seating areas, parks and gathering places in addition to off-street parking spaces, to the extent practicable. 
(c)  Outparcel buildings located on lots at street corners shall be located and configured to define the corner through a combination of: 
(i)  Locating the building as close to the right-of-way as is practicable; 
(ii)  Limiting surface parking between the building and the streets; 
(iii)  Providing a public gathering space adjacent to the corner; 
(iv)  Distinctive roof form or other pedestrian features such as porches, canopies, or arcades. 
(d)  Outbuildings within the same development shall include a consistent level of facade articulation on facades facing public streets, a gathering space, or parking lots. 
(7)  Gathering Spaces   
(a)  A portion of the spaces between buildings on outparcels shall be enlivened with pedestrian amenities such as small plazas, seating areas, and central gathering spaces. These places shall include at least two of the following: 
(i)  Patio/seating area; 
(ii)  Pedestrian plaza with benches; 
(iii)  Window display areas; 
(iv)  Outdoor play area; 
(v)  Kiosk; 
(vi)  Water feature; 
(vii)  Clock tower; or 
(viii)  Other features or amenities as approved by the Planning Director. 
(b)  Gathering places with pedestrian amenities shall be located in prominent, central locations. 
(c)  Gathering places shall have direct access to the site pedestrian network. 
(8)  Service and Loading Area Placement and Screening   
(a)  Outdoor storage, trash collection, and loading areas shall be integrated with the overall design of the building, or be screened in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-5.2(F), Screening. 
(b)  Outdoor storage, trash collection, and loading areas shall not be located within 20 feet of the public or private rights-of-way. 
(c)  Shopping cart containment areas shall not be located adjacent to internal public spaces, plazas, or commercial streets. 
(d)  Exterior shopping cart storage areas located adjacent to a building shall be screened by an opaque fence or wall of at least four feet in height. 
(9)  Roof-Mounted Equipment   
(a)  All rooftop equipment shall be screened from all off-street views. 
(b)  When flat roofs are used, parapet walls with three dimensional cornice treatments shall be used to conceal roof-mounted equipment. 
(10)  Glazing   
(a)  Except for development subject to the standards for large retail, the front facade of buildings shall provide glazing for at least 40 percent of the ground floor facade area between 2 feet above grade to 8 feet above grade towards the street that the front facade faces. 
(b)  On corner lots, other building facades that face a public street shall be designed with one or more of the following: 
(i)  Glazing for at least 40 percent of the ground floor facade area between 2 feet above grade to 8 feet above grade; 
(ii)  Recessed wall elements equal in area and location to the glazing requirement in (a) above and compatible with the overall architectural design and details of the building; 
(iii)  A mural or other artistic design of a non-commercial nature and of durable materials depicting an appropriate aspect of Portsmouth as determined by the Zoning Design Review Committee (ZDRC)comparable in size to the glazing requirement in (a) above; OR, 
(iv)  An alternative wall design specifically submitted and approved by the Zoning Design Review Committee (ZDRC)or as part of a Use Permit application that meets the design intent of this section. 
Where there are more than two public street frontages only the two more significant frontages in terms of traffic and exposure shall be required to meet the requirements for glazing or the above alternatives. 
(c)  All street-level widows shall be visually permeable between a height of three feet and eight feet above the walkway grade. 
(d)  Reflective or tinted glass that obstructs views into the building shall not be used on 1st floor building facades adjacent to sidewalks. 
(11)  Accessory Structures Accessory structures shall comply with the standards in Section 40.1-4.4, Accessory Use Standards, and the following standards: 
(a)  Access to accessory structures shall be provided from alleys or secondary streets, whenever possible. 
(b)  Accessory structures shall be compatible with the principal structure in terms of, materials, massing, and color. 
(c)  Accessory structures shall not physically obstruct pedestrian entrances or travelways. 
(d)  Trash receptacles and refuse collection areas shall be located in an enclosed area. 
(12)  Off-Street Parking Location Development subject to the standards of this section, except for development in the UR, UR-H, and NMU districts, shall limit the amount of off-street parking between the primary or front façade and the street it faces in accordance with Table 40.1-5.6(F)(12), Off-Street Parking Location. 
TABLE 40.1-5.5.6(F)(12): OFF-STREET PARKING LOCATION 
DEVELOPMENT SIZE 
(sq. ft.) 	AMOUNT OF PARKING THAT MAY BE LOCATED BETWEEN THE FRONT FA&CCEDIL;ADE AND THE STREET [1] 
<10,000 	1 single loaded bay 
10,000—29,999 	2 single loaded bays 
30,000—60,000 	4 bays 
>60,000 	60% of total provided 
NOTES: 
[1] Parking bays may extend the full length of the front façade. 
 
(13)  On-Site Circulation   
(a)  Pedestrian Circulation and Walkways 
Pedestrian walkways shall: 
(i)  Connect all buildings within a multi-building development with the larger pedestrian network surrounding the site. 
(ii)  Have a minimum width of five feet. 
(iii)  Be provided along the full length of building facades with an entryway or facing off-street parking areas. 
(iv)  To maximize pedestrian safety, crosswalks shall be provided at all intersections and other street crossings (both external and internal to the site) where a high-level of pedestrian movement is anticipated. 
(v)  Site design, including entrances and parking lots, shall be coordinated with the location of existing and planned transit facilities. 
(b)  Parking Lot Cross-Access Commercial development shall be designed to allow for vehicular cross-access to adjacent, compatible developments in accordance with the following standards: 
(i)  Cross-access ways shall be designed and located based on the standards of this section, but in no case shall a development be required to provide cross-access to more than two adjacent parcels. 
 
(ii)  Cross-access ways shall allow for two-way traffic between parcels through the use of a single drive aisle with a minimum width of 22 feet, or through two one-way aisles, each with a minimum width of 11 feet. 
(iii)  The cross-access standard may be waived by the Planning Director if the applicant demonstrates it is impractical to provide cross-access due to: 
a.  Topography, or natural features; 
b.  The size and configuration of the site; 
c.  Vehicular safety factors; 
d.  The presence of incompatible uses; or 
e.  Existing development patterns on adjacent developed sites. 
(iv)  When cross-access is waived in accordance with this section, bicycle and pedestrian connections shall be provided between adjacent developments or uses, unless it is unreasonable or impracticable. 
(14)  Drive-through Configuration   
(a)  Drive-throughs shall be located to the side or at the rear of the building so as not to compromise the quality of the pedestrian experience at the street edge. 
(b)  A drive-through may be permitted on the front façade, provided the building is located 150 feet or more from the edge of the right-of-way. 
(c)  Drive-throughs serving a building located on a corner lot shall be located to the rear or interior side. In no instance shall the drive-through be located on the side of a building facing a street. 
(d)  If covered, the roof over the drive-through shall be of a complementary architectural design as the design covering the primary portion of the structure. 
(15)  Stormwater Management   
(a)  Stormwater retention facilities shall not be located within front or corner side areas. 
(b)  Stormwater retention ponds not designed as a site amenity shall be fully screened from off-site views. 
(c)  Landscape plantings may be used to increase infiltration and decrease runoff. Alternative designs, such as landscaping islands configured with a lower grade than adjacent parking, or rain gardens are encouraged. 
(G)  Additional Standards for Development in the UR, UR-H, and NMU Districts In addition to the general commercial standards, commercial development in the UR, UR-H, and NMU districts shall comply with the following standards. 
(1)  Off-Street Parking Areas Commercial development located within a UR, UR-H, or NMU district shall be exempted from the parking location standards in Section 40.1-5.1, Off-Street Parking Location, and shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  All required off-street parking shall be provided on the side or rear of the building. 
(b)  A single-loaded parking bay shall be permitted between a building and the street it faces when the building contains two or more useable floors. 
(2)  Front Building Setbacks Except for outparcel buildings on corner lots, front building setbacks shall vary no more than 125 percent from the average building setback of buildings along the same block face. In cases where the average front setback is not discernable (e.g., the block face is vacant or lacks more than one building), the minimum front setback shall be established by the base zoning district standards. 
(3)  Building Facades   
(a)  Front building facades of more than 50 feet in length shall be articulated into a series of evenly-spaced storefronts to increase visual interest and pedestrian orientation. Such buildings shall incorporate two or more of the following design elements on each facade visible from a street: 
(i)  Changes in wall plane (such as projections or recesses) with an offset or depth of at least one foot, a width of at least ten feet, located a minimum of every 25 feet; 
(ii)  Distinct changes in texture and color of wall surfaces; 
(iii)  Variations in roof form and parapet heights; 
(iv)  Vertical accents or focal points; or 
 
(v)  Features such as arcades, display windows, entry areas, or awnings. 
(b)  All facade treatments shall be of similar scale and design. 
(4)  Roofs   
(a)  New buildings shall use a pitched roof or a sloped parapet to maintain compatibility with surrounding residential uses. 
(b)  A flat roof shall be permitted for new buildings located between two existing buildings with flat roofs. 
(5)  Drive-Throughs Prohibited Drive-throughs are not permitted for commercial developments within UR, UR-H, and NMU districts. 
(6)  Cross Access Not Required Vehicular cross access between a commercial use and an abutting residential or public use is not required. 
(H)  Standards for Large Retail Development In addition to the general commercial standards, all new single tenant buildings of 60,000 gross square feet in area or more with 60 percent or more of the total floor area occupied by retail sales activities, shall comply with the following standards. 
(1)  Building Entrances Large retail buildings shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than three of the following: 
(a)  Canopies or porticos; 
(b)  Overhangs; 
(c)  Recesses/projections; 
(d)  Arcades; 
(e)  Raised corniced parapets over the door; 
(f)  Peaked roof forms; 
(g)  Arches; 
(h)  Outdoor patios; 
(i)  Display windows; 
(j)  Architectural detail such as tile work and moldings integrated into the building structure and design; or 
(k)  Integral planters that incorporate landscaped areas and places for sitting. 
(2)  Building Massing   
(a)  Front facades of large retail buildings shall be articulated to reduce its mass, scale, and uniform appearance. Large retail buildings shall incorporate two or more of the following design elements on each facade visible from a street: 
(i)  Changes in wall plane, such as projections or recesses, having a wall offset of at least one foot depth, and located a minimum of every 40 feet. Each required offset shall have a minimum width of ten feet; 
(ii)  Distinct changes in texture and color of wall surfaces; 
(iii)  Variations in roof form and parapet heights; 
(iv)  Vertical accents or focal points. 
 
(b)  Side walls exceeding 30 feet length shall have facade articulating elements such as columns and/or changes in plane, texture, or masonry pattern. 
 
(3)  Off-Street Parking Location Standards   
(a)  Up to 60 percent of the total parking provided is permitted to be located between the front façade of a building and the street it faces. 
(b)  Off-street parking lots of 250 or more spaces serving a large retail building shall be organized into a series of parking bays surrounded by buildings, landscaping, or streets. 
(4)  Glazing   
(a)  Facades of large retail buildings facing a street shall include glazing in an amount equal to 25 percent of the ground floor facade area. 
(b)  Glazing on side facades may consist of clear, frosted, or spandrel glass, and shall be organized into a display window configuration. 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 8), 12-9-2014)  
40.1-5.7 - Transitional Standards 
(A)  Purpose and Intent These transitional standards are intended to: 
(1)  Provide proper transition and compatibility between single-family detached development and other more intense development. 
(2)  Establish or maintain vibrant pedestrian-oriented areas where differing uses can operate in close proximity to one another. 
(3)  Protect the character of single-family development from negative impacts resulting from adjacent more intense forms of development. 
(B)  Applicability These transitional standards apply to commercial, industrial, mixed-use, attached residential, townhouse, two- to-four-family residential, and multi-family development located on land abutting or across a local street or alley from existing single-family detached residential development. 
(C)  Exemptions The following development is exempt from these standards: 
(1)  Community service, educational facilities, religious institutions, and utilities (See Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table); 
(2)  Commercial, industrial, mixed-use, attached residential, townhouse, two- to four-family residential, or multi-family development located across a street with three-or more lanes from single-family detached residential development; and 
(3)  Development within the D1 or D2 districts. 
(D)  Review for Compliance Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur during review of a Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3(C) & (D)), Preliminary Subdivision Plat (Chapter 33.1 of the City Code) Master Plan associated with an Amendment to the Zoning Map to establish a new AC district (Section 40.1-3.5(B)), or Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(F)), as appropriate. 
 
(E)  Plan for Development Required Development subject to the standards of this section shall provide a development plan, master plan, or other plan for development illustrating how the proposed development complies with these standards. 
(F)  Transitional Development Standards Development subject to the standards of this section shall comply with the following standards. 
 
(1)  Building Placement Buildings shall be oriented towards the street from which they derive their street address. 
(2)  Building Setback Building setbacks shall be consistent with other buildings on the block face and across the street to maintain a consistent plane or edge of buildings along public frontages. Building setbacks shall vary no more than ten percent than the adjacent buildings setbacks. 
(3)  Building Facades Buildings shall: 
(a)  Be configured to appear as a series of discrete storefronts if facades face single-family detached dwellings, with no single storefront occupying more than 50 percent of the total façade width; 
(b)  Use exterior colors that are compatible with nearby single-family detached dwellings; 
(c)  Use similarly sized and patterned architectural features such as windows, doors, awnings, arcades, pilasters, cornices, wall offsets, building materials, and other building articulations found on adjacent single-family detached dwellings; and 
(d)  Orient porches, balconies, outdoor space, and other exterior site features such as vending machines away from adjacent single-family detached dwellings. 
(4)  Building Height   
(a)  Buildings on lots adjacent to single-family detached dwellings shall maintain the same height as the dwelling, or be stepped-back from the lot line such that the lowest portion of the building is the portion closest to the single-family detached dwelling. 
(b)  No building within 150 feet of a single-family detached dwelling shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(c)  In instances when buildings or portions of buildings are allowed to exceed 35 feet in height, they shall be broken up into modules or wings with the smaller and shorter portions of the structure located adjacent to single-family detached dwellings. 
(5)  Similar Roof Forms Consistency in roof forms with adjacent buildings shall be addressed by using a similar roof form with varying height and proportion. 
(6)  Service and Loading Area Location and Screening   
(a)  Separate service related activities associated with commercial uses shall be located behind or to the sides of buildings away from the adjacent residential uses, screened with walls and/or landscaping, and provided with access that is integrated with parking areas and the vehicular circulation network. 
(b)  Outdoor storage, trash collection, and loading areas shall not be visible from public or private rights-of-way. 
(7)  Parking and Driveways When required, off-street parking shall be established in one of the following locations (listed in priority order): 
(a)  Adjacent to off-street parking lots serving nonresidential uses on abutting lots; 
 
(b)  Adjacent to lot lines abutting nonresidential development; 
(c)  Adjacent to lot lines abutting mixed-use development; 
(d)  On a lot's corner side; 
(e)  Behind the building; 
(f)  In front of the building; or 
(g)  Adjacent to lot lines abutting single-family detached dwellings. 
(G)  Drive-Throughs Ordering speakers and menu boards associated with a drive-through use shall be located as far as possible from abutting single-family detached development. 
(H)  Outdoor Activity Areas Outdoor dining and other outdoor gathering areas that generate noise shall be located away from abutting detached single-family residential uses so as to minimize acoustic impacts. 
(I)  Open Space   
(1)  Location of Open Space Buildings subject to these standards and the standards in Section 40.1-5,4 Open Space Set Asides, shall locate the open space set-aside adjacent to existing Single-Family Detached Dwellings, if reasonably possible. 
 
(2)  Existing Natural Features Natural features such as existing vegetation, natural differences in topography, streams, wetlands, and other such features shall be used as transitions where possible. Where such natural features are used as transitions, pedestrian connections to adjoining land uses shall be provided. 
(J)  Use Intensities For multi-building development including varying intensities in the different buildings, a gradual gradation of uses shall be provided with the least intense use next to abutting detached single-family residential uses or zoning. 
(K)  Operational Standards Upon approval of development application, the city may impose conditions as described in the Procedures Manual to limit operational activities of the development to ensure it is compatible with adjoining residential uses. These operational activities include but are not limited to placement of trash receptacles, location of delivery and loading zones, placement and illumination of outdoor vending machines, hours of operation, and other such conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 21), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-5.8 - Green Building Incentives 
(A)  Purpose In an effort to encourage sustainable development practices within the zoning districts as a means of addressing global climate change, the protection of natural resources, and ensuring a high quality of life for future city residents, the following green building incentives are provided. 
(B)  Type of Bonuses   
(1)  Development providing green building features in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be eligible for bonuses including: 
(a)  A density bonus of up to 20 percent beyond the maximum allowable gross residential density; 
(b)  An increase in the maximum allowable height by up to two stories beyond the maximum allowed in the base zoning district; 
(c)  An increase in the maximum allowable building coverage by 15 percent beyond the maximum allowed in the base zoning district; 
(d)  A reduction in the total amount of required landscaping material for site landscaping and perimeter buffers by up to 35 percent; 
(e)  A modification to the off-street parking requirements resulting in a reduction from the minimum requirements by 15 percent, or an increase to the maximum allowable number of spaces provided by 15 percent; or 
(f)  A reduction in the amount of open space set-aside by 10 percent. 
(2)  Development may include a sufficient number of green building features to take advantage of more than one type of bonus, but in no instance shall the amount of an incentive be increased or decreased (as appropriate) beyond the maximum listed in this sub-section. 
(C)  Applicability   
(1)  The incentives included in this section are available to new development in the business, special, and UR-H districts. 
(2)  Sustainability bonuses shall be limited to those related to building height or gross residential density in the Downtown (D1) and (D2) districts. 
(D)  Conflict with Transitional Standards In cases where bonuses in this section conflict with the transitional standards in Section 40.1-5.7, the transitional standards shall control. 
(E)  Procedure   
(1)  Development seeking to use green building incentives shall include a written request with the development application. 
(2)  Review for compliance with this section, and receipt of a bonus in accordance with this section shall occur during review of a Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3 (C) & (D)), Master Plan associated with an Amendment to the Zoning Map to establish a new AC district (Section 40.1-3.5(B)), or Use Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(B)), as appropriate. 
(3)  The bonus shall be based on the number of green building features provided, in accordance with Table 40.1-5.8, Green Building Bonuses, and Section 40.1-5.8(F), Menu of Green Building Features. 
TABLE 40.1-5.8: GREEN BUILDING BONUSES 
TYPE OF BONUS [1] 	MINIMUM NUMBER OF GREEN BUILDING FEATURES PROVIDED 
	FROM SCHEDULE A 	FROM SCHEDULE B 
Increase in gross residential density by up to 10 percent beyond district maximum 	1 	3 
Increase in building height by 1 story beyond district maximum 	1 	2 
Increase in the maximum building coverage by up to 5 percent 	1 	2 
Modification in the minimum or maximum number of off-street parking spaces by up to 5 percent 	1 	2 
Increase in gross residential density by between 10 and 20 percent beyond district maximum 	2 	4 
Increase in building height by 2 stories beyond district maximum 	2 	4 
Increase in the maximum building coverage by 5 to 15 percent 	2 	3 
Modification to the minimum or maximum number of off-street parking spaces by between 5 and 15 percent 	2 	2 
NOTES: 
[1] In case of conflict between the type of bonus and the minimum required transitional standards, the standards in Section 40.1-5.7, Transitional Standards, shall control. 
 
(F)  Menu of Green Building Features One or more of the following green building features may be offered by an applicant for proposed development in accordance with Table 40.1-5.8, Green Building Bonuses. 
TABLE 40.1-5.8(F): MENU OF GREEN BUILDING FEATURES 
SCHEDULE 	FEATURE 
ENERGY 
A 	Generation of a minimum of 20 percent of the electricity needed by the development from alternative energy sources (solar, wind, geothermal, or biomass) within five years 
A 	Proof of purchase of carbon offsets in an amount equivalent to 15 percent of the construction costs within five years 
B 	Design buildings so that they can accommodate the installation and operation of solar photovoltaic panels or solar thermal heating devices 
RECYCLING/WASTE REDUCTION 
A 	Utilize recycled materials for 50 percent of streets, off-street parking, sidewalks, curbs, and 25 percent of building materials 
B 	Provide at least enclosed recycling station per building suitable for storage and collection of recyclable generated on-site 
SITE CONFIGURATION 
B 	Provision of a community garden with at least 500 square feet per dwelling that is controlled by a property-owners association 
B 	Use of paving materials in driveways and parking lots that have solar reflectance index (SRI) score of at least 29 (SRI is a measure of a parking lot's ability to reject solar heat; a higher SRI yields a cooler parking lot) 
B 	Configuration of new buildings with one axis 1.5 times longer than the other, and the long axis oriented in an east-west configuration for solar access 
A 	Include underground parking or a parking structure 
A 	Provide for mixed-use structures with active retail or personal service uses on ground floors, and residential uses on upper floors 
RESOURCE CONSERVATION 
B 	Provision of 150-foot undisturbed buffers adjacent to all perennial stream banks, wetlands, and bodies of water 
A 	Use only native vegetation for required landscaping 
A 	Use of Low Impact Development (LID) techniques instead of retention or detention ponds for stormwater management 
B 	Preservation of 15 percent of the tree canopy on a site comprised of the canopies of trees 10" or greater in DBH 
A 	Double the minimum open space set-aside amount 
A 	Remediate site contamination on a documented (by means of a Phase II Environmental Site Assessment) "brownfield" site 
TRANSPORTATION 
A 	Provision of a network of multi-purpose trails with at least one connection to the public greenway or sidewalk system for every acre of land 
B 	Inclusion of showering and dressing facilities in nonresidential development for employees using alternative forms of transportation 
A 	Provide on-site transit facilities (e.g., designated park-and-ride parking spaces, bus shelters, water-taxi stops, or similar features 
BUILDING CONFIGURATION 
A 	Inclusion of green roofs on at least 30 percent of the roof area within the development 
B 	Meet minimum Energy Star (or equivalent) criteria for at least 75 percent of the residential floor area 
A 	Design the building to achieve a minimum LEED certification of platinum [1] 
A 	Design the building to achieve a minimum LEED certification of gold 
B 	Design the building to achieve a minimum LEED certification of silver 
B 	Include shade features (e.g., awnings, louvers, shutters, overhangs, etc.) to shade all windows and doors on the southern building facade 
B 	Design buildings such that 25 percent of the residential units are consistent with Universal Design practices 
A 	Design buildings such that 50 percent of the residential units are consistent with Universal Design practices [1] 
WATER CONSERVATION 
A 	Inclusion of a recycled or grey water system for landscaping irrigation 
B 	Use xeriscape landscaping techniques with no turf or lawn 
NOTES: 
[1] Credited as provision of two schedule "A" features. 
  
40.1-5.9 - Exterior Lighting 
(A)  Purpose The purpose of this section is to regulate light spillage and glare to ensure the safety of motorists and pedestrians, and to ensure lighting does not adversely affect land uses on adjacent properties. More specifically, this section is intended to: 
(1)  Regulate Exterior Lighting to Mitigate Adverse Impacts Regulate exterior lighting to assure that excessive light spillage and glare are not directed at adjacent properties, neighboring areas, and motorists; 
(2)  Ensure Proper Insulation Ensure that all site lighting is designed and installed to maintain adequate lighting levels on site while limiting negative lighting impacts on adjacent lands; and 
(3)  Provide Security Provide security for persons and land. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  General The provisions of this section shall apply to all development in the city unless exempted in accordance with Section 40.1-5.9(C), Exemptions. 
(2)  Time of Compliance An exterior lighting plan shall be submitted and approved along with an application for a Development Plan (Section 40.1-2.3(C) &(D)), Preliminary Subdivision Plat (Chapter 33.1 of the City Code), Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(F)), or Temporary Use Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(E)), whichever occurs first. 
(C)  Exemptions The following is exempted from the exterior lighting standards of this section. 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings; 
(2)  Existing athletic field lighting; 
(3)  City-owned, -operated, or -maintained street lights located within a street right-of-way or other easement granted to the city; 
(4)  Lighting and fixtures approved as part of a Certificate of Appropriateness (Section 40.1-2.3(I); and 
(5)  Lighting approved as part of a Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-3.2(H)) in the Downtown (D2) district. 
(D)  General Standards for Exterior Lighting   
(1)  Hours of Illumination Public and institutional uses, commercial uses, and industrial uses (See Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table.) that are adjacent to existing residential development or vacant land in residential districts shall turn off all exterior lighting—except lighting necessary for security or emergency purposes—within one hour of closing. For the purposes of this subsection, lighting "necessary for security or emergency purposes" shall be construed to mean the minimum amount of exterior lighting necessary to illuminate possible points of entry or exit into a structure, to illuminate exterior walkways, or to illuminate outdoor storage areas. Such lighting may be activated by motion sensor devices. 
(2)  Illumination Direction In all districts, lighting shall be directed downward. In addition, upwardly-directed lighting shall not be used to illuminate structures, except for low-wattage architectural lighting or lighting for the American flag. 
(E)  Design Standards for Exterior Lighting All exterior lighting shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Maximum Lighting Height   
(a)  Except for outdoor sports fields or performance areas, the height of outdoor lighting, whether mounted on poles or walls or by other means, shall be no greater than 16 feet in residential districts and no greater than 30 feet in other districts. 
(b)  Wherever possible, illumination of outdoor seating areas, building entrances, and walkways shall be accomplished by use of ground mounted fixtures not more than four feet in height. 
(2)  Shielding   
(a)  Exterior Light fixtures in excess of 60 watts or 100 lumens shall use full cut-off lenses or hoods to prevent glare or spillover from the project site onto adjacent lands and streets. 
(b)  Interior No interior light source shall be positioned, aimed, or configured so as to result in the light source being visible from land occupied by existing residential development. 
(c)  Canopies No light source in a canopy structure shall extend downward further than the lowest edge of the canopy ceiling. 
(d)  Awnings Awnings or canopies used for building accents over doors, windows, etc., shall not be internally illuminated (i.e., from underneath or behind the awning). 
(3)  Maximum Illumination Levels All outdoor lighting and indoor lighting visible from outside shall be designed and located so that the maximum illumination measured in footcandles at ground level at a property line shall not exceed the standards in Table 40.1-5.9(E)(3), Maximum Illumination Levels. Cut-off lighting shall be designed to direct light downward (e.g., shoe box style). 
 
TABLE 40.1-5.9(E)(3): MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION LEVELS 
TYPE OF USE [1] 	MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION AT PROPERTY LINE (FOOTCANDLES) 
Residential or Public and Institutional Use 	0.5 
Commercial Use 	1.0 
Parking lots [2} 	1.0 
NOTES: 
[1] See Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table. 
[2] The minimum illumination level at the property line shall be 0.2 footcandle. 
 
(F)  Wall Pack Lights Wall packs on buildings may be used at entrances to a building to light unsafe areas. They are not intended to draw attention to the building or provide general building or site lighting. Wall packs on the exterior of the building shall be fully shielded (e.g., true cut-off type bulb or light source not visible from off-site) to direct the light vertically downward and be of low wattage (preferably 100 watts or lower). Wall pack light sources visible from any location off the site are prohibited. 
(G)  Exemptions for a Security Plan Government facilities, parks and open areas, public safety, and other uses (see Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table) where sensitive or dangerous materials are stored may submit to the Planning Director a site security plan proposing exterior lighting that deviates from the standards in this subsection. The Planning Director shall approve, or approve with conditions, the site security plan and its proposed deviation from the standards of this subsection, upon finding that: 
(1)  Deviation Necessary to Protect Public or Ensure Security The proposed deviation from the standards is necessary for the adequate protection of the public; 
(2)  Significantly Greater Danger of Theft or Damage Without Additional Lighting The condition, location, or use of the land, or the history of activity in the area, indicates the land or any materials stored or used on it are in significantly greater danger of theft or damage, or members of the public are at greater risk for harm than on surrounding land; and 
(3)  Deviation is Minimum Required and Will Not Have Adverse Effect The proposed deviation from the standards is the minimum required, and will not have a significant adverse effect on neighboring lands. 
(H)  Illumination of Outdoor Sports Fields and Performance Areas Lighting of outdoor sports fields and performance areas shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Glare Control Package All lighting fixtures shall be equipped with an existing glare control package (e.g., louvers, shields, or similar devices) and aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area. 
(b)  Hours of Operation The lighting system for any game or event shall be extinguished after the end of the game or event. 
(I)  Sign Lighting Lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall comply with the standards of this section, and such fixtures shall be aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the sign face and is not visible from off-site areas.  
40.1-5.10 - Fences and Walls 
(A)  Purpose and Intent The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate the location, height, and appearance of fences and walls to maintain visual harmony within residential, business, activity center, and special districts; protect adjacent properties from the indiscriminate placement and unsightliness of fences and walls; and ensure the safety, security, and privacy of properties. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  General Unless exempted in accordance with Section 40.1-5.10(B)(2), Exemptions, the provisions of this section shall apply to the construction, reconstruction, or replacement of fences or walls in the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this section and any screening standard in Section 40.1-5.2(F), Screening, the latter shall govern. 
(2)  Exemptions The following are exempted from the requirements of this section. 
(a)  Development in the D1 and D2 Districts Development on lots in the Downtown D1 and D2 and historic districts shall comply with the regulations of this article and shall also comply with the sections found in Appendix sections A and B where they apply. The more restrictive regulations shall apply in cases of conflict. 
(b)  Required Screening Fencing provided to meet the standards of Section 40.1-5.2 Landscaping and Screening, but in no case shall the fencing exceed the maximum height limits of Section 40.1-5.2, Landscaping and Screening. 
(c)  Recreational Fencing Customary fencing provided as a part of a permitted tennis court, athletic field, or other recreational facility. 
(d)  Temporary Fencing Temporary fencing established around construction sites, demolitions, or other site conditions unsafe for pedestrians or vehicles, provided it is consistent with the building code. 
(3)  Time of Compliance Compliance with the standards of this section shall occur prior to approval of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, whichever occurs first. 
(C)  General Requirements for Fences and Walls   
 
(1)  Location Fences are permitted anywhere on a lot outside of sight triangles or public easements, and may be located directly over a property line between two or more parcels of land held in private ownership. 
(2)  Blocking Natural Drainage Flow No fence shall be installed so as to block or divert a natural drainage flow on to or off of any other land. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the installation of temporary fencing to protect existing trees, limit sedimentation, or control erosion. 
(3)  Fences and Walls within Buffers Fences and walls shall be installed so as not to disturb or damage existing vegetation or installed plant material. The perimeter fencing or wall for a single development shall be of a uniform style that complies with the standards of this section. 
(D)  Height Requirements for Fences and Walls All fences and walls shall conform to the following standards. In all cases, heights are measured from finished grade on the highest side of the fence or wall. 
(1)  Residential Districts In residential districts (see Table 40.1-3: Base Zoning Districts Established), fences and walls shall not exceed: 
(a)  Front Yards A height of four feet in front yards and that part of side yards from the front lot line to the front façade plane of the structure. 
(b)  Side or Rear Yards A height of eight feet in side and rear yards. 
(c)  Transparency Fences or walls located within a front yard or side yard adjacent to a street shall maintain a minimum of 50 percent transparency. 
(2)  Other Districts   
(a)  General   
(i)  Except within industrial districts, fences and walls shall not be permitted in front setback areas, and shall not exceed a height of four feet in the remainder of front yards and eight feet in side or rear yards, unless the fence in the side or rear yard is located within 15 feet of a public right-of-way, in which case it shall not exceed a height of six feet. 
(ii)  Fences in industrial districts shall not exceed eight feet in height in front and corner side yard areas, or where industrial land abuts a residential district. 
(iii)  If a fence is constructed on top of a retaining or other wall, the combined height of the fence and wall shall not exceed the maximum height that would apply to a fence or wall alone. 
(b)  Major Utilities, Wireless Communications, Government Facilities, and Other Public Safety Uses Fences and walls in front, side, and rear yards of major utilities, wireless communication towers, government facilities, and other public safety uses shall not exceed eight feet. 
(3)  Vacant Property   
(a)  Vacant property may be fenced if: 
(i)  The fence does not exceed four feet in residential districts and eight feet in all other districts; 
(ii)  The fencing maintains a minimum transparency of 50 percent; and 
(iii)  The purpose of the fencing is to discourage unauthorized dumping or unauthorized parking on the property. 
(b)  Fencing of the vacant property shall not be construed to allow use of the property for outdoor storage. 
(E)  Exemption for Security Plan A property owner or tenant or a representative of a public agency responsible for a government facility, public safety use, or other use in need of heightened security may submit to the Planning Director a site security plan proposing fences or walls taller than those permitted by this section or proposing the use of barbed or concertina wire atop a fence or wall for security reasons. The Planning Director shall approve or approve with conditions the site security plan and its proposed exemption of fences or walls from the standards of this section, upon finding: 
(1)  Taller Fence or Wall Needed for Safety or Security Reasons The condition, location, or use of the property, or the history of activity in the area, indicates the land or any materials stored or used on it are in significantly greater danger of theft or damage than surrounding land, or represent a significant hazard to public safety without a taller fence or the use of barbed or concertina wire atop a fence or wall; and 
(2)  No Adverse Effect The proposed taller fences or walls or use of barbed or concertina wire will not have a significant adverse effect on the security, functioning, appearance, or value of adjacent properties or the surrounding area as a whole. 
(F)  Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Public Rights-of-Way Fences or walls located within 15 feet of a street or public right-of-way shall: 
(1)  Be located outside the public right-of-way; 
(2)  Include breaks, offsets of at least one foot, access points, or other design details in the wall plane at least every 200 feet as illustrated in Figure 40.1-5.10(F), Required Fencing Offsets; 
(3)  Comply with the standards in Section 40.1-5.10(K), Appearance; and 
(4)  Comply with the requirements of Section 40.1-5.10(K)(4), Screening. 
(G)  Visibility Clearance Fences and walls shall be placed outside of required sight triangles or areas needed for visibility. 
(H)  Prohibited Fences Fences or walls made of debris, junk, rolled plastic, sheet metal, plywood, or waste materials are prohibited in all zoning districts unless such materials have been recycled and reprocessed for marketing to the general public as building materials that resemble new building materials (e.g., picket fencing made from recycled plastic and fiber). 
(I)  Chain Link Fencing   
(1)  Chain link fencing shall be allowed, subject to the following standards:   
(a)  Residential Districts Chain link fencing is permitted on lots within residential zoning districts provided it does not include opaque slats, and does not exceed the maximum allowable height in Section 40.1-5.10(D), Height Requirements for Fences and Walls. 
 
 
(b)  Industrial Districts Chain link fencing shall be allowed on lots within industrial zoning districts provided it does not include opaque slats, is coated with black or dark green vinyl, and does not exceed eight feet in height within front or corner side areas. 
(2)  Chain link fencing shall not be allowed on lots within a business or mixed-use zoning district. 
(J)  Barbed or Razor Wire Barbed or razor wire is allowed permitted only in accordance with an approved security plan (See Section 40.1-5.10(E)). 
(K)  Appearance   
(1)  Customary Materials Fences and walls shall be constructed of any combination of treated wood posts and vertically-oriented planks, rot-resistant wood, wrought iron, decorative metal materials, brick, stone, masonry materials, or products designed to resemble these materials. Where wood, masonry, or other opaque materials are specified for particular types of screening or buffering fences or walls, all other fence materials are prohibited. 
(2)  Finished Side to Outside Wherever a fence or wall is installed, if one side of the fence or wall appears more "finished" than the other (e.g., one side has visible support framing and the other does not), then the more "finished" side of the fence shall face the perimeter of the lot rather than the interior of the lot. 
(3)  Compatibility of Materials along a Single Lot Side All fencing or wall segments located along a single lot side shall be composed of a uniform style and colors compatible with other parts of the fence and with the associated buildings. 
(4)  Landscape Screening All fences and walls exceeding four feet in height in all districts, if located within 15 feet of a public street right-of-way, shall be supplemented with landscape screening in accordance with the following standards, to soften the visual impact of the fence or wall. 
(a)  Shrubs Required One evergreen shrub shall be installed for every five linear feet of fence or wall, on the side of the fence or wall facing the public street right-of-way. Shrubs shall meet the size standards of Section 40.1-5.2(C)(2), Planting Standards, and may be installed in a staggered, clustered, grouped, or linear fashion. 
(b)  Substitution of Understory Trees One understory or ornamental tree may be substituted for every three evergreen shrubs provided that the tree meets the size standards of Section 40.1-5.2(C)(2), Planting Standards. 
(c)  Integration with other Required Landscaping Required landscape screening for fences or walls may be integrated into the landscaping required for vehicular use area screening or perimeter buffers, provided the standards in Section 40.1-5.2, Landscaping and Screening Standards, are maintained.  
40.1-5.11 - Signage 
(A)  Purpose and Findings The purpose of these sign standards is to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city, to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety, to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property, and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. 
(1)  Findings The City Council finds: 
(a)  Signs provide a vital function for the convenience of the public and for the efficient communication of commercial and noncommercial speech. 
(b)  Unlike oral speech, signs may cause harm by virtue of the physical space they occupy by obstructing views, distracting motorists, displacing alternative uses of land, and endangering the safety of persons or property. The city has a substantial and compelling interest in all of the purposes set forth below and has a substantial and compelling interest in regulating signs in such a way that the harms caused by signs might be reduced and mitigated. 
(c)  Signs are essential to the health and economic well-being of the city by: 
(i)  Facilitating consumer transactions and other commercial and industrial activities that allow businesses to be successful, which in turn provides employment and supports a stable tax base; and 
(ii)  Providing information and directions for the safe and efficient travel of motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians. 
(d)  Signs have a strong visual impact on the character and aesthetic appearance of the city. 
(i)  They are a prominent part of the cityscape and, as such, can enhance or detract from the city's image and character and facilitate or impede the creation of an attractive and harmonious environment in the city. 
(ii)  Their suitability or appropriateness helps to define the way in which the city and neighborhoods within the city are perceived. 
(e)  The visual environment and character of the city are important factors in the city's economic well-being because they influence Portsmouth's appearance and land values. 
(f)  The visual environment and character of the city, as well as the orderly flow of traffic and safety of travel, are diminished when visual clutter results and the vision of motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians is obstructed by the unrestricted proliferation and placement of signs, or from the improper maintenance of signs. 
(g)  Regulation of the size, height, number, and spacing of signs throughout the city is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, to provide ample, meaningful opportunities for persons who desire to display information by means of a sign to have their information seen and understood, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising and other messages for the benefit of all persons in the city. 
(h)  For these reasons, the needs of individual citizens, property owners, and businesses to convey their commercial and noncommercial messages must be balanced against the goals of the city to ensure the safety of its roads and pedestrian-ways, maintain its desired character, and preserve and enhance the property values of property owners and businesses. The provisions of this Sec. 40.1-5.11 do not entirely eliminate all of the harm that may be created by the installation and display of signs. Instead, they strike an appropriate balance that preserves ample channels of communication by means of visual display while still reducing and mitigating the extent of the harm caused by signs. 
(i)  The provisions of this Sec. 40.1-5.11 do not apply to every form and instance of visual speech that may be displayed within the city. They are intended to regulate those forms and instances that are most likely to meaningfully affect one or more of the purposes set forth below. 
(j)  The provisions of this Sec. 40.1-5.11 are neither intended nor designed to restrict or control signs for the purpose of promoting or stifling any messages and content that might appear on them. 
(2)  Purpose The purpose of this Sec. 40.1-5.11 is to: 
(a)  Promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare of those within the city; 
(b)  Promote the efficient use of signs as a means of communication; 
(c)  Ensure that the right to free speech is protected; 
(d)  Maintain and enhance a visual environment that allows the city to attract sources of economic development and supports the economic well-being of the city's businesses; 
(e)  Protect and enhance the character, quality, and viability of the city's development and neighborhoods; 
(f)  Protect scenic views and avoid sign clutter; 
(g)  Reduce the distractions, obstructions, and hazards to pedestrian, bicycle, and automobile traffic caused by the excessive number, size, height, illumination, movement, indiscriminate placement, overconcentration, or unsafe construction or maintenance of signs; 
(h)  Reasonably accommodate: 
(i)  The identification and advertising needs of businesses, institutions, and other entities; and 
(ii)  The needs of persons moving through the public spaces of the city to identify and locate destinations and find desired products and services; 
(i)  Ensure signs are compatible with their surroundings, and minimize potential adverse effects on nearby properties; 
(j)  Enhance property values and business opportunities; and 
(k)  Enable efficient and consistent permitting and enforcement. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  General Unless exempted in accordance with subsection (2) below, any installation, erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of a sign shall comply with the standards in this Sec. 40.1-5.11. Signs located in the D1 and D2 districts shall be permitted with a zoning compliance permit and shall be subject to the provisions of this Article, and either the Downtown Design Guidelines or the D2 Form Based Code, as applicable. The more restrictive regulations shall apply in cases of conflict. 
(2)  Exemptions Where not prohibited by subsection 40.1-5.11(D)(2), Prohibited Signs, the following signs are exempt from the standards in this Sec. 40.1-5.11: 
(a)  Any sign carved into masonry that is integral to a structure; 
(b)  Any sign consisting of a solid plate of bronze or similar corrosion-resistant metal that is permanently attached to a building and does not exceed four square feet in area; 
(c)  Gravestones; 
(d)  Traffic control signs and devices and similar signs erected by a government agency for public safety purposes; 
(e)  Any sign erected on city-owned property by a public agency that is under the control of the City Manager, 
(f)  Any sign required to be erected by city, state, or federal law; 
(g)  Any sign the city is prohibited from regulating by state or federal law, to the extent of the prohibition; 
(h)  Any sign applied directly and entirely to, and flush with, a horizontal surface paved with asphalt, concrete, or a similar material; 
(i)  Any permanent sign that is located in a parking lot or parking structure or adjacent to a loading area, if the sign is less than two square feet in area and, if freestanding, less than four feet in height and not located closer than the height of the sign from adjoining properties; 
(j)  Political campaign yard signs placed on private property pursuant to Code of Virginia, Section 15.2-109; and 
(k)  Any sign that is applied directly to and flush with the body of a motor vehicle, as defined in Code of Virginia, Section 46.2-100, that is operable and duly licensed. 
(3)  Signs Not Requiring a Zoning Compliance Permit The following are subject to the standards in this Sec. 40.1-5.11 but do not require issuance of a zoning compliance permit in accordance with subsection (4) below: 
(a)  Routine maintenance of a sign or changing of lettering or parts of signs designed to be regularly changed, including sign face changes; 
(b)  For each residential structure, and for each public entrance to a nonresidential or mixed-use structure, one sign that is permanently attached to the structure if the sign does not exceed two square feet in area; 
(c)  For each roadway frontage on a parcel of land upon which construction activities of any type are being performed, one temporary sign that does not exceed 32 square feet in area in a commercial or industrial zoning district or 24 square feet in area any other zoning district; 
(d)  A temporary sign securely and tautly affixed to temporary protective fencing erected around an area where construction activities of any type are being performed; 
(e)  For each roadway frontage on a parcel of land that is actively marketed for sale, lease, or rent, one yard sign that does not exceed four square feet in a residential zoning district, eight square feet in a mixed-use zoning district, and 16 square feet in any other zoning district; 
(f)  In addition to signage required by state or federal law, signs attached to a gas pump that do not exceed four square feet in area; 
(g)  Window signs located in the NMU, GMU, IL, IN, and WF districts, and, if consistent with applicable adopted design standards, window signs located in the MU-H, NAC, CAC, and RAC districts; and 
(h)  Signs oriented toward the interior of and intended to be viewed from within an outdoor recreation or entertainment establishment or facility. 
(4)  Procedure for Compliance Unless not required in accordance with subsection (3) above, a zoning compliance permit issued in accordance with Sec. 40.1-2.3(F), Zoning Compliance Permit, is required prior to any activity that is subject to this Sec. 40.1-5.11. The Zoning Compliance Permit application may be reviewed concurrently with a Type I Development Plan application for the same site. 
(C)  Definitions Terms as used in this Sec. 40.1-5.11 have the following definitions: 
AWNING 
See Sec. 40.1-8.3, Definitions. 
CANOPY 
See Sec. 40.1-8.3, Definitions. 
LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENT 
See Sec. 40.1-8.3, Definitions. 
MARQUEE 
See Sec. 40.1-8.3, Definitions. 
PENNANT 
A lightweight plastic, fabric, paper or similar material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
SIGN 
A surface, fabric, display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard, or other structure which is designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform, any part of the advertising or informative contents of which is visible from a street or bicycle or pedestrian path or from property other than the lot on which it is located. This term does not include flags displayed from flagpoles or staffs. 
SIGN, A-FRAME 
A sign designed to rest on the ground that consists of two sign faces connected together at the top to form an "A" shape sign with a broad base and narrow top when viewed from the side. 
 
SIGN, ATTACHED 
A sign that is attached, directly or indirectly to a building (e.g. wall sign, marquee sign) or structure that has a principal purpose other than supporting the sign (e.g. fence, light pole). 
SIGN, AWNING 
A sign that is part of or attached to the surface of an awning. 
 
SIGN, BANNER 
A sign constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, or other light materials, that does not have an integral supporting framework. 
SIGN, BLADE 
A sign constructed of lightweight material and attached to and projecting from a light pole or similar structure, but not from a building. 
 
SIGN, CANOPY 
A sign attached to a canopy. 
 
SIGN, FREESTANDING 
A sign installed upon the ground directly or through a structure designed for the exclusive purpose of supporting the sign, and not attached to a building or other structure. 
SIGN, GROUND 
A permanent freestanding sign that is not a monument sign (e.g., because the sign is not wider than it is tall), a pole sign (e.g., because there is less than two feet of open air under the sign), or an off-premises sign. 
SIGN, INFLATABLE 
A sign that requires air pressure to maintain its shape. 
SIGN, MARQUEE 
A sign attached to or hung from a marquee. 
 
SIGN, MONUMENT 
A freestanding sign permanently mounted on or affixed to a solid decorative base or pedestal with no open air between the sign and the ground, that has, including the support structure, a total width that exceeds its height. 
 
SIGN, NONCONFORMING 
A sign lawfully existing on January 9, 2018 or the effective date of amendment to this Ordinance, that does not conform to all the standards and regulations of this Ordinance or the amendment. 
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES 
A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, commodity, product, event or any goods or services conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
SIGN, PERMANENT 
A sign that is intended for other than temporary use or a limited period. A permanent sign is affixed or attached to the exterior of a building or to a pole or other structure by adhesive or mechanical means or is otherwise characterized by anchoring, construction materials, or a foundation indicative of an intent to display the sign for more than a limited period. 
SIGN, POLE 
A freestanding sign permanently affixed to one or more masts, poles, or open braces that are secured permanently to the ground and have as their principal purpose support of the sign, such that there is a minimum of two vertical feet of open air under any portion of the bottom of the sign. 
 
SIGN, PORTABLE OR WHEELED 
A sign that is designed to be transported on wheels or that is constructed on a chassis. 
SIGN, PROJECTING 
A sign that is attached to and oriented approximately perpendicular to the wall or parapet of a building, the building having a principal function other than support of the sign. 
SIGN, ROOF 
A sign affixed to the roof of a building or to the wall of a building, and extending above the roofline. 
 
SIGN, TEMPORARY 
A temporary sign or display that is intended or constructed for display during a limited period of time only, and generally constructed of lightweight materials and installed in a manner so as to be easily removed. 
SIGN, T-FRAME 
Any sign designed to rest on the ground and consisting of a sign face mounted perpendicular to its base to form an upside-down "T" shape when viewed from the side. 
 
SIGN, WALL 
Any sign painted on or attached to the outside wall of any building and supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one surface. 
 
SIGN, WIND SAIL 
Any sign temporarily mounted along its edge on a single, flexible pole, and which generally resembles the shape of a feather, sail, bow, teardrop, or other similar shape. 
 
SIGN, WINDOW 
A sign which is painted on, applied to, or attached to a window or door, or located within three feet of the interior of the window or door, and which is legible and intended to be read from the exterior of the building. 
SIGN, YARD 
A lightweight temporary freestanding sign that is not a wind sail sign, inflatable sign, or A-frame or T-frame sign. A yard sign is generally installed in the ground on a wooden post or a thin frame made of metal. 
 
(D)  General Sign Standards   
(1)  Classification of Sign Types For purposes of this Sec. 40.1-5.11, signs are generally classified as either permanent or temporary, and as either freestanding or attached. Table 40.1-5.11(D)(1): Classification of Sign Types, identifies signs according to their classification. 
TABLE 40.1-5.11(D)(1): CLASSIFICATIONS OF SIGN TYPES 
	Attached 	Freestanding 
Permanent 	Awning sign 
Canopy sign 
Marquee sign 
Off-premises sign 
Projecting sign 
Wall sign 
Window sign 	Ground sign 
Monument sign 
Off-premises sign 
Pole sign 
Temporary 	Banner sign 
Blade sign 
Inflatable sign 
Window sign 	A-frame or T-frame sign 
Inflatable sign 
Wind sail sign 
Yard sign 
 
(2)  Prohibited Signs The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts: 
(a)  Roof signs; 
(b)  Pennants; 
(c)  Balloons which meet the definition of "sign" and are greater than two feet in diameter with a tether more than two feet long extending from a roof or structure by means of a rope, string, or other device; 
(d)  Obsolete signs containing sign copy, print, or graphics which advertise an activity, business, product, or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises. An exception to the immediate removal of obsolete sign copy, print or graphics will occur where the owner or lessor of the premises on which the sign is located is seeking a new tenant, in which event the sign copy, print or graphics shall be removed by the owner or lessor at least two years from the date of vacancy of the premises on which the obsolete sign is located; 
(e)  Portable or wheeled signs and portable or nonstructural signs with no permanently mounted, self-supporting structure, including signs mounted on wheels and otherwise constructed to be used as a temporary sign display, but not including signs applied directly to and flush with the body of a motor vehicle, as defined in Code of Virginia, Section 46.2-100, that is operable and duly licensed; 
(f)  Off-premises signs, except in accordance with subsection 40.1-5.11(E)(3)(d) or subsection 40.1-5.11(E)(4)(d); 
(g)  Signs that include movement or animation, other than changeable copy in accordance with subsection 40.1-5.11(D)(7); 
(h)  Signs located in the right-of-way, except A-frame and T-frame signs in accordance with subsection 40.1-5.11(F)(3)(a) and signs placed in the right-of-way in accordance with Chapter 32 of the City Code; 
(i)  Signs of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination that may cause them to be misconstrued as traffic-control devices or signs; and 
(j)  Signs that hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal or that obstruct the view at a street or road intersection, as determined by the City Engineer. 
(3)  Measurement of Height and Sign Area   
(a)  Sign Height The height of a sign shall be measured from the top edge of the sign to the ground level measured at the edge of the pavement of the public street on which the sign faces. 
(b)  Sign Area The area of a sign shall be computed as the area within the smallest standard geometric shape that encloses the extreme limits of lettering, representations, emblems, or other figures, together with all surrounding material, trim, or ornamentation that either form the integral part of the display or differentiate the sign from the background where it is placed (see Figure 40.1-5.11(D)(3)(b): Sign Area). The structural supports for a sign, whether they be columns, pylons or a building or part thereof, shall not be included in the sign area unless they are designed as integral parts of the sign for the purpose of illustration or attraction. 
 
(4)  Building Code Compliance and Installation   
(a)  Building Code Compliance The requirements of this section are supplemental to the Uniform Statewide Building Code and other applicable codes. Nothing herein shall exempt any sign from compliance with these codes. 
(b)  Signs to be Permanent Except for temporary signs installed in accordance with subsection 40.1-5.11(F), Temporary Sign Standards, all signs shall be permanently installed as defined by the Uniform Statewide Building Code. Installation using ropes, cords, and the like is not considered permanent. 
(5)  Materials   
(a)  Generally Permanent signs shall be constructed of durable, weather-proof materials. 
(b)  D1 District In the D1 district, a sign shall not be constructed of: 
(i)  Unfinished materials, including unpainted wood; 
(ii)  Highly reflective materials; 
(iii)  Plastic; or 
(iv)  If the Downtown Design Guidelines apply, any material that the Downtown Design Committee determines is inconsistent with the Downtown Design Guidelines. 
(6)  Illumination and Brightness   
(a)  Illumination, where permitted, shall be designed, installed and maintained in a manner that avoids glare on adjoining properties and that avoids glare or reflection which in any way interferes with traffic safety. 
(b)  Where illumination is by a source external to the sign, the source of illumination shall be aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the sign face and is not visible from off-site areas. 
(c)  The luminance of a sign shall not exceed 1500 nits during daylight hours and 150 nits at all other times. Signs incorporating displays that use light emitting diodes (LEDs), charge coupling devices (CCDs), plasma, or functionally equivalent technologies shall be equipped with automatic dimming technology and certified by the manufacturer or a qualified professional to be compliant with the maximum luminance standards in this subsection (6)(c). 
(d)  In the UR, UR-H, and Historic zoning districts, signs shall be illuminated only by a source external to the sign. 
(e)  In the D1 district, any illumination of a sign shall be directed at the sign from an external, shielded lamp, emitting a warm light, similar to daylight, except: 
(i)  Backlighting of individual letters is allowed; and 
(ii)  If approval of the sign by the Downtown Design Committee is required, the Committee may allow internal sign illumination, such as neon in limited amounts or incandescent bulbs, or other sign illumination, if the Committee determines the proposed illumination is compatible with the character of the street and with the historic character of individual buildings and the district as a whole. 
(7)  Automatic Changeable Copy   
(a)  Signs incorporating automatic changeable copy are prohibited outside of the NMU, GMU, MU-H, NAC, CAC, RAC, IL, and IN districts. 
(b)  A sign that incorporates automatic changes in display or copy shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  The display or copy shall remain static prior to each change for a period of not less than eight seconds. 
(ii)  Each change of the display or copy shall be accomplished within 0.25 seconds or less if the change is effected by digital means, or 2 seconds if the change is effected by mechanical means. 
(iii)  Each change of the display or copy shall be accomplished without the use of animation, scrolling, or simulated movement. 
(iv)  The device that automatically changes the display or copy shall be designed and equipped to maintain a static display if a malfunction occurs. 
(8)  Substitution The replacement of commercial content with noncommercial content on any sign permitted by this Sec. 40.1-5.11 is expressly allowed. 
(9)  Maintenance Each sign shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Maintenance shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Each sign shall be kept free of holes, tears, and fraying; 
(b)  Each sign shall be kept free of rust, rot, and similar degradation; and 
(c)  Cracked, shattered, or similarly damaged parts of a sign shall be replaced. 
(E)  Permanent Sign Standards   
(1)  Permanent Sign Types Allowed in Each Zoning District The types of permanent signs allowed in each zoning district are identified in Table 40.1-5.11(E)(1): Permanent Sign Types Allowed in each Zoning District. The types of signs that are allowed are indicated by "yes" in the zoning district column, and the types of signs that are not allowed are indicated by "no" in the zoning district column. For each type of sign, the right-most column in Table 40.1-5.11(E)(1) references the specific standards that apply to that type of sign. 
TABLE 40.1-5.11(E)(1): PERMANENT SIGN TYPES ALLOWED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT 
TYPE OF SIGN 	ZONING DISTRICT 	STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO SIGN TYPE 
	NR, GR 	UR, UR-H 	NMU 	GMU 	MU-H, NC, CAC, RAC (1) 	IL, IN 	D1 	D2 	WF 	PG 	HLOHLB 	HR 	
ATTACHED SIGNS 
Awning sign 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	yes 	no 	40.1-5.11(E)(3)(a) 
Canopy sign 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	yes 	no 	40.1-5.11(E)(3)(b) 
Marquee sign 	no 	no 	no 	yes 	no 	no 	yes 	yes 	no 	no 	no 	no 	40.1-5.11(E)(3)(c) 
Off-premises sign 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	yes 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	40.1-5.11(E)(3)(d) 
Projecting sign 	no 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	yes 	no 	40.1-5.11(e)(3)(e) 
Wall sign 	no 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	yes 	no 	40.1-5.11(e)(3)(f) 
Window sign 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	yes 	no 	40.1-5.11(E)(3)(g) 
FREESTANDING SIGNS 
Ground Sign 	no 	no 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	no 	yes 	yes 	no 	no 	40.1-5.11(e)(4)(b) 
Monument sign 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	40.1-5.11(e)(4)(c) 
Off-premises sign 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	yes 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	40.1-5.11(e)(4)(d) 
Pole sign 	no 	no 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	no 	yes 	yes 	no 	no 	40.1-5.11(e)(4)(e) 
NOTES: 
(1) Sign types indicated as allowed in the MU-H, NAC, CAC, and RAC districts are allowed unless inconsistent with the adopted design standards applicable to the district. 
 
(2)  Maximum Total Sign Area per Lot for Permanent Signs On any lot, the maximum total sign area of all permanent signs and any additional sign area restrictions for permanent attached signs and permanent freestanding signs are established in Table 40.1-5.11(E)(2): Maximum Total Sign Area Per Lot for Permanent Signs, for the zoning district in which the sign(s) is located. 
TABLE 40.1-5.11(E)(2): MAXIMUM TOTAL SIGN AREA PER LOT FOR PERMANENT SIGNS 
ZONING DISTRICT 	MAXIMUM TOTAL SIGN AREA PER LOT FOR ATTACHED AND FREESTANDING SIGNS (EXCLUDING WINDOW SIGNS) 	ADDITIONAL SIGN AREA RESTRICTIONS FOR ATTACHED SIGNS 	ADDITIONAL SIGN AREA RESTRICTIONS FOR FREESTANDING SIGNS 
NR, GR 	Ten percent of the area of the front building facade, or one square foot for every five linear feet of street frontage, whichever is greater, provided, no individual sign shall have a sign area in excess of 18 square feet 	None 	Not more than 36 square feet, or one square foot for every eight linear feet of street frontage, whichever is less 
UR, UR-H, HR, HLO, HLB 	Ten percent of the area of the front building facade, or one square foot for every two linear feet of street frontage of the lot, whichever is greater, provided, no individual sign shall have a sign area in excess of 18 square feet 	None 	Not more than 36 square feet, or one square foot for every three linear feet of street frontage, whichever is less, provided, no sign shall have a sign area in excess of 18 square feet 
NMU, GMU, MU-H, IL, IN, NAC, CAC, RAC, WF, PG 	Ten percent of the area of the front building facade or one square foot for every one linear foot of street front of the lot, whichever is greater, provided, no sign located on a lot having less than 40 linear feet of street frontage shall have a sign area in excess of 40 square feet 	None 	None 
D1 	Ten percent of the area of the front building facade, provided, no sign located on a lot having less than 40 linear feet of street frontage shall have a sign area in excess of 40 square feet 	None 	N/A 
D2 	Ten percent of the area of the front building facade, provided, no sign located on a lot having less than 40 linear feet of street frontage shall have a sign area in excess of 40 square feet 	None 	Not more than 40 square feet, or one square foot for every two linear feet of street frontage, whichever is less 
 
(3)  Permanent Attached Sign Standards (On-Site and Off-Premises) The general standards established for each type of permanent attached sign in subsections (a) through (g) below apply in all zoning districts, unless explicitly stated otherwise for specific zoning districts. 
(a)  Awning Sign 
(i)  General Standards 
a.  One awning sign is allowed on a lot for each public street on which the lot has frontage. 
b.  Awning signs are allowed only on awnings attached to the ground floor of a building. 
c.  An awning sign that is suspended from the bottom of an awning shall: 
1.  Not extend horizontally beyond the edges of the awning; and 
2.  Maintain a minimum vertical distance of eight feet between the bottom of the sign and the grade directly below the bottom of the sign. 
d.  An awning sign that is applied directly to the surface of an awning shall not be illuminated internally or have any form of backlighting. 
e.  An awning sign that is mounted on the front or side of an awning shall not extend above the highest point where the awning attaches to the building. 
(ii)  D1 District If the Downtown Design Guidelines apply, the color of the sign shall be in accordance with the Downtown Design Guidelines, as determined by the Downtown Design Committee. 
(iii)  D2 District In the D2 district, the vertical dimension of the sign area shall not exceed six inches on the vertical face of the curb side of the awning. 
(b)  Canopy Sign   
(i)  General Standards   
a.  One canopy sign is allowed on each side of a canopy visible from a public street on which the lot has frontage. 
b.  A canopy sign shall not extend above, beyond, or below any edge of the vertical face of the canopy roof structure. 
c.  The sign area of a canopy sign shall not exceed 20 percent the area of the vertical face of the side of the canopy roof structure to which it is attached. 
(ii)  D1 District If the Downtown Design Guidelines apply, the color of the sign shall be in accordance with the Downtown Design Guidelines, as determined by the Downtown Design Committee. 
(iii)  D2 District The vertical dimension of the sign area shall not exceed six inches on the vertical face of the curb side of the canopy. 
(c)  Marquee Sign   
(i)  General Standards A marquee sign shall maintain a minimum vertical distance of eight feet between the bottom of the sign and the grade directly below the bottom of the sign. 
(d)  Off-Premises Sign (Attached)   
(i)  IL and IN Districts Off-premises signs are permitted only in the IL and IN districts after a use permit for the sign has been approved by the City Council in accordance with Sec. 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit. 
(ii)  General Standards An off-premises sign (attached) shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The maximum sign area shall not exceed 672 square feet; 
b.  The maximum height shall not exceed 50 feet; 
c.  An off-premises sign (attached) shall be: 
1.  Oriented in only one direction; 
2.  Located not less than 25 feet from the right-of-way of any public street; 
3.  Located not less than 15 feet from any other property line, or, if the property line adjoins property in the NR, GR, UR, or UR-H district, by a distance at least equal to the height of the sign; and 
4.  Erected not less than 500 feet from any other off-premises sign on the same side of the same street. 
d.  Off-premises signs within 660 feet of the right-of-way of any highway classified as an interstate highway or as a federal aid primary highway shall also comply with Virginia Code, Sections 33.1-351 et seq. 
(e)  Projecting Sign   
(i)  General Standards A projecting sign shall: 
a.  Not extend more than six feet from a building to which it is attached; 
b.  Be perpendicular to the building to which it is attached; 
c.  Maintain a minimum vertical distance of eight feet between the bottom of the sign and the grade directly below the bottom of the sign; 
d.  Not exceed 12 square feet in area; 
e.  Not be illuminated; and 
f.  If located within the public right-of-way, comply with the provisions of Section 32-7 of the City Code pertaining to street encroachments. 
(ii)  D1 District In the D1 district, only one projecting sign is permitted per storefront. 
(iii)  D2 District In the D2 district, a projecting sign shall not measure more than two feet vertical by three feet horizontal, or three feet vertical by two feet horizontal. 
(f)  Wall Sign   
(i)  D1 District In the D1 district, a wall sign shall not obscure moldings or transoms. 
(ii)  D2 District In the D2 district, a wall sign shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The vertical dimension of the sign area of a wall sign shall not exceed three feet; 
b.  A sign may not be located closer than two feet from an adjacent common lot line; and 
c.  A sign shall not be painted on the front facade, unless existing prior to July 2009, but may be painted on the other exterior walls (side, rear, and courtyard). 
(g)  Window Sign   
(i)  On any story of a building, the total sign area of window signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the facade area comprised of windows. 
(ii)  A window sign shall not be illuminated by any source other than a source external to the sign. 
(4)  Permanent Freestanding Sign Standards (On-Site and Off-Premises) The general standards established for permanent freestanding signs in subsection (a) below and for each type of permanent attached sign in subsections (a) through (e) below, apply in all zoning districts, unless explicitly stated otherwise for specific zoning districts. 
(a)  General Standards A freestanding sign shall comply with the following standards: 
(i)  One freestanding sign support structure is allowed on a lot for each public street on which the lot has frontage. The sign support structure shall not support multiple co-located signs unless they are placed parallel to a common plane and arranged in one or a combination of the following ways: 
a.  Back-to-back; 
b.  In rows; or 
c.  In columns. 
(ii)  A freestanding sign and its supporting structure shall be located not less than: 
a.  Seven feet from the front property line; and 
b.  Fifteen feet from any adjoining property located in the NR, GR, UR, UR-H, HR, HLO, or HLB zoning district. 
(b)  Ground Sign   
(i)  General Standards A ground sign shall not exceed a height of 25 feet. 
(ii)  NR or GR District In the NR or GR district, a ground sign shall: 
a.  Not exceed six feet in height; and 
b.  Not be illuminated by any source other than a source external to the sign. 
(iii)  UR or UR-H District In the UR or UR-H districts, a ground sign shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(c)  Monument Sign   
(i)  General Standards 
a.  A monument sign shall not exceed a height of 12 feet. 
b.  The base or pedestal of a monument sign shall be constructed of brick, stone, concrete, or a material of similar bulk, weight, and durability. 
c.  A monument sign shall not be located less than one foot from any right-of-way. 
(ii)  NR or GR District In the NR or GR district, a monument sign shall: 
a.  Not exceed six feet in height; and 
b.  Not be illuminated by any source other than a source external to the sign. 
(iii)  UR or UR-H District In the UR or UR-H district, a monument sign shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(d)  Off-Premises Sign (Freestanding) A freestanding off-premises sign shall comply with the standards in subsection 40.1-5.11(E)(3)(d), Off-Premises Sign. 
(e)  Pole Sign   
(i)  General Standards A pole sign shall not exceed a height of 25 feet. 
(ii)  NR or GR District In the NR or GR District, a pole sign shall: 
a.  Not exceed six feet in height; and 
b.  Not be illuminated by any source other than a source external to the sign. 
(iii)  UR or UR-H District In the UR or UR-H districts, a pole sign shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(F)  Temporary Sign Standards   
(1)  Temporary Signs Allowed in Each Zoning District The types of temporary signs allowed in each zoning district are identified in Table 40.1-5.11(F)(1): Temporary Signs Allowed in each Zoning District. The types of signs that are allowed are indicated by "yes" in the zoning district column, and the types of signs that are not allowed are indicated by "no" in the zoning district column. For each type of sign, the right-most column in Table 40.1-5.11(F)(1) references the specific standards that apply to that type of sign. 
TABLE 40.1-5.11(F)(1): TEMPORARY SIGNS ALLOWED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT 
TYPE OF SIGN 	ZONING DISTRICT 	STANDARDS SPECIFIC TO SIGN TYPE 
	NR, GR 	UR, UR-H 	NMU, GMU 	MU-H, NAC, CAC, RAC 	IL, IN 	D1 	D2 	WF 	PG 	HR, HLB 	HLO 	
ATTACHED SIGNS 
Banner sign 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	40.1-5.11(f)(2)(a) 
Blade sign 	no 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	yes 	no 	40.1-5.11(f)(2)(b) 
Inflatable sign 	no 	no 	no 	no 	yes 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	40.1-5.11(f)(2)(c) 
Window sign 	no 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	no 	yes 	40.1-5.11(f)(2)(d) 
FREESTANDING SIGNS 
A-frame or T-frame sign 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	yes 	yes 	no 	no 	no 	no 	40.1-5.11(f)(3)(a) 
Inflatable sign 	no 	no 	no 	no 	yes 	yes 	no 	no 	no 	no 	no 	40.1-5.11(f)(3)(b) 
Wind sail sign 	no 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	yes 	yes 	yes 	no 	no 	40.1-5.11(f)(3)(c) 
Yard sign 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	yes 	40.1-5.11(f)(3)(d) 
 
(2)  Standards for Temporary Attached Signs   
(a)  Banner Sign Unless affixed to temporary protective fencing in accordance with subsection 40.1-5.11(B)(3)(d), a temporary banner sign shall not be displayed for a cumulative period of time longer than 30 days in any calendar year. 
(b)  Blade Sign   
(i)  General Standards A blade sign shall maintain a minimum eight feet clear height above the ground. 
(ii)  D2 District A blade sign shall not measure more than two feet vertical by three feet horizontal, or three feet vertical by two feet horizontal. 
(c)  Inflatable Sign (Attached) Temporary inflatable attached signs shall: 
(i)  Project no more than 30 feet above the roof line or top of the building or structure to which they are attached; 
(ii)  Not be designed to generate animation or movement; and 
(iii)  Be displayed no more than once per year per lot, for a period of time not to exceed seven days. 
(d)  Window Sign (Temporary) A temporary window sign shall comply with the standards in Sec. 40.1-5.11(E)(3)(g), Window Sign. 
(3)  Standards for Temporary Freestanding Signs   
(a)  A-frame or T-frame Sign   
(i)  One sign is permitted per establishment. 
(ii)  Sign area shall not exceed two feet in the horizontal dimension and three-and-one-half feet in the vertical dimension. 
(iii)  The sign shall be located in front of, and within 16 feet of the main entrance to, the premises. 
(iv)  The placement of signs must not interfere with pedestrian traffic, curb ramps, or access to buildings, driveways, or fire escapes 
(v)  The sign shall not be affixed, chained, anchored, or otherwise secured to the ground or to any pole, parking meter, tree, tree grate, fire hydrant, railing, or other structure. 
(vi)  The sign shall be internally weighted so that it is stable and windproof. 
(b)  Inflatable Sign (Freestanding) Temporary inflatable freestanding signs shall: 
(i)  Have a height not exceeding 30 feet above ground level; 
(ii)  Not be designed to generate animation or movement; and 
(iii)  Be displayed no more than once per year per lot, for a period of time not to exceed seven days. 
(c)  Wind Sail Sign   
(i)  One temporary wind sail sign is allowed on a lot that has at least 25 feet of street frontage. One additional temporary wind sail sign is allowed on the lot for each additional 50 feet of lot street frontage above 25 feet; 
(ii)  A wind sail sign shall not exceed nine feet in height; 
(iii)  A wind sail sign shall not be located within 25 feet of another wind sail sign on the same lot. 
(iv)  A wind sail sign shall not be located less than seven feet from the right-of-way. 
(d)  Yard Sign   
(i)  In addition to signs identified in subsection 40.1-5.11(B)(3), Signs not Requiring a Zoning Compliant Permit, up to four temporary yard signs having a combined sign area not exceeding 24 square feet are allowed per lot. 
(ii)  A yard sign shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(G)  Alternative Signage Plan   
(1)  Eligibility Large-scale development with common design elements (such as a shopping center, an office park, or large institutions such as a university or medical center with multiple buildings on a campus) may apply for a special exception permit to authorize alternative signage in accordance with an Alternative Signage Plan that proposes a comprehensive set of signage standards in-lieu of compliance with standards in this Sec. 40.1-5.11. 
(2)  Approval and Amendment Process   
(a)  Special Exception Permit Application, consideration, and approval or denial of a special exception permit for an Alternative Sign Plan, and any subsequent amendments to an approval, shall conform to and be governed by the procedures set forth in Sec. 40.1-2.3(D), Special Exception Permit. In addition to the special exception permit standards in Sec. 40.1-2.3(D), prior to approval of the special exception permit, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall also find that the proposed Alternative Sign Plan is consistent with the purpose of this Sec. 40.1-5.11, includes common elements and a consistent design scheme, is consistent with the purposes of the zoning district in which it is located, and is compatible with surrounding development. 
(b)  Reserved.   
(H)  Alternative Sign Overlay Districts   
(1)  Purpose Certain large-scale development with common design elements, including but not limited to office parks, corporate centers, and medical centers having a multi-building campus, or development that is unique in its design, operating characteristics, and presence in the city, including but not limited to outdoor performing arts centers, may present unique development opportunities of special value to the city. In order to ensure that the economic, social, and cultural benefits of that type of development are optimized, the establishment of one or more localized alternative sign overlay districts is authorized to address the unique signage needs and opportunities associated with the development. 
(2)  Applicability The type of large-scale development described in subsection (1) above may be classified to an Alternative Sign Overlay District in accordance with subsection (3) below. All properties located within Alternative Sign Overlay District shall be subject to the signage standards of the Alternative Sign Overlay District in-lieu of the standards in this Sec. 40.1-5.11. 
(3)  Procedure for Establishment An application for the establishment of an Alternative Sign Overlay District shall be submitted, reviewed, and decided upon in accordance with Sec. 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) or Text Amendment. Such an application shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  A description of the boundaries of the proposed district; 
(b)  A statement of the reasons for the request; and 
(c)  A comprehensive set of signage standards proposed by the applicant to be applied within the district. 
(4)  Comprehensive Signage Standards Comprehensive signage standards in an Alternative Sign Overlay District shall consist of a comprehensive design scheme that: 
(a)  Includes common elements; 
(b)  Is compatible with the character of the underlying base district; 
(c)  Is consistent with the purpose of this Sec. 40.1-5.11; and 
(d)  Is consistent with surrounding development.  
40.1-5.12 - Transportation Analysis 
(A)  Applicability The provisions of this section shall apply to all new development as follows: 
(1)  Any residential, commercial, industrial use, or combination thereof, where the anticipated average weekday twenty-four-hour traffic generation, using the Trip Generation Manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers, Sixth Edition or as it may from time to time be amended) equals or exceeds 1,000 trip ends or where the traffic volume during a peak hour equals or exceeds 100 trip ends unless the City Engineer shall determine, in writing, that such analysis is unnecessary due to the existence of previous studies and analyses which adequately cover the extent of the proposed development and its traffic impact. 
(2)  Any development or subdivision of a portion of property where the potential average weekday twenty-four-hour traffic generation, using the Trip Generation Manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers, Sixth Edition or as it may from time to time be amended) for the developable portion of the entire property based on permitted uses under existing zoning equals or exceeds 1,000 trip ends or where the traffic volume during a peak hour equals or exceeds 100 trip ends, regardless whether the remainder of the property is currently proposed for development unless the City Engineer shall determine, in writing, that such analysis is unnecessary due to the existence of previous studies and analyses which adequately cover the extent of the proposed development and its traffic impact. 
(3)  Any Amendment of the Zoning Map or Use Permit applications, other than those requests initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council, where the anticipated average weekday twenty-four-hour traffic generation, using the Trip Generation Manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers, Sixth Edition or as it may from time to time be amended) equals or exceeds 1,000 trip ends or where the traffic volume during a peak hour equals or exceeds 100 trip ends unless the City Engineer shall determine, in writing, that such analysis is unnecessary due to the existence of previous-studies and analyses which adequately cover the extent of the proposed development and its traffic impact. 
(4)  Any non-residential development which proposes to access a street which is residential in character and classified as a minor collector or lower order street. 
(5)  Any other development proposal which, as determined by the City Engineer, has a significant potential to cause or aggravate traffic safety or congestion problems and, as such, would benefit from a professional review of proposed access and circulation designs. 
(B)  Transportation Analysis Standards and Requirements   
(1)  For any development described in subsection (a) above, a traffic impact analysis, prepared by a licensed professional engineer, shall be submitted for review and consideration by the city. 
(2)  A minimum of five copies of such traffic impact analysis shall be submitted to the city at the same time as the initial application for approval. Preliminary Subdivision Plats, Development Plans, Amendments to the Zoning Map, Use Permit applications, and other development proposals for which a traffic impact analysis is required shall not be deemed to be received until the traffic impact analysis is submitted. The traffic engineering department will provide available technical information. The applicant must collect traffic data that is not already available or is outdated. 
(3)  The submitted traffic impact analysis shall, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer in writing, contain the following information and analysis: 
(a)  Existing conditions summary including twenty-four-hour volumes, peak periods and peak volumes on adjacent roadways, peak periods and peak volumes of the generator, and peak hour factor(s); roadway geometrics; grades; lateral clearance; heavy vehicles, pedestrian, bicycle, and recreational vehicle percentages; existing lane configurations; traffic control devices and timing plans if signals are present and level of service analysis based on the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual. 
(b)  Future conditions summary-including the horizon (analysis) year(s) and the criteria used in its selection, committed future roadway improvements, traffic growth factors combined with forecasts for adjacent sites to determine future background traffic (both twenty-four-hour and peak period), and level of service analysis, compared with existing conditions. 
(c)  Trip generation and design hour volumes-including traffic forecast for site development to include twenty-four-hour and peak hour volumes both for the traffic generator itself and on adjacent roadways. Trip Generation Manual (Institute of Transportation Engineers, Sixth Edition, or as it may from time to time be amended) rates or equations shall be used unless verifiable local data is available. Any assumptions or adjustments shall be fully documented and, where appropriate, justified with source references provided. 
(d)  Trip distribution and traffic assignment-including a directional distribution of site traffic to its area of influence based on primary market, analogy, origin-destination, gravity model, or other similar methods. Each step in the process shall be fully and carefully documented. 
(e)  Design year total volumes developed for both twenty-four-hour and for the peak periods of the generator and on adjacent roadways. 
(f)  Capacity analysis-including intersection and lane capacity based on the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual as it may from time to time be amended and revised. Where intersections (both signalized and unsignalized) are spaced in such proximity or the volumes are such that the intersection does not operate independently, appropriate progression and queuing analyses performed using a recognized methodology or analysis or simulation package must accompany the capacity analyses. Capacity analyses shall be prepared for each potential access design scenario. Any assumptions and adjustments to the default values in the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual shall be fully documented and justified. These include, but are not limited to, peak hour factor, average running speeds, and cycle lengths, especially very short or long cycles. All worksheets shall be submitted. 
(g)  The distribution and frequency of traffic accidents shall be analyzed and a determination made as to whether any safety deficiencies exist or will be caused or exacerbated. This shall specifically include a safety analysis of all proposed street extensions. 
(h)  The recommended roadway and traffic network improvements based on the design hour in the design year shall be shown on a scaled plan sheet with appropriate narrative. Such improvements shall be designed to yield a minimum level of service of "C" as defined by the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual as it may from time to time be amended, supplemented, or revised. Where the existing conditions provide a current level of service of less than "C," the improvements shall be designed to at least maintain the current volume to capacity ratio as determined by the methods contained in the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual without further degradation through the design year plus two years. A detailed construction cost estimate of the required improvements shall be provided. 
(i)  Including the number and width of driveway lanes, the appropriate throat lengths (both unobstructed and with cross traffic permitted) for ingress and egress points, stacking and queuing lanes, pedestrian accommodations, bicycle facilities, and any other facilities or accommodations and any other factor which could impact traffic operations along the adjacent roadways or overall traffic safety, both internal and external. The internal circulation system shall be designed to preclude stacking or queuing in the travel lanes of adjacent roadways during the peak hours of the traffic generator. 
(j)  Including all conclusions of the analyst applicable to the site, particularly with respect to the appropriate timing and phasing of improvements. Timing and phasing must be clearly tied to identifiable stages of development or specific time frames. Conclusions about the relative safety of the post-development situation shall also be included. 
(k)  An executive summary containing key findings and recommended actions. 
(4)  All intersections, commercial entrances, median breaks, pavement markings, driveways, or other roadway features potentially affecting traffic flow located within 500 feet of the proposed development as well as all intersections and driveways internal to the development shall be considered and either shown or clearly noted on a scaled plan submitted with the traffic impact analysis.  
40.1-5.13 - Underground Utilities 
All utilities within or serving new development (e.g., cable television, electrical (excluding transformers), gas, sewer, telephone, and water lines) shall be placed underground in accordance with Section 32-155 of the City Code.  
ARTICLE 40.1-6: - NONCONFORMITIES 
 
40.1-6.1 - General Applicability 
(A)  Purpose and Scope There exist in the city nonconforming uses of land, structures, lots, and signs that were lawfully established before this Ordinance was adopted or amended, that now do not conform to its requirements. The purpose and intent of this article is to regulate and to limit the continued existence of those nonconforming uses, structures, lots, and signs that do not conform to the requirements of this Ordinance, or any subsequent amendments. 
(B)  Intent of Provisions It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but discourage their survival or substantial investment in them except under the limited circumstances established in this article. 
(C)  Authority to Continue Nonconformities are allowed to continue, and are encouraged to receive routine maintenance in accordance with the requirements of this article as a means of preserving safety and appearance. 
(D)  Determination of Nonconformity Status In all cases, the burden of establishing that a nonconformity lawfully exists shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land on which the alleged nonconformity is located. 
(E)  Minor Repairs and Maintenance Minor repairs and normal maintenance that are required to keep nonconforming uses, structures, lots, and signs in a safe condition are allowed, provided the minor repair or maintenance does not extend, expand, or enlarge the nonconformity. For the purposes of this section, "minor repair or normal maintenance" shall mean: 
(1)  Maintenance of Safe Condition Repairs that are necessary to maintain a nonconforming use, structure, lot, or sign in a safe condition. 
(2)  Maintenance of Land for Safety Maintenance of land areas to protect against health hazards and to promote the safety of surrounding uses. 
(3)  Maintenance Limitations An improvement or other action intended to materially extend the useful life of a nonconformity shall not be considered maintenance. 
(F)  Value of Development or Redevelopment The cost or cash value of development or redevelopment associated with a nonconformity shall be determined by the Building Official. 
(G)  Change of Tenancy or Ownership No change of title or possession or right to possession of land shall be construed to prevent the continuance of a nonconforming use, structure, lot, or sign.  
40.1-6.2 - Nonconforming Uses 
(A)  General Nonconforming uses are declared generally incompatible with the permitted uses in the zoning district in which they are located and with the provisions of this Ordinance. To be considered a nonconforming use the property owner must provide documentation to the Zoning Administrator that the use was legally established. Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the standards in this subsection. 
(B)  Change of Use   
(1)  Residential Uses   
(a)  Nonconforming residential uses located within a building on a lot in a business district may be changed to another nonconforming residential use. 
(b)  In the event a building on a lot in a business district containing a nonconforming residential use is redeveloped to an extent exceeding 50 percent of its reproducible value (exclusive of foundations), the nonconforming residential use shall be extinguished, and all uses shall comply with this Ordinance. 
(2)  All Other Uses   
(a)  A nonconforming use, other than a residential use shall not be changed to any other nonconforming use. 
(b)  Whenever a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
(C)  Expansion and Enlargement   
(1)  Generally Except as otherwise allowed below, no nonconforming use shall be enlarged, intensified or increased, nor intensified to occupy a larger structure, building or land area than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or subsequent amendment of this ordinance. No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel unoccupied by such use at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this ordinance, and no building or structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with the nonconforming use of land. 
Nonconforming uses in a historic zoning district (HR, HLO, HLB) may expand, subject to an approved use permit, and the standards in this section. 
(2)  Date of Establishment Nonconforming uses in a historic district may only be expanded if lawfully-established prior to the following dates: 
(a)  Lots in the Olde Towne Historic District: September 23, 1971; 
(b)  Lots in the Truxtun Historic District: March 25, 1975; 
(c)  Lots in the Cradock Historic District: February 10, 1976; 
(d)  Lots in the Park View Historic District: April 1, 1984; and 
(e)  Lots in the Port Norfolk Historic District: April 26, 1983. 
(3)  Procedure   
(a)  Requests for expansion to an existing nonconforming use shall be reviewed in accordance with the requirements in Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permits, and Section 40.1-6.2(C)(3), Use Permit Standards. 
(b)  Expansions to nonconforming uses on lots within a Historic District shall obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness (Section 40.1-2.3(I)) prior to review of the Use Permit application. 
(4)  Use Permit Standards In approving a use permit for the expansion of a nonconforming use, the Planning Commission shall find: 
(a)  The nonconforming use remains compatible with adjacent land uses and the comprehensive plan; 
(b)  Approval of the use permit is not injurious to the neighborhood; 
(c)  All access roads and entrance or exit drives to the nonconformity will be adequate with respect to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow, and control and access in the case of fire or other emergency; 
(d)  All off-street parking, loading, refuse collection, and other service areas will be adequate with respect to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow, and economic, noise, glare, odor, and other impacts on adjoining properties; 
(e)  All landscaping, screening, and fencing will be adequate, with respect to the effectiveness of the type, dimensions, and character, and will be adequate with respect to minimizing the economic, noise, glare, odor, and other impacts of the nonconformity on adjoining properties and other properties in the neighborhood; 
(f)  That the type, size, and intensity of the proposed use, including such considerations as storage of items and arrangement, the size of the site and the location of the use upon it, and the hours of operation and numbers of people who are likely to utilize the use, will be adequate with respect to minimizing the impact of the nonconformity upon adjoining properties, other properties in the neighborhood, and achieving the purpose and intent of the zoning district in which the property is located; 
(g)  No part of the nonconforming use being expanded occurs outside a building or structure; 
(h)  Denial of the request would create a severe and undue hardship to the property owner; and 
(i)  Denial will result in no appreciable benefit to the neighborhood. 
(5)  Conditions The Planning Commission may impose any conditions on approval of the request, including appropriate time limits for meeting those conditions, as it deems necessary to mitigate any potential hazards or problems, or to bring the nonconformity into compliance to the extent necessary to protect the rights and interests of nearby property owners and the general public. 
(D)  Discontinuance or Abandonment   
(1)  A nonconforming use shall not be re-established after discontinuance for a period of two years or more. If efforts to renovate or repair the use legally began prior to the expiration of the two year period, the use is not considered a vacancy, abandonment, or discontinuance, provided all appropriate permits or development approvals are obtained, and provided the renovation or repair is completed within one year from commencement of repair or renovation, and the use is re-established within one month from the time the renovation or repairs are completed. Failure to complete the repairs or renovation within two years or re-establish the use within one month following repairs or renovation shall constitute discontinuance, and a nonconforming use shall not be re-established. 
(2)  If a building, structure or land was: a)vacant on May 1, 2010, b) the specialized equipment necessary for the operation of the approved use removed; and c) repairs are not occurring with a valid building permit, that parcel of land is to be considered vacant and all previous approvals null due to the owner's activities. 
(E)  Accessory Uses Once a nonconforming principal use is discontinued, all associated accessory uses shall cease operations within 30 days. 
(F)  Relocation In the event a structure housing a nonconforming use is moved any distance, the nonconforming use shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(G)  Reconstruction after Casualty Damage   
(1)  Destruction or Damage by Act of God or Natural Disaster   
(a)  Any nonconforming use which has been damaged or destroyed by a natural disaster or other act of God, may be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced to eliminate or reduce the nonconforming features. 
(b)  A nonconforming use may be restored to its original nonconforming condition, regardless of the amount of damage or destruction, provided it complies with the flood protection standards in Chapter 14 of the City Code. 
(c)  The owner or the owner's contractor shall apply for a building permit and complete all reconstruction within two years of the act of God or natural disaster. 
(d)  In the event the damage or destruction occurs in a federally-declared disaster area, all reconstruction shall be completed within four years of the declaration date. 
(e)  If a nonconforming use is not reconstructed within the required timeframe, reconstruction shall occur only in compliance with the standards in this Ordinance. 
(2)  Destruction or Damage by Other Means Casualty damage resulting from a means other than an act of God or natural disaster shall be subject to the following standards. 
(a)  Destruction or Damage of 50 Percent of Value   
(i)  Except for single-family detached, attached, two-to four-family, and townhouse dwellings, in the event a structure housing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed, to an extent that constitutes 50 percent or more of its replacement value (exclusive of foundations) at the time of damage or destruction, the use shall only be restored in a manner that conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(ii)  New construction (including the establishment of off-street parking, landscaping, signage, and other site features) shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(iii)  Nonconforming single-family detached, attached, two-to four-family, and townhouse dwellings damaged in excess of 50 percent of replacement value (exclusive of foundations) at the time of damage or destruction may be re-built subject to the standards in Section 40.1-6.2(G)(2)(b), Damage of Less Than 50 Percent of Value. 
(b)  Damage of Less Than 50 Percent of Value   
(i)  In the event a structure housing a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed, to an extent that constitutes less than 50 percent of its replacement value (exclusive of foundations) at the time of damage or destruction, it may be re-built to its previous form if a building permit for such repair or restoration is obtained within one year of the casualty damage, and repair or restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion. 
(ii)  Wherever practical, redevelopment of a nonconforming use following casualty damage shall demonstrate greater compliance with this Ordinance than existed prior to the casualty. 
(iii)  In no event shall repair or restoration increase, expand, or enlarge the degree of nonconformity.  
40.1-6.3 - Nonconforming Structures 
(A)  Relationship with Nonconforming Uses A nonconforming principal structure containing a conforming use may only continue in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Nonconforming structures housing nonconforming uses may only continue in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-6.2, Nonconforming Uses. 
(B)  Continuation Normal repair and maintenance may be performed to allow the continued use of nonconforming structures in accordance with Section 40.1-6.1(E), Minor Repairs and Maintenance. 
(C)  Enlargement   
(1)  Except for nonconforming structures in a historic district, nonconforming structures may be redeveloped or enlarged, provided they shall not be enlarged or expanded in any way that increases the nonconformity. Expansion of the structure in a way that complies with applicable dimensional standards or that decreases the degree of nonconformity is permitted. 
(2)  In the event a nonconforming structure is enlarged to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the structure's replacement value (exclusive of foundations), the entire structure shall be brought into compliance with the applicable dimensional standards for the district where located. 
(3)  In historic districts, a nonconforming structure may only be enlarged in accordance with the standards and procedure for enlarging a nonconforming use in Section 40-1.6.2 (C), Expansion and Enlargement in Historic Districts. 
(D)  Relocation A nonconforming structure shall not be moved, in whole or in part, to another location on or off the parcel of land on which it is located, unless upon relocation it conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(E)  Restoration after Casualty Damage   
(1)  Destruction or Damage by Act of God or Natural Disaster   
(a)  Any nonconforming structure which has been damaged or destroyed by a natural disaster or other act of God, may be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced to eliminate or reduce the nonconforming features. 
(b)  A nonconforming structure may be restored it to its original nonconforming condition, regardless of the amount of damage or destruction, provided it complies with the flood protection standards in Chapter 14 of the City Code. 
(c)  The owner or the owner's contractor shall apply for a building permit and complete all reconstruction within two years of the act of God or natural disaster. 
(d)  In the event the damage or destruction occurs in a federally-declared disaster area, all reconstruction shall be completed within four years of the declaration date. 
(e)  If a nonconforming structure is not reconstructed within the required timeframe, reconstruction shall occur only in compliance with the standards in this Ordinance. 
(2)  Destruction or Damage by Other Means Casualty damage resulting from a means other than an act of God or natural disaster shall be subject to the following standards. 
(a)  Residential Development If a legally-established single-family attached, detached, two- to four-family, or townhouse dwelling is destroyed by casualty on a lot in a residential zoning district that was part of a subdivision or division of land evidenced by plat or deed, or both, recorded prior to April 25, 1961, an identical replacement use may be reconstructed even though the structure is nonconforming. 
(b)  Nonresidential Development   
(i)  Destruction or Damage of 50 Percent of Value   
a.  Except for single-family detached, attached, two-to four-family, and townhouse dwellings, in the event a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed, to an extent that constitutes more than 50 percent of its replacement value (exclusive of foundations)at the time of damage or destruction, it shall only be restored in a manner that conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
b.  New construction (including the establishment of off-street parking, landscaping, signage, and other site features) shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(ii)  Damage of Less Than 50 Percent of Value   
a.  In the event a nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed, to an extent that constitutes less than 50 percent of its replacement value (exclusive of foundations)at the time of damage or destruction, it may be re-built to its previous form if a building permit for such repair or restoration is obtained within one year of the casualty damage, and repair or restoration is actually begun within one year after the date of such partial damage or destruction and is diligently pursued to completion. 
b.  In no event shall repair or restoration increase the nonconformity.  
40.1-6.4 - Nonconforming Lots 
(A)  Development Prohibited No use or structure shall be established on a lot of record that does not conform to the standards established in this Ordinance, except in accordance with this section. 
(B)  Status of Structures on Nonconforming Lots   
(1)  Conforming structures legally established on a nonconforming lot prior to May 1, 2010 may be continued, enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered in any way that is in conformance with the standards of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Nonconforming structures legally established on a nonconforming lot prior May 1, 2010 may be continued, enlarged, or redeveloped in accordance with the standards in Section 40.1-6.3, Nonconforming Structures. 
(C)  Governmental Acquisition of a Portion of Lot Conforming lots subject to governmental acquisition of a portion of the lot for a public purpose that results in the lot becoming nonconforming because it no longer complies with lot area or width standards of the district shall be deemed conforming upon receipt of a Zoning Compliance Permit (Section 40.1-2.3(F)), and compliance with the following standards: 
(1)  The development proposed complies with Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table. 
(2)  The development proposed complies with the dimensional standards of this Ordinance to the maximum extent practicable; 
(3)  The development proposed is designed to comply with the off-street parking and landscaping standards of this Ordinance to the maximum extent practicable; 
(4)  The development proposed complies with all other standards and requirements of this Ordinance; and 
(5)  The proposed development is designed and located in a way that is compatible with surrounding development. 
(D)  Lot Consolidation   
(1)  If a nonconforming lot of record has continuously been in separate ownership from any contiguous lot on the same existing or proposed public right-of-way since April 25, 1961, the nonconforming lot may be developed in accordance with the applicable standards in this Ordinance. 
(2)  If a nonconforming lot of record has, at any time since April 25, 1961, been in common ownership with any contiguous lot on the same existing or proposed public right-of-way, such lots shall be consolidated, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Lots within a historic district; and 
(b)  Preexisting non-conforming lots occupied by a detached single family residence where the principal building, associated accessory building[s] and related site improvements cross interior lot lines shall be determined to be a single lot of record. Such interior lot lines may be vacated at the request of the property owner. However, no lot of record shall be resubdivided unless all new lots so created are in conformity with the lot requirements of the district in which the subdivision is located. 
(3)  If all the contiguous lots in common ownership are consolidated and the resulting lot remains nonconforming, it still may be developed in accordance with Section 40.1-6.4(E), Development of Nonconforming Lots. 
(E)  Development of Nonconforming Lots   
(1)  In Residential Districts   
(a)  Nonconforming lots within a residential district may be developed for single-family detached residential use in accordance with the requirements in Section 40.1-2.3(C), Type I Development Plan, if all of the contiguous nonconforming lots in common ownership are consolidated, or if consolidation cannot be achieved because lots are not under common ownership. 
(b)  If after consolidation, or if consolidation cannot be achieved, the lot(s) still fail to comply with the standards of this Ordinance, one single-family detached residential unit may be developed on the lot(s). The single-family detached residential unit shall be located on the lot and designed so as to comply with the standards of this Ordinance, to the maximum extent practicable. 
(2)  In All Other Districts Nonconforming lots in business and special districts may be developed in accordance with the requirements in Section 40.1-2.3(D) and the following standards: 
(a)  The use shall be permitted in the district where proposed (See Table 40.1-4.1(A), Use Table); 
(b)  The use shall be of a design and location on the lot that is compatible with adjacent, existing uses; and 
(c)  The use shall comply with the applicable district standards to the maximum extent practicable. 
(F)  Restoration after Casualty Damage If a legally-established, conforming use is destroyed by casualty on a nonconforming lot that was part of a subdivision or division of land evidenced by plat or deed, or both, recorded prior to April 25, 1961, an identical replacement use may be reconstructed even though the lot is nonconforming.  
40.1-6.5 - Nonconforming Signs 
The following additional restrictions shall apply to signs which were legally erected prior to January 9, 2018, but which do not conform to provisions of this Ordinance: 
(1)  Any nonconforming on-premises sign and sign structure shall be removed or brought into conformance with this Ordinance if for any period of at least two years it does not advertise a business or service located on the same lot with the sign; 
(2)  Any nonconforming off-premises sign and sign structure shall be removed or brought into conformance with this Ordinance if for any period of at least two years it does not contain copy or messages on the advertising display area; 
(3)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, Section 15.2-2307(G), the city may require the property owner to remove any non-conforming sign and/or sign structure which has been abandoned if the business for which the sign was erected has not been in operation for at least two years, or the city may remove the sign and structure after giving notice and reasonably attempting to contact the property owner and charge the cost of removal to the property owner; and 
(4)  If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by natural causes, it may not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed or replaced except in conformity with all of the provisions of this Ordinance. All remnants of the former sign or sign structure not incorporated into the repaired, reconstructed or replaced signage shall be removed from the property. For purposes of this section, a nonconforming sign is "destroyed" if damaged to the extent that the cost of repairing the sign to its former condition equals or exceeds the value of the sign so damaged.  
40.1-6.6 - Nonconforming Site Aspects 
(A)  Purpose   
(1)  The purpose of this section is to provide a means by which the city may require certain nonconforming site features to come into compliance with the standards of this Ordinance as part of remodeling or expansion of a building or structure. 
(2)  It is not the intent of this section to allow multiple incremental improvements to a nonconforming site without addressing the nonconformities as required in this section. 
(B)  Applicability   
(1)  For purposes of this section, the term "nonconforming site features" includes the following: 
(a)  Nonconforming off-street parking; 
(b)  Nonconforming landscaping; 
(c)  Nonconforming screening of mechanical equipment; and 
(d)  Nonconforming screening walls or fences. 
(2)  If an application is filed for a building permit for the remodeling or expansion of a building or site that has one or more nonconforming site features identified in Section 40.1-6.6(B), Applicability, and the value of the proposed improvements over a five-year period exceeds at least 25 percent of the assessed value of the existing site over a five-year period, the applicant shall be required to address the nonconforming site features as provided in this section. 
(3)  The Planning Director may develop administrative guidelines to assist in the implementation of this subsection, including guidelines for the resolution of conflicts when it may not be possible for one or more types of nonconforming site features to be brought into conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance because of particular site constraints or impacts upon adjacent properties. 
(C)  Exemptions These standards shall not apply to the reconstruction of a nonconformity damaged by an act of God or other natural disaster. 
(D)  Structural Alteration These standards shall apply to structural alterations, as provided in Section 36-97 of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. For the purposes of these standards, structural alternations only include activities that do not result in the expansion of a building. 
(1)  Determining Applicability For purposes of determining when site features must be brought into partial or full compliance with the standards of this Ordinance, the costs that constitute the assessed value of the structural alteration of a building or structure shall be as shown on the building permit application, and shall include the cost of materials and labor. 
(2)  General   
(a)  25 Percent or Less of Structure Value Structural alteration of a building or structure during a five-year period whose assessed value is 25 percent or less of the current assessed value of the building or structure shall not require any correction to nonconforming site features. 
(b)  More Than 25 Percent but Less Than 75 Percent of Structure Value Structural alteration of a building or structure whose assessed value exceeds more than 25 percent but less than 75 percent of the current assessed value of the structure during a five-year period shall require that a corresponding percentage of the site features identified in Section 40.1-6.6(B), Applicability, be brought into compliance, until the site achieves 100 percent compliance. 
Example: a nonresidential site with nonconforming off-street parking (site feature) with an assessed value of $100,000 is undergoing remodeling equaling $40,000 (40 percent of the assessed value), the developer must add a corresponding number of additional required parking spaces until the site fully complies. The site at the time of remodel has 10 parking spaces, but the ordinance requires a minimum of 20 for the use that is proposed (10 more spaces are required for the site to be conforming), the applicant would be required to provide 40 percent of the 20 spaces—or 8 more parking spaces, bringing the total number of spaces on the site to 18 spaces. 
(c)  75 Percent or More of Structure Value Structural alteration of a building or structure during a five-year period whose alteration is estimated to cost 75 percent or more of the current assessed value of the building or structure shall require 100 percent compliance with the site features identified in Section 40.1-6.6(B), Applicability. 
(d)  Two or Fewer Additional Parking Spaces When two or fewer additional off-street parking spaces are required under this subsection as a result of a redevelopment, such additional off-street parking is not required to be installed. 
(3)  Physically Constrained Properties- Comply to Maximum Extent Practicable Lands that are physically constrained (due to limited size, topography, or other environmental considerations) from complying with these provisions shall comply to the maximum extent practicable, as determined by the Planning Director. 
(E)  Expansions Expansions to buildings or structures or use areas on sites with nonconforming site features identified in Section 40.1-6.6(B), Applicability, shall require compliance until the site achieves 100 percent compliance for site features in accordance with this section. 
(1)  General   
(a)  Expansions of 15 Percent or Less   
(i)  Additions or expansions that increase a building or structure or use area's size by 15 percent or less over a five-year period shall not require any correction to nonconforming site features. 
(ii)  This provision shall not be used to allow multiple, incremental, small-scale increases to a structure or use area without addressing nonconforming site features. 
(b)  Expansion between 15 and 50 Percent of Gross Square Footage Over 5 Years Expansion in any continuous five-year period, which results in an increase in the gross square footage of the existing building or structure or use area (measured at the beginning of the five-year period) greater than 15 percent, but less than 50 percent, requires a corresponding percentage of the nonconforming site features identified in Section 40.1-6.6(B), Applicability, to be brought into compliance, until the site achieves 100 percent compliance. 
Example: A 25 percent increase in square footage will necessitate a 25 percent increase in the total number of parking spaces provided (up to the minimum requirement). Existing landscaping on the site shall be retained or replaced but shall not count toward the required percentage of new landscaping. 
(c)  Expansion of Greater Than 50 Percent of Gross Square Footage Over 5 Years Expansions over any continuous five-year period, which results in a greater than 50 percent increase of the gross square footage of the existing building or structure or use area (measured at the beginning of the five-year period) that has a nonconforming site feature identified in Section 40.1-6.6(B), Applicability, shall require the building or site or use area to comply with the standards of this Ordinance for that site feature. 
(2)  Physically Constrained Properties- Comply to Maximum Extent Practicable Lands that are physically constrained (due to limited size, topography, or other environmental considerations) from complying with these provisions shall comply to the maximum extent practicable as determined by the Planning Director. 
(3)  Addition of Outdoor Storage Area Only When only outdoor storage areas are being added or increased on a site, the percentage increase in outdoor operations area shall require a corresponding percentage increase in perimeter buffers and screening. Perimeter buffer and screening augmentation shall be located so as to achieve the performance objectives in Section 40.1-5.2, Landscaping and Screening, with priority given to screening the impacts of outdoor operations.  
ARTICLE 40.1-7: - ENFORCEMENT 
 
40.1-7.1 - Purpose 
This article establishes procedures through which the city seeks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and obtain corrections for Ordinance violations. It also sets forth the remedies and penalties that apply to violations of this Ordinance. The provisions of this article are intended to encourage the voluntary correction of violations, where possible.  
40.1-7.2 - Compliance Required 
(A)  General Compliance with all the procedures, standards, and other provisions of this Ordinance is required by all persons owning, developing, managing, using, or occupying land or structures in the city. 
(B)  Receipt of Development Approvals Required All persons shall obtain all permit and development approvals required by this Ordinance prior to development.  
40.1-7.3 - Violations 
(A)  General Violations   
(1)  Failure to Comply with Ordinance or Condition of Approval Constitutes Violation Any failure to comply with a standard, requirement, prohibition, or limitation imposed by this Ordnance, or the terms or conditions of any permit or other development approval or authorization granted in accordance with this Ordinance shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance as provided in this article. 
(2)  Permits or Permit Approvals Only Authorize Development Approved Permits or development approvals issued by a review or decision-making body authorize only the use, density or intensity, location, design, or development set forth in such permits or development approvals. Development that differs from that approved by a review or decision-making body in a permit or development approval in accordance with this Ordinance is a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided in this article. 
(B)  Specific Violations It shall be a violation of this Ordinance to undertake any development contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, including but not limited to the following, which shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this article and the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended: 
(1)  Develop land without first obtaining all appropriate permits or development approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions. 
(2)  Occupy or use land or a structure without first obtaining all appropriate permits or development approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions. 
(3)  Engage in any development or other activity of any nature in any way inconsistent with the permit or development approval, or other form of authorization granted for such activity by the city. 
(4)  Violate, by act or omission, any term, condition, or qualification placed by the city upon a required permit, certificate, or other form of authorization granted by the city to allow the development or other activity upon land. 
(5)  To alter, maintain, or use any building or structure or to use any land in violation of any provision of this Ordinance. 
(6)  Install, create, erect, alter, or maintain any sign without first obtaining the appropriate permits or development approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions. 
(7)  Create, expand, replace, or change any nonconformity, except in accordance with this Ordinance. 
(8)  Reduce or diminish the requirements of use, development, or dimensional standards below the minimum required by this Ordinance. 
(9)  Through any act or omission, fail to comply with any other provisions, procedures, or standards, as required by this Ordinance. 
(10)  To continue any of the above-stated violations.  
40.1-7.4 - Responsible Persons 
The owner, tenant, or occupant of any land or structure, or an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, or any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains a situation that constitutes a violation of this Ordinance may be held responsible for the violation and subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in this article.  
40.1-7.5 - Enforcement Generally 
(A)  Responsibility for Enforcement The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance in accordance with the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(B)  Complaints Regarding Violations Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may notify the Zoning Administrator, stating fully the cause and basis of the alleged violation. The Zoning Administrator shall properly record such complaint, investigate, and take appropriate action as provided by this Ordinance. 
(C)  Inspections The Zoning Administrator may enter upon land or inspect any structure to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, after requesting and receiving approval of the land owner to enter upon land for these purposes. If consent is not given by the land owner, the Zoning Administrator may enter upon land in accordance with 15-2.2286(A)15, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(D)  Investigations of Complaint   
(1)  Learning there is a potential violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall investigate and determine whether a violation of this Ordinance exists. 
(2)  When the Zoning Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this Ordinance that limits occupancy in a Dwelling Unit has or is taking place, and the Zoning Administrator has been unable to obtain necessary information from the owner concerning the violation, the Zoning Administrator may petition the general district court for a subpoena against anyone refusing to provide data or information. Any person failing to comply with such subpoena shall be subject to punishment for contempt by the court issuing the subpoena. 3 
(3)  Following an unsuccessful good faith effort to obtain consent to investigate an alleged violation of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and request an inspection warrant to enable the Zoning Administrator to enter the premises for the purpose of determining whether a violation exists. 
(E)  Notice of Violations   
(1)  Procedure   
(a)  On finding that a violation of this Ordinance exists, the Zoning Administrator shall provide written notification of the violation through a notice of violation, by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property on which the violation exists and the person causing or maintaining the violation. Such notification shall: 
(i)  Describe the location and nature of the violation; 
(ii)  State the actions necessary to abate the violation; 
(iii)  Order that the violation be corrected within a specified reasonable time period not to exceed 30 days after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall state what course of action is intended if the violation is not corrected with the specified time limit. The notice of violation shall also advise the alleged violator(s) of their right to appeal the notice of violation to the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal, within 30 days of receipt of the notice of violation, and that the decision not to appeal shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within 30 days. The fee for an appeal and where additional information may be obtained for filling an appeals shall also be included in the notice of violation. 
(c)  A notice of violation involving temporary or seasonal commercial uses, parking of commercial trucks in a residential zoning district, or similar short-term, recurring violations shall have an appeal of ten days, and that the decision not to appeal shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within ten days. 
(d)  On receiving a written request for extension of the time limit for correction specified in the notice of violation, the Zoning Administrator may, for good cause shown, grant a single extension of the time for up to 30 days. 
(e)  If the owner of the property cannot be located or determined, the Zoning Administrator shall post a copy of the notice of violation on the building, structure, sign, or site that is the subject of the violation. In such a case, the time limit for correction of the violation shall be deemed to begin five days after the notice is posted. 
(2)  Application of Remedies and Penalties On determining that the violator has failed to correct the violation by the time limit set forth in the notice of violation, or any granted extension thereof, or has failed to timely appeal the notice of violation in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall take appropriate action, as provided in Section 40.1-7.6, Remedies and Penalties, to correct and abate the violation and to ensure compliance with this Ordinance. 
(3)  Emergency Enforcement without Notice On determining that delay in correcting the violation would pose a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the Zoning Administrator may seek immediate enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the remedies authorized in Section 40.1-7.6, Remedies and Penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 22), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-7.6 - Remedies and Penalties 
(A)  Enforcement and Remedies Any violation of this article may be corrected, restrained, or abated by any of the following proceedings and remedies in accordance with the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(1)  The city may stop work on any building or structure on any land on which there is or has been an uncorrected violation of a provision of this article or of a permit or other form of authorization issued hereunder in accordance with its powers to stop work under the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(2)  Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a Certificate of Appropriateness (COA) may result in the revocation of any subsequently issued permit requiring a COA or may result in a notice of violation. 
(3)  In accordance with Section 15.2-2209 and 15.2-2286(A)5, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the city has adopted a uniform schedule of penalties for violations of this Ordinance, which shall include the maximum penalties allowed by the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(a)  This schedule of offenses does not include any zoning violation resulting in injury to any persons, and the existence of these penalties shall not preclude action by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Section 15.2-2286(A)4 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, or action by the City Council under Section 15.2-2208 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(b)  Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. However, specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any 10-day period, and a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $5,000. 
(c)  Designation of a particular Ordinance violation for a penalty in accordance with this section shall be in-lieu of other sanctions, and except for any violation resulting in injury to persons, such designation shall preclude the prosecution of a violation as a criminal misdemeanor. 
(d)  The Zoning Administrator may issue a civil summons as provided by law for a scheduled violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a scheduled violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the Department of Finance or the Treasurer of the city prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offense charged. Such persons shall be informed of their right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. 
(e)  If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. In any trial for a scheduled violation authorized by this section, it shall be the burden of the locality to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission of liability or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(4)  If the alleged violator fails to correct the violation by the time limit set forth in the notice of violation, or any granted extension, or paid the appropriate penalty, and failed to timely appeal the notice of violation in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal, the Zoning Administrator shall, after consultation with the City Attorney, take appropriate legal action in the circuit court of the City of Portsmouth, including requirements to correct and abate the violation. 
(5)  In accordance with Section 15.2-2286(A) 5 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the court may impose penalties upon the conviction of any violator. A violation shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine that does not exceed the maximum allowed by the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. If the violation is uncorrected at the time of conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation to comply with the violation, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a zoning violation within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine that does not exceed the maximum allowed by the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
(6)  Any conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in a Dwelling Unit shall be punishable by a fine of up to $2,000. Failure to abate the violation within the specified time period shall be punishable by a fine of up to $5,000, and any such failure during any succeeding 10-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each 10-day period punishable by a fine of up to $7,500. However, no such fine shall accrue against an owner or managing agent of a Dwelling Unit during the pendency of any legal action commenced by such owner or managing agent of such Dwelling Unit against a tenant to eliminate an overcrowding condition. A conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in Dwelling Units shall not be punishable by a jail term. 
(7)  At any time after the filing of an injunction or other appropriate proceeding to restrain, correct, or abate an alleged violation of this Ordinance where the owner of the real property is a party to such proceeding, the Zoning Administrator may record a memorandum of lis pendens in accordance with Section 8.01-268 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. Any memorandum of lis pendens admitted to record in an action to enforce a violation of this Ordinance shall expire after 180 days. If the city has initiated an enforcement proceeding against the owner of the real property and such owner subsequently transfers the ownership of the real property to an entity in which the owner holds an ownership interest greater than 50 percent, the pending enforcement proceeding shall continue to be enforced against the owner. 
(8)  The city shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time to time be provided for or allowed by the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, for the violation of zoning, subdivision, and other provisions of the City Code. 
(9)  To the extent allowed by law, all such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation. 
(B)  Remedies for Failure to Obtain or Comply with a Certificate of Appropriateness In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2209, the uniform schedule of civil penalties for failure to obtain or comply with an approved certificate of appropriateness in Table 40.1-7.5(A) Civil Penalties in Historic Districts, is adopted. The table does not include any zoning violation resulting in injury to any persons, and the existence of these civil penalties shall not preclude action by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Section 15.2-2286(4) of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, or action by the city under Section 15.2-2208 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. 
TABLE 40.1-7.5(A): CIVIL PENALTIES IN HISTORIC DISTRICTS 
FAILURE TO OBTAIN A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR: 	INITIAL OFFENSE [1] 	CONTINUING OFFENSE [2] 	REPEAT OFFENSE [3] 
The removal and/or installation of roofing materials 	$100 	$500 	$500 
The removal and/or installation of wall siding materials 	$100 		
The removal and/or installation of windows 	$200 		
The removal and/or installation of exterior doors 	$100 		
The removal and/or installation of fences 	$100 		
The painting of any exterior surfaces 	$50 		
The removal and/or installation of driveways and/or sidewalks 	$100 		
The demolition of part or all of any structure 	$200 		
The construction of any addition 	$200 		
NOTES: 
[1] An initial offense is the first offense committed by this individual at this or any other property in the historic districts. 
[2] A Continuing offense is an offense that has not been corrected after receiving notice to correct and being issued an initial civil penalty. 
[3] A repeat offense is an offense committed by an owner, agent and/or contractor after receiving a violation notice for failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness at any other property within any of the historic districts 
 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 23), 12-8-2015)  
ARTICLE 40.1-8: - DEFINITIONS 
 
40.1-8.1 - General Rules for Interpretation 
The following rules shall apply for construing or interpreting the terms and provisions of this Ordinance. 
(A)  Meanings and Intent All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the general purposes set forth in Section 40.1-1.3, General Purpose and Intent, and the specific purpose statements set forth throughout this Ordinance. When a specific section of these regulations gives a different meaning than the general definition provided in this article, the specific section's meaning and application of the term shall control. 
(B)  Headings, Illustrations, and Text In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this Ordinance and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control. Graphics and other illustrations are provided for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a complete and accurate description of all applicable regulations or requirements. 
(C)  Lists and Examples Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms like "for example," "including," and "such as," or similar language are intended to provide examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities. 
(D)  Computation of Time The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
(E)  References to Other Regulations or Publications Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such regulation, resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(F)  Delegation of Authority Any act authorized by this Ordinance to be carried out by a specific official of the city may be carried out by a professional-level designee of such official. 
(G)  Technical and Non-technical Terms Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
(H)  Public Officials and Agencies All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Portsmouth, unless otherwise indicated. 
(I)  Mandatory and Discretionary Terms The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in nature. 
(J)  Conjunctions Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply; and 
(2)  "Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply. 
(K)  Tenses and Plurals Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa. 
(L)  Terms Not Defined If a term used in this Ordinance is not defined in this article, the Planning Director shall have the authority to provide a definition through the interpretation procedure (See Section 40.1-2.3(J), Interpretation.) based upon the definitions used in accepted sources, including but not limited to A Planners Dictionary, A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms, and A Survey of Zoning Definitions, published by the American Planning Association.  
40.1-8.2 - Rules of Measurement 
(A)  Measurements, Generally   
(1)  Purpose The purpose of this section is to clarify the rules of measurement and exemptions that apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in this Ordinance. These standards may be modified by other applicable sections of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Distance Measurements, Generally Unless otherwise expressly stated, distances specified in this Ordinance are to be measured as the length of an imaginary straight line joining those points. 
(B)  Lots   
(1)  Definitions/Measurement   
(a)  Average Lot Size The mean lot size for three or more lots located along the same block face. 
(b)  Average Lot Width The mean lot width for three or more lots located along the same block face. Average lot width is measured at the edge of the public right-of-way, not the rear edge of the front yard. 
(c)  Contextual Lot Size Standards Dimensional configuration using one or more of the following: 
(i)  Average lot size; 
(ii)  Average lot width; 
(iii)  Average front yard; 
(iv)  Average Rear yard; or 
(v)  Average side yard. 
(d)  Lot Coverage See "Building Coverage". 
(e)  Lot Depth The horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line. 
(f)  Lot or Street Frontage In the case of a building lot abutting upon only one street, the frontage line is the line parallel to and common with the right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot, that part of the building lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall be considered the frontage line. 
(g)  Lot Line   
 
(i)  Corner Side Lot Line The corner side lot line is a side lot line that abuts a street or other right-of-way. 
(ii)  Front Lot Line The front lot line is the line connecting the two side lot lines along the edge of the street. 
(iii)  Rear Lot Line The rear lot line is the line connecting the two side lot lines along the edge of the lot opposite from the front line. 
(iv)  Side Lot Line The side lot line is the lot line connecting the front and rear lot lines regardless of whether it abuts a right-of-way or another lot line. 
(h)  Lot Size   
(i)  The amount of land area, measured horizontally, included within the lines of a lot. Lands located within any private easements shall be included within the lot size. Public rights-of-way, areas below the mean high-water mark, marshlands, wetlands, or drainage areas located below the normal water level are not be included in calculating lot size, except where specifically allowed by this Ordinance. 
(ii)  The "pole" or "pan handle" portion of a flag lot shall not be counted towards the lot size. 
(i)  Lot Types   
 
(i)  Corner Lot A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets (other than alleys), regardless of whether or not such streets intersect at right angles. 
(ii)  Cul-de-Sac Lot A lot located on the head or turnaround of a cul-de-sac with side lot lines on a tangent to the arc of the right-of-way. 
(iii)  Double Frontage Lot A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an alley. 
 
(iv)  Flag Lot A lot that does not abut or front a street where access is obtained by a narrow private right-of-way. 
(v)  Interior Lot A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street other than an alley. 
(vi)  Zone Lot A parcel of land under single ownership that has a sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for the base zoning district where it is located. 
(j)  Lot Width The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured at the back edge of the front yard. On cul-de-sacs, lot width is measured at a point of tangency to the curve of the street. 
(2)  General Lot Requirements   
(a)  Erection of More Than One Principal Structure on a Platted Lot Whenever any land is subdivided, a building permit for the construction of a building or other principal structure (excluding buildings under common ownership or unified control) shall not be issued unless the land is subdivided in accordance with the procedures and standards in Chapter 33.1 of the City Code. 
(b)  Lots Divided By Zoning District Lines Whenever a single lot is located within two or more different zoning districts, each portion of that lot shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to the district in which it is located. 
(c)  Flag Lots All yards of a flag lot shall meet the minimum dimensional requirements for a front yard in the district where the flag lot is located. 
(3)  Zero Side Lot Line Development For Townhouse Dwellings, one side yard otherwise required hereunder shall be reduced to zero, provided that: 
(a)  A subdivision plat approved in accordance with Chapter 33.1 of the City Code authorizes the placement of the Townhouse Dwelling on one side of the lot line; 
(b)  The width of the remaining side yard is equal to or exceeds the sum of both required side yards; 
(c)  Any wall facing on the zero side lot line is a structural wall capable of providing protection from fire, noise, and visual encroachment; 
(d)  At least 10 feet of the remaining side yard is open for access to the homeowner and city services; 
(e)  A five-foot-wide nonexclusive maintenance easement contiguous to the zero lot line wall on the adjoining property is reserved for the homeowner to repair and maintain such wall; 
(f)  Any eave encroachments over the zero side lot line are one foot or less; and 
(g)  The zero side lot line development is suitable, uniform, and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(C)  Required Yards   
(1)  Definitions/Measurement   
(a)  Accessory Structure Yard The minimum yard requirement between a lot line and an allowable accessory structure. Accessory structures may not be placed within front or corner side yards. 
(b)  Average Front Yard The mean depth of front yards of three or more lots along the same block face. 
(c)  Average Rear Yard The mean depth of rear yards of three or more of the same type of lot along the same block face. 
(d)  Average Side Yard The mean depth of side yards of three or more 
(e)  Building Setback Line A line located at the inside edge of a required front, side, or rear yard. Exterior building walls may not encroach into the required yard beyond the building setback line. Portions of a building, (e.g., an overhang, eave, entry stairs, bay windows, foundation planters, etc.) may encroach into a required yard as allowed in Section 40.1-8.3, Allowable Yard Encroachments. 
(f)  Build-to Line A line with which the majority of an exterior wall of a building is required to coincide. 
(g)  Right-of-Way Land dedicated, deeded, used, or to be used for a street, road, alley, pedestrian way, crosswalk, bikeway, drainage facility, or other public uses, wherein the owner gives up rights to the land so long as it is being or will be used for the dedicated purpose. Right-of-way also is a land measurement term, meaning the distance between lot property lines which generally contain not only the street pavement, but also the sidewalk, grass area, and underground or aboveground utilities. 
(h)  Yard A required open area unoccupied and unobstructed by any building or by any structure or portion of a structure except as allowed by this Ordinance. Fences, walls, and incidental structures (e.g., flagpoles, birdhouses or feeders, clothesline posts, etc.) may be permitted within a yard provided the structures do not interfere with corner visibility. 
(i)  Yard Types   
(i)  Corner Side Yard A yard extending between the front and rear lot lines parallel to an abutting street or right-of-way. 
(ii)  Development Perimeter Yard An undeveloped yard of a minimum width that surrounds all sides of a development. 
(iii)  Front Yard A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot between the frontage line and the front building setback line. 
(iv)  Rear Yard A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear building setback line. In the case of double frontage lots, there is no rear yard, and the requirements for the front yard shall apply to the front and rear. 
(v)  Side Yard A yard extending from the front building setback line to rear building setback line. In the case of double frontage lots, the side yard extends from the front building setback line to the opposing building setback line associated with the other yard. 
(vi)  Zero Side Lot Line A condition where no side yard is provided between two or more distinct Dwelling Units sharing a party wall (e.g., Townhouse Dwellings). 
(2)  General Yard Requirements   
(a)  In General A yard or other open area required about a building shall not be included as part of a yard or other open space for another building. 
(b)  Required Yards Increased for Some Uses   
(i)  Any commercial or industrial use on a lot adjacent to a lot in residential or historic base zoning district that is vacant or occupied by a dwelling unit shall maintain the minimum side or rear yard requirement, as appropriate, required by the adjacent residential or historic zoning base district. 
 
(ii)  In addition, the minimum yard requirements for such commercial or industrial buildings shall be increased by one foot for every foot in building height beyond 36 feet. 
(3)  Allowable Yard Encroachments The following features may encroach into required yards: 
 
(a)  Driveways, walkways, patios, stairs, paved areas, and other accessory structures less than 36 inches above grade and all landscape plantings are exempted from yard requirements, but are subject to corner visibility requirements. 
(b)  Fences and walls intended for privacy or demarcation of lot lines that meet the standards in Section 40.1-5.10, Fences and Walls, may encroach into a required yard, but shall be subject to corner visibility requirements. Fences or walls intended for screening of service areas or mechanical equipment may not encroach into required yards. 
(c)  Stairs, ramps, chimneys, fireplaces, windows, pilasters, balconies, uncovered decks, uncovered porches, air condensers, mechanical equipment, signs, and other accessory structures with a height exceeding 36 inches above grade may encroach into a required yard by up to three feet. 
(d)  Front porches may encroach into front yards up to six feet. 
(4)  Corner Visibility   
(a)  Corner lots shall preserve areas necessary for corner visibility by limiting fence or wall height to a maximum of three feet above grade, and all other obstructions between three and ten feet of the established grade in the following areas: 
(i)  For lots with an interior corner lot angle of 90 degrees or more at the street corner, the corner area is the area within the triangle created by the two corner lot lines and drawing an imaginary line between the corner lot lines at 30 feet from the corner on each property lot line. 
(ii)  For lots with an interior angle of less than 90 degrees at the street corner, the corner area is the area within the triangle created by the two corner lot lines and drawing an imaginary line between the corner lot lines 30 feet from the corner on each property lot line plus one foot for every ten degrees or major fraction less than 90 degrees. 
 
(b)  These standards do not apply to United States mailboxes, police and fire alarm boxes, public utility poles, street name markers, official traffic signs and control devices, and fire hydrants. 
 
(c)  Lots in an historic or downtown zoning district, may waive these standards following approval by the City Traffic Engineer, to fulfill the purposes and objectives declared in Section 40.1-3.6(F), Historic Districts. 
(D)  Bulk   
(1)  Definitions/Measurement   
(a)  Building Coverage Building coverage is a measure of intensity of a use of land that represents the portion of a site that is covered by building footprint, as well as attached porches, decks, and balconies. Building coverage does not include driveways, streets, sidewalks, and any other areas covered by an impervious surface material, including areas of outdoor storage. 
(b)  Building Size Building size is the total floor area located inside exterior walls and covered by a roof. 
(c)  Density, Gross Residential The number of residential dwelling units permitted per gross acre of land that is determined by dividing the number of units by the total area of land within the boundaries of a parcel of land including existing streets, dedicated rights-of-way, tree protection zones, and open space set-asides, except as otherwise provided for in this Ordinance. In the determination of the number of residential units to be permitted on a specific parcel of land, a fractional unit equal to or greater than 0.6 of a unit shall be rounded up to equal a full unit. A fractional unit less than 0.6 of a unit shall be rounded down, and not counted as a unit. 
(d)  Density, Net Residential The total number of dwellings existing or proposed on a zone lot, group of zone lots or other parcel, divided by the total land area in the zone lot or parcel, expressed in acres. If the parcel is undeveloped, required street rights-of-way and other lands required to be dedicated for public use are not included in the land area. 
(e)  District Size The minimum size, in acres, of a base or overlay zoning district, including streets, rights-of-way, and open space areas, but excluding unbudilable lands. 
(f)  Floor Area The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, and excluding the following: 
(i)  Attic areas with a headroom of less than seven feet; 
(ii)  Unenclosed stairs or fire escapes; 
(iii)  Elevator structures; 
(iv)  Cooling towers; 
(v)  Areas devoted to air conditioning, ventilating or heating or other building machinery and equipment; 
(vi)  Structured parking; and 
(vii)  Basement space where the ceiling is not more than 48 inches above the general finished and graded level of the adjacent part of the lot. 
(g)  Floor Area Ratio The total floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot divided by the lot size. 
(E)  Height   
(1)  Definitions/Measurement   
(a)  Building Height The vertical distance measured from the established grade at the corner of a front of a building to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard or Bermuda roof, to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip, cone, gambrel and shed roofs, as depicted in Figure 40.1-8(E)(1), Building Height Measurement. 
(b)  Building Story The space between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; or if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor surface and the top of the ceiling joists or roof rafters above it. Typically, story height in a residential structure is nine feet per story, and story height in a non-residential structure is twelve feet per story. 
(c)  Established Grade Established grade is the finished grade following grading, excavation, or other land-disturbing activity. 
 
(d)  Grade Grade means the level of the finished ground surface immediately adjacent to the exterior walls of a building. 
(2)  Height Requirements Multi-story buildings within a mixed-use district or intended for mixed uses and all parking structures shall maintain a first floor ceiling height of at least 15 feet to accommodate commercial ground-floor uses. 
(3)  Exceptions Height limits shall not apply to chimneys, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, flag poles, monuments, water towers, rooftop dish antennas, skylights, fire escapes or roof access stairways, mechanical equipment required to operate and maintain the building, or similar appurtenances, provided: 
(a)  The appurtenance does not interfere with Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace; 
(b)  The appurtenance does not extend more than 25 feet above the maximum permitted building height, except as allowed herein; 
(c)  The appurtenance does not exceed a maximum height of 200 feet above grade; 
(d)  The appurtenance is not constructed for the purpose of providing additional floor area in the building; and 
(e)  The appurtenance complies with the screening requirements for mechanical equipment and appurtenances in this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 21), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amds. 24, 25), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-8.3 - Definitions 
ABANDONMENT 
For the purposes of Article 40.1-6: Nonconformities, abandonment shall mean the stopping or halting of use or occupancy of a nonconformity for a period of two years or more. 
ABUTTING 
The condition of two or more adjoining lots having a common property line or boundary including cases where two or more lots adjoin a corner, but not including cases where adjoining lots are separated by a street or alley. 
ACCENT 
The use of an alternate material, or color to a detail that is emphasized by contrasting with its surroundings. 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT 
A secondary dwelling unit established in conjunction with and clearly subordinate to a principal dwelling unit, whether part of the same structure as the principal dwelling unit, or as a detached structure on the same lot. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE 
A structure that is subordinate in use and square footage to a principal structure or permitted use. 
ACCESSORY USE 
A use that is customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and located on the same lot. 
ACT OF GOD 
Any event in which the damage to a nonconforming use or structure is outside of the control of a single individual. Damage or destruction by fire (except arson) and damage by a vehicle are considered acts of God. 
ACTIVE RECREATION USE 
Uses or structures intended for specific active recreational uses such as play grounds, ball fields, tennis courts and other similar uses typically located in open space set-aside areas. 
ADDITION 
Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load bearing wall is new construction. 
ADJACENT 
A lot or parcel of land that shares all or part of a common lot line or boundary with another lot or parcel of land or that is directly across a public street or right-of-way. 
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT 
A permit reviewed and approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the Planning Director in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(H), Administrative Adjustments. 
ADMINISTRATOR, ZONING 
See "Zoning Administrator." 
ADULT BOOKSTORE 
Any commercial establishment having its stock and trade in books, films, video cassettes, (whether for viewing off premises or on premises), or magazines and other periodicals of which more than 25 percent (either sales, number of titles, or display area) are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on or having as its dominant theme or purpose, matters depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein. 
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER 
A program operated in a structure other than a Single-Family Detached Dwelling that provides group care and supervision on a less than 24-hour basis, and in a place other than their usual place of abode, to four or more adults 18 years or older who may be physically or mentally disabled. 
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT 
An establishment offering goods and services of an adult nature which includes the selling and rental of publications and other material of a sexual nature (i.e. adult book stores, adult video rental stores, adult theaters, adult nightclubs). 
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER 
An enclosed building or outdoor facility with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER 
A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films (which term shall also include videotapes and other, comparable technology) containing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" ("sexually oriented films") are predominantly shown; or where a predominant number of films are limited to adults only. For the purposes of this Ordinance, sexually oriented films will be deemed predominantly shown if they are shown more frequently than other, nonsexually oriented films or if there is regularly greater audience attendance at such films than at other, nonsexually oriented films. A finding by the Zoning Administrator that sexually oriented films predominate or that a predominant number of films are restricted to adults shall be presumed to be correct unless the subject owner or operator rebuts the presumption by clear and convincing evidence. 
ADULT NOVELTY STORE 
A commercial establishment which offers for sale, rental or viewing for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
When one of more of the following criteria apply: 
(1)  In any one month 25 percent or more of the gross income of the establishment is derived from the sale, rental or viewing of such materials; 
(2)  Twenty-five percent or more of the floor area of the premises is devoted to the display or storage of such materials; or 
(3)  Twenty-five percent of the stock and trade of the establishment is comprised of such materials. 
ADVERTISING DISPLAY AREA 
The advertising display surface area of a sign. 
AFFECTED PROPERTY OWNER 
The owner of any property upon which the proposed development will have a positive or negative impact. 
AGGRIEVED PARTY 
Any person (including an owner, developer, or applicant for a development order) who will suffer an adverse effect to an interest protected or furthered by the comprehensive plan or this Ordinance, including interests related to health and safety, police and fire protection service systems, densities or intensities of development, transportation facilities, health care facilities, equipment or services, and environmental or natural resources. The party must be able to show an immediate, pecuniary, and substantial interest in any litigation, and not a remote or indirect interest. 
AIRCRAFT PARTS, SALES, AND MAINTENANCE 
The use of land for the display and sale of, or general repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of any contrivance now known or hereafter invented for use in or designed for navigation of or flight in air. 
AIRPORT 
Any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of aircraft. 
AIRPORT ELEVATION 
The highest point on any usable landing surface expressed in feet above mean sea level. 
ALLEY 
A minor way designed to give vehicular access to the side or rear of properties whose principal frontage is on another street. 
ALTERATION 
Any change or expansion in the size, configuration, or location of a structure; or any change or expansion in the use of a structure or lot, from a previously approved or legally existing size, configuration, location, or use. 
ALTERNATIVE PARKING PLAN 
A plan or other proposal to utilize one or more of the alternative parking provisions in Section 40.1-5.1(J), Alternative Parking Plans, as a means of providing more off-street parking spaces than typically allowed or fewer spaces than required. 
AMATEUR RADIO TOWER 
A structure on which an antenna is installed for the purpose of transmitting and receiving amateur radio signals erected and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC. 
AMENITIES 
Manmade or natural features which enhance or make more attractive a particular site for development. 
ANCILLARY MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT 
Supplemental equipment, attached or detached, including but not limited to equipment for the provision of services for heat, ventilation, air conditioning, electricity, plumbing, telephone and television. 
ANIMAL GROOMING 
Any place or establishment, public or private, where animals are bathed, clipped, or combed for the purpose of enhancing their aesthetic value and/or health and for which a fee is charged. 
ANIMAL SHELTER 
A facility used to house and care for stray, homeless, abandoned, or neglected animals that are owned, operated, or maintained by a public body, an established humane society, or other private or nonprofit organization. 
ANTENNA 
A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between land based or orbiting uses. 
APPEAL 
An appeal of a decision or interpretation made by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator that is reviewed and reversed, modified, or upheld by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(K), Appeal. 
APPEAL REVIEW COMMITTEE (ARC) 
A committee whose role is to determine if there are legitimate grounds to place an appeal of an HPC decision on the City Council agenda. The ARC consists of the Planning Director and the City Attorney. 
APPLICANT 
The owner of land, or the authorized representative of the landowner, applying for a permit or development approval. 
APPLICATION 
The completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by the appropriate City department, board, or commission as part of the review for a permit or development approval. 
ARBORETUM OR BOTANICAL GARDEN 
A garden or place where trees, shrubs, or other woody plants are grown, exhibited or labeled for scientific, educational, or passive recreational purposes, not including the harvest of plants or their produce. 
ARBORIST 
A person who is licensed (either a professional certification or International Society of Arboriculture Certified Arborist) to perform arboricultural work in the city. 
ARCADE 
A series of arches supported by piers or columns. 
ARCH 
A curved, semicircular opening in a wall. 
ARCHITECTURAL LIGHTING 
Exterior lighting that is designed to highlight structures, plantings, or significant architectural features in a direct or indirect fashion. 
ARENA, AMPHITHEATER, OR STADIUM 
A building or structure designed or intended for use for spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions, and other public gatherings. Such uses may or may not include lighting facilities for illuminating the field or stage area, concessions, parking facilities, and maintenance areas. 
ASSESSED VALUE 
The monetary price that a parcel of land, portion of land, improvement on land, or other commodity is assigned by the city Tax Assessor's office for the purposes of taxation. 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY 
A building, section or distinct part of a building, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or other residential facility, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide housing, meals, health care assistance, and one or more personal services for a period exceeding 24 hours to one or more adults who are not relatives of the owner or proprietor. Accessory uses may include dining rooms and infirmary facilities for intermediate or skilled nursing care solely for the use of the occupants residing in the principal facility. 
AUDITORIUM 
A building or structure designed or intended for use for spectator sports, entertainment events, expositions, and other public gatherings, all occurring inside a structure typically limited to a capacity of 500 or fewer seats. 
AUTHORIZED AGENT 
A person with express written consent to act upon another person's behalf. 
AUTOMOBILE 
Any vehicle propelled by its own motor and operating on roads. As used herein, the term includes passenger cars, trucks, motorcycles, motor scooters, motorized bicycles and the like. 
AUTOMOBILE SALES OR RENTALS 
Premises on which new or used passenger automobiles, trailers, or light trucks in operating condition are displayed for sale, lease, or rental. 
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION 
See "Automotive Repair and Servicing". 
AUTOMOTIVE PAINTING/BODY SHOP 
Repair of automobiles, vehicles, or trailers, including bodywork, framework, welding, and major painting service. 
AUTOMOTIVE PARTS AND INSTALLATION 
The on-site sale and subsequent installation of various automobile parts and accessories, including but not limited to tires, mufflers, brakes, batteries, audio systems, and lubricants such as engine oil. Such uses do not include the sale of gasoline or other fuels. 
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND SERVICING (WITHOUT PAINTING/BODYWORK) 
General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers, not including bodywork, framework, welding, and major painting service. 
AUTOMOTIVE WRECKER SERVICE 
An establishment operated for the purpose of temporary storage on-site of no more than nine wrecked or inoperable vehicles for a period no longer than 90 days. If an establishment has 10 or more inoperable vehicles located on-site, stores inoperable vehicles for more than 90 days, stacks vehicles, or portions of the vehicles are dismantled or removed for sale, it shall be considered a salvage and junkyard. 
AWNING 
A cover constructed of fabric, plastic, or a similar lightweight material that is entirely supported by the building to which it is attached, that has the purpose of shielding a doorway, window, porch, terrace, or platform from the elements. This term does not include a marquee or a canopy. 
AXIS 
The centerline of a structure that divides the structure into two halves. 
BASEMENT 
A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story where more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground. 
BED AND BREAKFAST INN 
A private residence, generally a Single-Family Detached Dwelling, engaged in renting one or more bedrooms on a daily basis to tourists, vacationers, and business people, where provision of meals is limited to guests only. 
BIKE RACK 
A stand used for mounting and securing bikes when not in use. 
BLOCK 
A parcel of land entirely surrounded by streets or by any combination of streets, parks or railroad right-of-way. 
BLOCK FACE 
The lands abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, railroad right-of-way, watercourse, or un-subdivided land. 
BLOOD/TISSUE COLLECTION FACILITY 
A facility where blood or related materials are either withdrawn or collected from patients or assembled after being withdrawn or collected elsewhere from patients for subsequent delivery to a clinical laboratory for examination. A collection facility is maintained at a separate physical location not on the grounds or premises of the main licensed laboratory or institution, which performs the testing. 
BOARDER 
An individual occupying a dwelling unit or part thereof who, for consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations and may be furnished meals or other services as part of the consideration. 
BOARDING HOUSE 
See "Rooming House or Boarding House". 
BOAT AND MARINE RENTAL AND SALES 
Premises on which new or used boats and other marine vessels are displayed for sale, lease, or rental. 
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT 
An establishment in which body piercing takes place. For the purposes of this definition, the term body piercing means the act of penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar, generally permanent in nature, but does not include the use of a mechanized, presterilized ear piercing system that penetrates the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear, or both. 
BREWERY/DISTILLERY/WINERY/CIDERY. 
A facility for the production and packaging of alcoholic beverages/spirits of the following types and quantities for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or off the premises; beer (more than 15,000 barrels per year), distilled spirits, wine, or alcoholic cider (more than 20,000 gallons per year). Permitted accessory uses shall include retail sales, tasting rooms for beverages produced on-site, restaurants, reception halls, and live entertainment as other-wise permitted in the zoning district. 
BUFFER 
An area of natural or planted vegetation adjoining or surrounding a use and unoccupied in its entirety by any building, structure, paving or portion of such use, for the purposes of screening and softening the effects of the use, no part of which buffer is used for recreation or parking. 
BUFFER, PERIMETER 
Vegetative material and structures (i.e., walls, fences) that are used to separate uses from each other as required by this Ordinance, including but not limited to the Type A Basic, Type B Aesthetic, Type C Semi-opaque, and Type D Opaque described in Section 40.1-5.2(E), Perimeter Buffers. 
BUILDABLE AREA 
The portion of the lot remaining after required yards have been provided and after the limitations of any pertinent environmental regulations are applied. Buildings may be placed in any part of the buildable area, but if there are limitations on percent of the lot which may be covered by buildings, some open land may be required within the buildable area. 
BUILDING 
A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, that forms a structure for use or occupancy by persons or property. 
BUILDING CODE 
The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code adopted by the state legislature and any amendments thereto. 
BUILDING OFFICIAL 
The person appointed by the City Manager as the individual who issues the permit for the construction, alteration, reconstruction, or demolition of all or part of any building. 
BUILDING PERMIT 
An approval statement signed by the Building Official authorizing the construction, alteration, reconstruction, or demolition of all or part of any building. 
BUILDING, HEATING, PLUMBING, OR ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR 
Offices for building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractors, and related storage facilities. 
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL 
A building which contains the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
BZA 
The Board of Zoning Appeals for the City of Portsmouth, Virginia. See Section 40.1-2.1(D). 
CALIPER 
A horticultural method of measuring the diameter of a tree trunk for the purpose of determining size. The caliper of the trunk is measured six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four inches in diameter, 12 inches above the ground for trees greater than four inches and up to ten inches in diameter, and at breast height (4½ feet) for trees ten inches or greater in diameter. 
CAMPGROUND OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARK 
An outdoor facility designed for overnight accommodation of persons in tents, rustic cabins, recreational vehicles, and shelters for recreation, education, naturalist, or vacation purposes. Office, retail, and other commercial uses commonly established in such facilities and related parking structures shall be allowed as accessory appurtenances. 
CANOPY 
A roofed shelter that is not enclosed by walls but is attached to and supported by columns extending from the ground or by a combination of a building and columns extending from the ground. 
CANOPY TREE 
A tree that has an expected height at maturity of 30 feet or more. 
CAR WASH OR AUTO DETAILING 
An establishment providing the exterior washing of vehicles where vehicles are manually driven or pulled by a conveyor through a system of rollers and/or brushes. Interior cleaning and/or drying may be conducted manually by vehicle operator or on-site attendants. Automatic car wash establishments are further defined under the two following categories: 
1.  Full service: An establishment featuring a conveyor system to move vehicles through the wash cycle. This type of car wash may include sales of gasoline, oil and other vehicle related merchandise. On-site attendants are required. Building size is limited by lot size, parking requirements, building and landscape setbacks or other site characteristics. 
2.  Self-service: An establishment featuring a car wash system where vehicles are manually driven through a wash cycle, or washed manually using a wand or other hose. Incidental interior cleaning and exterior drying are performed by vehicle operator. This type of car wash does not have an on-site attendant and there is no gasoline, oil or other merchandise for sale. 
CASUALTY DAMAGE 
Damage to a use, lot, or structure from an event that is sudden, unexpected, and unusual, such as a hurricane, earthquake, fire, flood, theft, or similar event. 
CEMETERY, COLUMBARIUM, MAUSOLEUM 
Uses intended for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes. This use type may include a funeral home or mortuary or a mausoleum or columbarium (a structure or vault lined with recesses for cinerary urns), but does not include a crematory. 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (COA) 
The development approval by the HPC, or DDC, as appropriate, in accordance with Section 20-2.3(I) that certifies the appropriateness of a particular request for the construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, or demolition of all or a part of any building within an historic district, subject to the issuance of all other relevant permits or development approvals needed for the matter sought to be accomplished. 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 
A certificate granted by the city's Building Official which permits the use of a building in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building in its several parts together with any special stipulations or conditions of the Building Permit. A building may not be occupied without the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE 
See "Zoning Compliance Certificate". 
CHANGE IN USE 
A change of one land use to a different land use. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a change of use shall not include change in ownership or a change from one land use to an identical land use (e.g., a change from one restaurant to another restaurant shall not be deemed a change in use.) 
CHICKENS, BACKYARD 
A domesticated fowl, not including turkeys, ducks, geese, or other types of poultry. Chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus) shall be considered as livestock and not household pets under the zoning ordinance. 
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER 
An arrangement or program where, at any one time, either: 
a.  Six or more children under the age of 13 receive child care in a residence, or 
b.  Two or more children under the age of 13 receive child care in a building other than a residence 
On a regular basis from persons other than their guardians, full-time custodians, or persons related to them by blood, marriage, or adoption. Such uses may also involve the provision of educational services in preparation for elementary school. This definition does not include family child care homes, home child day care, cooperative arrangements among parents, or drop-in or short-term child care provided while parents work part-time or participate in other activities on the premises (e.g., churches, shopping malls, hotels, health spas). 
CIRCUIT COURT 
The Circuit Court of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia 
CITY 
The City of Portsmouth, Virginia. 
CITY CODE 
The code of ordinances of the City of Portsmouth. 
CITY COUNCIL 
The City Council for the City of Portsmouth, Virginia. 
CIVIC, SOCIAL, OR FRATERNAL CLUBS OR LODGES 
A building and related facilities owned and operated by a corporation, association, or group of individuals established for fraternal, social, educational, recreational, or cultural enrichment of its members and primarily not for profit, and whose members meet certain prescribed qualifications for membership and pay dues. 
CLERK OF CIRCUIT COURT 
The Clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia. 
CLOTHES LINE 
A rope or wire on which clothes, linens, or other fabrics are hung for drying or airing. 
COA 
See "Certificate of Appropriateness". 
COLD STORAGE PLANT 
A building, structure, machinery, appurtenances, appliances and apparatus occupied and used in the business of freezing food products or storing frozen food products. 
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY 
A public or private, non-profit institution for post-secondary education offering courses in general or technical education which operates within buildings or premises on land owned or leased by the institution for administrative and faculty offices, classrooms, laboratories, chapels, auditoriums, lecture halls, libraries, student and faculty centers, athletic facilities, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, and other facilities which further the educational mission of the institution. In no event shall this definition prohibit a college or university from engaging in an activity historically conducted by such institutions. Trade or vocational schools are a different use type. 
COLOCATE 
To locate with another user on an existing structure such as a tower, power, phone or light pole or stanchion; water tank or stand pipe, building or steeple, billboard sign or similar structure. 
COMMERCIAL RECREATION, INDOOR 
A private indoor (entirely within an enclosed structure) use providing for sport and recreation activities that are operated or carried on primarily for financial gain. Examples of indoor commercial recreation uses include, but are not limited to, fitness centers, bowling alleys, dancehalls, skating rinks, and indoor commercial swimming pools and racquet and tennis courts. 
COMMERCIAL RECREATION, OUTDOOR 
A private outdoor use providing facilities for outdoor sport and recreation activities, which is operated or carried on primarily for financial gain. Examples of outdoor commercial recreation uses include, but are not limited to, privately owned golf driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, outdoor commercial tourist attractions, outdoor commercial swimming pools and tennis courts, and drive-in theatres. 
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE 
A truck, bus, or other self-propelled vehicle of any type or a container constructed for the transportation of materials used or maintained primarily for business purposes to transport goods, equipment or passengers. This definition is not applicable to a vehicle described as a pickup, van or panel truck that does not exceed one ton in manufacturer's rated capacity and does not exhibit a company name or logo. 
COMMON OPEN SPACE 
Portion of a proposed development required for reservation as permanent open space by Section 40.1-5.4, Open Space Standards and Set-Asides. 
COMMONWEALTH 
The Commonwealth of Virginia. 
COMMUNITY CENTER 
A public building to be used as a place of meeting, recreation, or social activity and not operated for profit. 
COMMUNITY GARDEN 
A private or public facility for cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person. 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 
The City of Portsmouth's adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
CONDOMINIUM 
A multiple-unit residential or nonresidential development where individual units are owned, but the foundation, roof, and land are owned jointly. 
CONFERENCE OR TRAINING CENTER 
A facility designed to accommodate less than 500 persons and used for conferences, seminars, product displays, recreation activities, and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions including temporary outdoor displays, and food and beverage preparation and service for on-premise consumption. 
CONNECTIVITY 
The relative degree of connection between streets, sidewalks, or other means of travel. 
CONSTRUCTION 
The erection of any building or structure or any preparations (including land disturbing activities) for the same. 
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION/DEBRIS LANDFILL (CDD LANDFILL) 
A land burial facility engineered, constructed and operated to contain and isolate construction waste, demolition waste, debris waste, yard waste, split tires, and white goods or combinations of the above solid wastes. Construction waste means solid waste that is produced or generated during construction, remodeling, or repair of pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Construction wastes include, but are not limited to lumber, wire, sheetrock. broken brick, shingles, glass, pipes, concrete, paving materials, and metal and plastics if the metal or plastics are a part of the materials of construction or empty containers for such materials. Paints, coatings, solvents, asbestos, any liquid, compressed gases or semi-liquids, and garbage are not construction wastes. 
CONTIGUOUS 
Abutting directly or immediately adjacent to a boundary or separated only by a street, railroad or public right-of-way. 
CONTINUING OFFENSE 
An offense that has not been corrected after receiving notice to correct and being issued an initial penalty. 
CONTINUOUS VISUAL SCREEN 
Screening of vehicular use areas by vegetative material, berms, or structures (walls and fences), or a combination of these items designed to completely obstruct off-site views of the vehicular use area typically to a height three feet or 36 inches above the adjacent grade. 
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTIES 
Those properties which by reason of form, materials, architectural details and relation to surrounding properties contribute favorably to the general character of the part of the historic district in which they are located. 
CONVENIENCE STORE WITH GAS SALES 
A retail establishment which offers for sale, primarily, the following types of articles: bread, milk, cheese, canned and bottled foods and drinks, tobacco products, beer, wine, candy, papers and magazines, and general hardware articles. Gasoline and/or fast food may also be offered for sale but only as a secondary activity of a convenience store. If vehicular maintenance and service are provided, the establishment is not classified as a convenience store. 
CONVENIENCE STORE WITHOUT GAS SALES 
A retail establishment and which offers for sale, primarily, the following types of articles: bread, milk, cheese, canned and bottled foods and drinks, tobacco products, beer, wine, candy, papers and magazines, and general hardware articles. Gasoline is not offered for sale. Fast food may be offered, but only as a secondary activity of a convenience store. If vehicular maintenance and service are provided, the establishment is not classified as a convenience store. 
CONVENTION CENTER 
A facility designed to accommodate 500 or more persons and used for conventions, conferences, seminars, product displays, recreation activities, and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions including temporary outdoor displays, and food and beverage preparation and service for on-premise consumption. Similar structures with a capacity of less than 500 people are auditorium or conference center uses. 
CORNICE 
Any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, of any building, projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roof line, including eaves and other roof overhang. 
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY 
Publicly or privately operated facilities housing persons awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence after being found guilty of a criminal offense. Such uses may include cafeterias, housing for facility staff, outdoor storage and maintenance areas, recreational areas, agricultural facilities, and facilities for the production of goods or materials produced for sale. 
COUNTRY CLUB 
A nonprofit membership club organized and operated primarily to provide recreational activities such as golf, swimming, tennis, and other outdoor recreation to its members and their guests, as well as incidental facilities such as a club house, locker rooms, and pro shop. 
COUNTY 
Norfolk County, Virginia. 
COURT, INNER 
A court other than an outer court. The length of an inner court is the minimum horizontal dimension measured parallel to its longest side. The width of an inner court is the minimum horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its length. 
COURT, OUTER 
An uncovered open space other than a yard, surrounded on three sides by the exterior walls of a structure. In cases where the fourth, or open side of a court is enclosed by projections exceeding 25 percent of its width, such court shall be considered an inner court. 
CREMATORY 
A facility containing furnaces for the reduction of dead bodies to ashes by fire. 
CROSS-ACCESS 
Vehicular access provided between the vehicular use areas of two or more development sites or parcels of land intended to allow travel between the sites without the use of a public or private street. 
CROSSWALK 
A right-of-way dedicated to public use which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties. 
CUL-DE-SAC 
A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
CULTURAL FACILITY 
An establishment such as a zoological garden, conservatory, planetarium, or other similar use of an historic, educational, or cultural interest, which is not operated for profit. 
CUPOLA 
A domelike structure on top of a roof or dome, often used as a lookout or to admit light and air. 
DECK 
A structure, without a roof, directly adjacent to a principal building which has an average elevation of 30 inches or greater from finished grade. 
DEMOLITION 
The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any building and all operations incidental thereto. 
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT 
The neglect in the maintenance of any building resulting in the deterioration of a building to the extent that it creates or permits a hazardous or unsafe condition as determined by the department of permits and inspections and as further defined in Section 40.1-3.6(E), Historic Districts. It shall also be defined as the removal of and/or the disposal of architectural features from the interior and/or exterior to make the rehabilitation of the structure economically unfeasible. 
DEVELOPER 
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed application for permit or development approval, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests in such land. 
DEVELOPMENT 
The initiation, construction, change, or enlargement of any use or structure or the disturbance of land through the removal of trees or ground cover. "Development" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
• Construction or enlargement of a building or structure; 
• Change in the type of use of a building, structure, or land; 
• Material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the square feet of businesses, offices, manufacturing establishments, or dwelling units located in a building or structure or on the land; 
• Commencement or expansion of resource extraction on a parcel of land; 
• Demolition of a structure or the removal of regulated trees from a parcel of land; 
• Deposition of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land; 
• Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a bank or channel of any stream, lake, or other body of water or alteration of any wetland; or 
• Any land disturbing activity that adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially-impervious cover on a land area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil. 
DEVELOPMENT PLAN, TYPE I 
A permit (site plan) reviewed and approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the Planning Director in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(C), Type I Development Plan. 
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY 
A developmental disability shall be defined in the same manner as defined in the Federal Developmentally Disabled Assistance Act. For the purposes of this Ordinance, developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) 
The measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk over ten inches in diameter taken at a height of four-and-one-half feet above the ground. Trees with multiple trunks should be treated as multiple trees and the DBH for each trunk added to aggregate diameter measurement. 
DINNER THEATER 
An eating establishment offering food to patrons while seated at tables or through a buffet line before, during, or after a performance by one or more actors in a theatrical production. 
DISTRICT 
An area delineated on the official zoning map that sets forth standards and guidelines for all development within the prescribed zoning district. 
DISTRICT, OVERLAY 
A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements above that required by the underlying zoning district. 
DOCK 
A piling-mounted stationary or floating platform extending into the water and used as a landing place for boats or promenade or to protect or form a cove. The term "dock" shall include walkway, catwalk, wharf, piling, bulkhead, boat house and other similar structures. 
DORMITORY 
A building used principally to provide rooms for sleeping accommodations at an educational, public, or religious institution. Common kitchen, sanitary, and social gathering rooms may also be provided. 
DRIPLINE 
A vertical line that extends from the outermost branches of a tree's canopy to the ground around the circumference of the tree. 
DRIVE-THROUGH 
A facility designed to enable a person to transact business while remaining in a motor vehicle. 
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TREATMENT FACILITY 
Inpatient facility which provides care for persons with drug and/or alcohol dependency problems and which may include outpatient follow-up care to the facility's patients. 
DRUG STORE OR PHARMACY, WITH DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE 
A freestanding establishment including one or more drive through lanes for customer service that is engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics, and related supplies. 
DRUG STORE OR PHARMACY, WITHOUT DRIVE THROUGH SERVICE 
A freestanding establishment engaged in the retail sale of prescription drugs, nonprescription medicines, cosmetics, and related supplies. 
DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDRY DROP-OFF ESTABLISHMENT 
A commercial establishment maintained for the drop off and pick up of clothes for off-site laundering or dry cleaning, without the operation of any laundry or dry cleaning equipment on the premises. 
DWELLING UNIT 
A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
DWELLING, LIVE/WORK 
A building or portion of a building combining one residential Dwelling Unit for one or more persons with an integrated work space principally used by one or more of the residents. 
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY 
A building or portion of a building or multiple buildings containing five or more Dwelling Units on an individual lot. This use is also referred to as multifamily. 
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED 
A building containing not more than one Dwelling Unit on an individual lot to be occupied by one family, not physically attached to any other principal structure. For regulatory purposes, this term does not include manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, or other forms of temporary or portable housing. 
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE 
A building or group of buildings in which two or more Dwelling Units are each located on individual lots, but attached by one or more common party walls which are shared by one or more units. The habitable spaces of different dwelling units are typically arranged on a side-by-side basis rather than a stacked configuration. This use is also referred to as a townhome. 
DWELLING, TWO- TO FOUR-FAMILY 
A building containing two, three, or four individual Dwelling Units located on an individual lot. Development of a Two-to-Four Family Dwelling located on a lot adjacent to a lot containing or proposed to contain a Two-to-Four Family Dwelling shall be classified as, and shall comply with all requirements for, a Multi-Family Dwelling (See Section 40.1-4.3(A)(1)(c)), including obtaining a Use Permit in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(B). 
DWELLING, UPPER STORY 
One Dwelling Unit located on the second floor or higher of a building with nonresidential uses located on the ground or street level. Where more than one Dwelling Unit is proposed with a nonresidential use on the ground floor, it shall be defined as a Two-to-Four Family Dwelling, or Multi-Family Dwelling, depending upon the number of Dwelling Units on a single lot. 
EASEMENT 
A grant by a landowner to another landowner or to the public, of a right to occupy or use designated land for specific purposes, such as access, drainage, conservation, the location of public improvements, or other specified purpose. An easement does not constitute fee simple ownership of the land. 
EAVE 
The projecting lower edges of a roof that overhangs the wall of a building. 
EGRESS 
An exit from a building or site. 
ELECTRIC MOTOR REPAIR 
An establishment that repairs electric motors for compensation. 
ELEVATION 
The front, side, or rear of a structure. 
ENCLOSURE 
Any roofed-over structure or attachment to a structure is enclosed if sides (other than the side or sides where a structure is attached to a main building) are more than 40 percent enclosed with any material other than customary wire or mesh screening. 
ENCROACHMENT 
The portion of a structure that intrudes into a required setback, or the point at which a driveway accesses a public street. 
ENERGY RECOVERY PLANT 
Any public or private recovering facility for electricity, natural gas, petroleum, coal, or other source of energy. 
ENGINEER 
An engineer registered by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
ENLARGEMENT 
An increase in the size of an existing structure. 
ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT 
Uses that offer some form of entertainment (e.g., dancing, comedy performances, amplified music, etc.) for patrons while on the premises. Entertainment establishments may serve alcohol, charge patrons a membership fee, and serve food for on-site consumption. 
EXISTING TREE CANOPY 
The crowns of all healthy self-supporting canopy trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of ten inches or greater and understory trees with a caliper size of four inches or greater at breast height. 
EXPANSION 
An increase in the size of an existing structure or use, including physical size of the land, building, parking, and other improvements or structures. 
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES 
The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, details, features, or elements. 
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRY, ALL USES 
A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining, and soil mining. Specifically excluded from this use is grading and removal of dirt associated with an approved site plan or subdivision or excavations associated with, and for the improvement of, a bona fide agricultural use. 
FACADE 
The entire exterior wall of a building facing a lot line measured from the grade to the eave or highest point of a flat or mansard roof. Facades may be on the front, side, or rear elevation of the building. 
FACADE, FRONT 
See "Front Facade". 
FACADE, REAR 
That portion of a building which is, by either service area, secondary entry and egress or the facade directly opposite the front facade of the structure, the reverse frontage of the building. 
FAMILY 
An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more than five persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
FAMILY CARE HOME 
A home with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care, and habilitation services in a family environment for not more than eight aged, infirm or disabled persons or resident persons with disabilities—i.e., persons with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental disability, including but not limited to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional disturbances, and orthopedic impairments, but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others. 
FAMILY CHILD DAY Care HOME (6 TO 12 CHILDREN) 
A program or arrangement located in a residence where, at any one time, more than six but no more than twelve children under the age of 13 receive child care on a regular basis from persons other than their guardians, full-time custodians, or persons related to them by blood, marriage, or adoption. This definition does not include day care centers, home child day care, or cooperative arrangements among parents. 
FENCE 
A structure used to delineate a boundary or act as a barrier or means of protection, confinement, or screening. 
FIRST FLOOR 
The floor of a building which is at, or first above, average finished grade. 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION, WITH DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE 
An establishment that provides retail banking services, mortgage lending, or similar financial services to individuals and businesses. Financial institutions include those establishments engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but shall not include bail bond brokers. Financial institutions may also provide automated teller machines (ATM) services, located within a fully enclosed space or building, or along an exterior building wall intended to serve walk-up customers only. These uses include drive-through facilities. 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION, WITHOUT DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE 
An establishment that provides retail banking services, mortgage lending, or similar financial services to individuals and businesses. Financial institutions include those establishments engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but shall not include bail bond brokers. Financial institutions may also provide automated teller machines (ATM) services, located within a fully enclosed space or building, or along an exterior building wall intended to serve walk-up customers only. These uses do not include drive-through facilities. 
FIRE OR EMS FACILITY 
A facility for the provision of local rapid response emergency services such as firefighting and mobile medical emergency services, including areas for the storage and maintenance of emergency vehicles, and equipment and facilities for the housing and feeding of emergency personnel while on duty. 
FIRE OR POLICE SUBSTATION 
Any building or part of a building that is designated by the chief of police or sheriff to be used as a police or sheriff's station or substation and at which duly authorized officers perform law enforcement functions. 
FLEA MARKET 
A market held in an open area or structure where individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. Such sellers may set up temporary stalls or tables for the sale of their products. Such sales may involve new and/or used items and may include the sale of fruits, vegetables, and other edible items. A farmer's market, where food items predominate, is different than a flea market. This also differs from a garage sale or yard sale that is conducted on a residentially developed lot by members of a household, or civic groups selling primarily donated items. 
FLOOR 
The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including the basement), such as the top of the slab in concrete slab construction or the top of the wood flooring in wood frame construction. 
FOOD TRUCK 
See Section 32-276 of the City Code as the same may be amended, moved or superseded from time to time. 
FOOTCANDLE 
The amount of light that falls onto a surface as emitted by an exterior lighting device. 
FRATERNITY/SORORITY HOUSE 
A building used as group living quarters for students of a college, university, or seminary, who are members of a fraternity or sorority that has been officially recognized by the college, university, or seminary. Such use may or may not be located within the campus it is associated with. The fraternity or sorority house may include sleeping areas, cooking facilities, and areas for meeting and socializing. 
FREIGHT SHIPPING CONTAINER 
A portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed for and used in multi-modal shipment of goods, wares or merchandise, including a receptacle originally designed for the transport of goods but not currently used for such purposes. Truck or tractor trailers are included in this definition. 
FRONT FACADE 
The side or elevation of a structure that contains the structure's architectural front, or the portion of the structure facing the street from which the structure derives its street address. 
FRONTAGE 
The width in linear feet occupied by each separate business or other use or the width in linear feet of a lot which fronts on a public street. Each building or lot front shall, for purposes of sign copy area allowed, be separately calculated. 
FRONTAGE BUILDING 
The linear length of only that portion of a building used by an individual tenant on a separate lot or by an individual tenant in a multiple tenant development and which faces a public street or alley. 
FUEL OIL STORAGE 
The storage of fuel oil or kerosene for heating purposes in aboveground containers. 
FUEL OIL/BOTTLED GAS DISTRIBUTOR 
An establishment that distributes fuel oil or bottled gases such as propone or liquid petroleum for compensation. 
FULL CUT-OFF LENS 
An artificial outdoor lighting fixture designed to ensure that no light is directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to the ground. 
FUNERAL HOME 
An establishment that provides human funeral services, including embalming and memorial services. Crematories are accessory uses to a funeral home. 
GABLE 
A triangular area of an exterior wall formed by two sloping roofs. 
GARAGE 
An outbuilding or accessory structure for the purpose of parking vehicles. 
GAS SALES 
Buildings and premises where gasoline, oils and greases, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail (or in connection with a private operation where the general public is excluded from use of facilities), and where in addition, the following services may be rendered and sales made, and no other: 
• Sale and service of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor parts; 
• Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving; 
• Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hoses, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the like; 
• Radiator cleaning and flushing; 
• Washing and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing materials; 
• Greasing and lubrication; 
• Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps, and lines; 
• Minor servicing and repair of carburetors; 
• Emergency wiring repairs; 
• Adjusting and repairing brakes; 
• Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or crankcase or racing the motor; 
• Sales of drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar convenience goods for filling station customers, as accessory and incidental to principal operation; 
• Provision of road maps and other informational material to customers; and 
• Provision of restroom facilities. 
Uses permissible at a gas sales establishment do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in filling stations. 
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL SERVICE 
Establishments engaged in the repair or servicing of agriculture, industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products. Firms that provide these services do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Accessory activities may include retail sales, offices, parking, and storage. 
GLARE 
The reflection or harsh, bright light and the physical effect resulting from high luminances or insufficiently shielded light sources to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
GLAZING 
The portion of an exterior building surface occupied by glass or windows 
GOLF COURSE, PRIVATE 
A tract of land under private ownership that is laid out with at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a clubhouse (with or without eating facilities), shelters, a driving range, putting green, maintenance facilities, an irrigation system, and outdoor storage of materials and equipment. 
GOLF COURSE, PUBLIC 
A tract of land owned by the city or other government entity that is laid out with at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a clubhouse (with or without eating facilities), shelters, a driving range, putting green, maintenance facilities, an irrigation system, and outdoor storage of materials and equipment. 
GOLF DRIVING RANGE 
A limited area on which golf players do not walk, but onto which they drive golf balls from a common driving tee. Such uses may include a concessions stand, netting, exterior lighting fixtures, putting greens, as well as maintenance and outdoor storage areas. Such uses do not include golf courses. 
GOVERNMENT MAINTENANCE, STORAGE, AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITY 
A facility housing government shops, maintenance and repair centers, equipment, and outdoor storage yards. 
GOVERNMENT OFFICE 
An office of a governmental agency that provides administrative and/or direct services to the public, such as, but not limited to, employment offices, public assistance offices, or motor vehicle licensing and registration services. 
GREENHOUSE 
A structure, primarily of glass, in which temperature and humidity can be controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants. 
GREENWAY 
A linear greenbelt linking various types of development by such facilities as bicycle paths, footpaths, and bridle paths. Greenways are usually kept in their natural state except for the pathway and area immediately adjacent to the pathway. 
GROCERY STORE 
An establishment engaged in retail and/or wholesale sale of food, foodstuffs, sundries, or other common household items to members of the public. 
GROUND COVER 
Any natural vegetative growth or other material that renders the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion. 
GROUP HOME 
A home with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care, and habilitation services in a family environment for nine or more adult resident persons with disabilities—i.e., persons with a temporary or permanent physical, emotional, or mental disability, including but not limited to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments, emotional disturbances, and orthopedic impairments, but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others. The definition does not include family care homes, hospitals, rest homes, nursing homes, boarding homes, homes for orphans or aged, sub-acute-care detoxification centers, or halfway house/mainstreaming facilities. 
HALFWAY HOUSE 
A licensed home for juveniles or adult persons on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling is provided to assist residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. 
HANDICAPPED 
See "Developmentally Disabled". 
HAZARDOUS WASTE COLLECTION SITE 
An establishment for the collection and/or transfer of hazardous waste. 
HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES, RENTAL, OR STORAGE 
An establishment engaged in the display, sale, leasing, or rental of heavy equipment of 12,000 or more pounds gross vehicular weight (GVW). 
HEAVY EQUIPMENT SERVICING AND REPAIR 
An establishment engaged in the repair of heavy equipment of 12,000 or more pounds gross vehicular weight (GVW). 
HEDGE 
A group of shrubs planted in line or in groups that forms a compact, dense, living barrier that demarcates an area from on-site or off-site views. 
HELICOPTER LANDING FACILITY 
An area, either on ground level or elevated on a structure, licensed or approved for the landing and takeoff of helicopters and which may include auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling, and maintenance equipment. 
HIGH RISK TREE 
Any tree with structural defects sufficient to render the tree or part of the tree likely to fail and cause damage to persons, property, or other significant vegetation, as determined by a qualified arborist or other tree professional. 
HISTORIC AND MEMORIAL MARKER 
Historic or memorial markers include memorial signs or tablets indicating the names of buildings and/or date of erection, when cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other noncombustible material, and any historic marker approved by the city. Such markers shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed four square feet in surface area. 
HISTORIC DISTRICT 
A geographically definable area consisting of public and/or private property within the city, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. An historic district shall further mean an area designated by the City Council as an historic district under this Ordinance. 
HISTORIC LANDMARK 
A building or site of historic importance designated by the City Council as part of a historic district. 
HISTORIC PROPERTY 
An individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the City Council as an historic property in accordance with the criteria established herein. 
HOME CHILD DAY CARE FOR FIVE OR FEWER CHILDREN 
A program or arrangement located in a residence where, at any one time, more than two but fewer than six children under the age of 13 receive child care on a regular basis from persons other than their guardians, full-time custodians, or persons related to them by blood, marriage, or adoption. This definition does not include day care centers, family child day care homes, home child day care, or cooperative arrangements among parents. 
HOME OCCUPATION 
A business, profession, occupation, or trade which is conducted within a Dwelling Unit for the economic gain or support of a resident of the Dwelling Unit, and is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the lot and which does not adversely and/or perceptively affect the character of the lot or surrounding area. Home occupation includes but is not limited to: offices; electronic and offsite retail; personal services such as physical therapy by licensed individuals, beauty parlors, pet grooming, and the like. Home occupation does not include such businesses as: automotive repair and the like; dentists or physicians' offices and the like; any licenses or unlicensed practitioner who performs invasive procedures (acupuncture, tattooing, body piercing, and the like); restaurants, bars, social clubs and the like; animal kennels or hospitals and the like; or any other business which is clearly inappropriate or out of character for a residential area such that its location constitutes an adverse impact on neighboring residential properties. 
HOSPITAL 
An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to human patients and injured persons, that is licensed by state law to provide facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics, or general medical practice. Such institutions may include in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part of the facilities. 
HOTEL OR MOTEL 
Hotel and motel are to be considered synonymous uses. A hotel or motel means a building or a group of buildings in which sleeping accommodations are offered to the public and intended primarily for rental for temporary occupancy by persons on an overnight basis, not including bed and breakfast establishments or a rooming house. Such uses may include microwaves and refrigerators for each guest unit. 
HOUSEHOLD PET 
Animals that are kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home. Household pet shall include but is not limited to dogs, cats, birds, and rodents. 
HPC 
The Historic Preservation Commission for the City of Portsmouth, Virginia. 
HUMAN SCALE 
Spatial and architectural relationship among various building elements including height, massing, and frontage relationships that are proportional to the human figure. 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE 
Buildings; parking areas; driveways; streets; sidewalks; areas of concrete, asphalt, gravel, or other compacted aggregate; and areas covered by the outdoor storage of goods or materials which do not absorb water. 
INCINERATOR 
A facility that burns refuse at high temperatures to reduce the volume of waste. 
INGRESS 
Access or entry to a building or site. 
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE 
Any motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer which is not in operating condition, or which for a period of 90 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle. An inoperative vehicle shall also be considered a vehicle with an observable condition which indicates a state such that it is economically impractical to make such vehicle operative within a reasonable period of time, or which constitutes a health, fire, or safety hazard. 
INTERPRETATION 
A formal request, submitted in writing to the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate), requesting a written interpretation in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(J), Interpretation. 
KENNEL, INDOOR 
A facility where more than four and less than 21 dogs, cats, or other animals over three months of age are kept, raised, sold, boarded, bred, shown, treated, or groomed. The facility shall be entirely indoors. 
KENNEL, OUTDOOR 
A facility where more than four and less than 21 dogs, cats, or other animals over three months of age are kept, raised, sold, boarded, bred, shown, treated, or groomed. Such a facility may have an indoor and outdoor component. 
KITCHEN 
A room or portion thereof containing facilities which are designed, intended or used for cooking and preparation of meals. 
KIOSK 
Small, freestanding structures either open or partially enclosed used to provide information or products. 
LAND 
The earth, water, and air, above, below, or on the surface, and includes any improvements or structures on land. 
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY 
Any movement of earth or substrate, manually or mechanically, including but not limited to any modification of existing grade by dredging, demolition, excavation or fill, grading, scraping, vegetation removal, landscaping, coring, well drilling, pile driving, undergrounding utility lines, trenching, bulldozing, sheeting, shoring and excavation for laying or removing foundations, pilings or other purposes, for which any permit or approval is required under the provisions of the city code. 
LANDOWNER 
Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in land, including the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns, and agent or personal representative of the owner. 
LANDSCAPING 
The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass, shrubs, and trees. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flower beds, ornamental objects such as fountains, statuary, and objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect. 
LANDSCAPE STRIP, PERIMETER 
Vegetative material associated with the perimeter landscaping required for a vehicular use area. 
LARGE RETAIL BUILDING 
A single business establishment engaged in retail sales activities and located in a stand-alone single tenant building of 60,000 square feet in size or larger. 
LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENT 
A site containing a minimum of five acres of contiguous land and 60,000 square feet of gross floor area that is developed as a cohesive unit with common design elements. Examples of common large-scale developments are shopping centers, office parks, and large institutions such as a university or medical center with multiple buildings on a campus. 
LAUNDRY, DRY CLEANING, AND CARPET CLEANING FACILITY 
A facility used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort by immersion and agitation, or by immersions only, in water or volatile solvents. 
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE 
A facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry clean clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
LIBRARY 
A public facility for the use, but not sale, of literary, historical, scientific, musical, artistic, or other reference materials. 
LIQUOR STORE 
Any establishment, including but not limited to restaurants, entertainment establishments, convenience stores retails stores, grocery stores, gasoline stations, licensed by the state exclusively for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages, excluding beer and wine, in original packages for consumption off the premises where sold. The sales of these items are never to be considered an accessory use. 
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET 
Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles, and not considered as part of the minimum required off-street surface parking. 
LOT 
A parcel of land or any combination of several parcels of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal use or structure, together with any accessory structures or uses and such accessways, parking area, yards, and open spaces required in this Ordinance. 
LOT OF RECORD 
A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of Circuit Court prior to May 1, 2010, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to May 1, 2010 
LOT, IRREGULAR 
A lot of such a shape or configuration that technically meets the area, frontage and width to depth requirements of this ordinance but meets these requirements by incorporating unusual elongations, angles, curvilinear lines unrelated to topography or other natural land features. 
LOT, NONCONFORMING 
See "Nonconforming Lot". 
LUMEN 
A unit of luminous flux. One footcandle is one lumen per square foot. Lumen output values shall be the initial lumen output ratings of a lamp. 
MACHINE SHOP 
An establishment where metal is cut and shaped by machine tools. 
MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT 
Major recreational equipment is defined for the purposes of this Ordinance as including recreational vehicles, boats and boat trailers, combinations thereof and other similar equipment, and cases and boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. 
MANSARD ROOF 
A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall. 
MANUFACTURED HOME 
A factory-built single-family structure that is manufactured under the authority of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, is transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent foundation, and is used as a place of human habitation. For the purposes of this ordinance, "manufactured home" also includes mobile homes, transportable, factory-built homes constructed prior to the enactment of the above Act (which became effective June 15, 1976). 
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY 
Manufacturing uses include, but are not limited to: manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment, instruments, vehicles, appliances, communications equipment, computer or electronic equipment, precision items and other electrical items; the processing of food and related products; lumber mills, pulp and paper mills, and the manufacture of other wood products; and electric power generation plants. 
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT 
The mechanical transformation of predominantly previously prepared materials into new products, including assembly of component parts and the creation of products for sale to the wholesale or retail markets or directly to consumers. Such uses are wholly confined within an enclosed building, do not include processing of hazardous gases and chemicals, and do not emit noxious noise, smoke, vapors, fumes, dust, glare, odor, or vibration. Examples include, but are not limited to: production or repair of small machines or electronic parts and equipment; woodworking and cabinet building; publishing and lithography; computer design and development; research, development, testing facilities and laboratories; apparel production; sign making; assembly of pre-fabricated parts, manufacture of electric, electronic, or optical instruments or devices; manufacture and assembly of artificial limbs, dentures, hearing aids, and surgical instruments; manufacture, processing, and packing of food products, cosmetics, and manufacturing of components, jewelry, clothing, trimming decorations, and any similar item. 
MARINA 
A facility for the docking, mooring, berthing, or storage of watercraft. Such uses may include a wide variety of accessory uses such as boat fuel sales, sales of boating supplies and equipment, boating-related services, laundries, boat repair and rental, and dry storage of boats. 
MARINA, PLEASURE BOATS ONLY 
A facility for the docking, mooring, berthing, or storage of only watercraft used for personal and family recreation, including recreational fishing. Such uses may include a wide variety of accessory uses such as boat fuel sales, sales of boating supplies and equipment, boating-related services, laundries, boat repair and rental, and dry storage of boats. 
MARQUEE 
A permanent roof-like shelter constructed of durable material that is supported solely by the building to which it is attached, and projects from the building face. A marquee is generally located at the main entrance to a building. This term does not include a canopy or an awning. 
MASSAGE THERAPY 0; 
An establishment other than a regularly licensed hospital or medical clinic engaged in the activity of massage or similar manipulation of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance by practitioners licensed as massage therapists by the Commonwealth of Virginia. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, spa, or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the body is offered as an incidental or accessory service. 
MATERIAL CHANGE IN APPEARANCE 
A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of an historic property or any contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within an historic district, such as: 
• Reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of an historic building, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements. 
• Demolition or relocation of an historic structure. 
• Commencement of excavation for construction purposes. 
• Change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way. 
• The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within an historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
• New construction within an historic district. 
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE 
No feasible or practical alternative exists, as determined by the Planning Director or Zoning Administrator (as appropriate), and all possible efforts to comply with the standards or regulation or minimize potential harmful or adverse impacts have been undertaken by an applicant. Economic considerations may be taken into account but shall not be the overriding factor determining "maximum extent practicable." 
MEDICAL OR DENTAL CLINIC 
An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists or psychologists and where patients are not usually lodged overnight. 
MEDICAL OR DENTAL LAB 
Facilities and offices for performing diagnostic or therapeutic medical procedures of a nonsurgical nature. 
MEDICAL TREATMENT FACILITY 
A small-scale facility which may or may not be located in a converted residence for the short term care and treatment of up to 20 chronically or terminally ill patients on an overnight basis. Such facilities may include sleeping rooms for care workers and members of patients' families. 
MEMBERSHIP SPORTS OR RECREATION CLUB 
A private club providing facilities to members for outdoor sports and recreation activities. Examples of membership sports or recreation clubs include swim clubs, tennis clubs, boating or yacht clubs, and soccer clubs. Examples of membership sports or recreation club facilities include swimming pools, tennis courts, ball fields, and basketball courts. This definition does not include country clubs, or golf courses. 
MICROBREWERY/MICRO-DISTILLERY/MICRO-WINERY/MICRO-CIDERY. 
A facility for the small-scale production and packaging of alcoholic beverages/spirits of the following types and quantities for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or off the premises; beer (not more than 15,000 barrels per year), distilled spirits, wine, or alcoholic cider (not more than 20,000 gallons per year). Permitted accessory uses shall include retail sales, tasting rooms for beverages produced on-site, restaurants, reception halls, and live entertainment as other-wise permitted in the zoning district. 
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT 
A tract of land or structure developed for two or more different uses, such as, but not limited to, residential, office, retail, institutional, public, or entertainment. Such uses are functionally integrated and share vehicular use areas, ingress/egress, and pedestrian access. 
MODULAR HOME 
A dwelling unit constructed on-site in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. 
MONUMENT 
Permanent concrete or stone markers not less than five inches in diameter and not less than 30 inches in length, with an appropriate center mark of nonferrous metal pin or plate. 
MOTORCYCLE SALES 
Premises on which new or used motorcycles in operating condition are displayed for sale, lease, or rental. 
MULLION 
The vertical member separating adjacent windows. 
MUSEUM 
A building serving as a repository for a collection of natural, scientific, historical, or literary curiosities or works of art, and arranged, intended, and designed to be used by members of the public for viewing, with or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory use the limited retail sale of goods, services, or products such as prepared food to the public. 
NATURAL DISASTER 
Any event in which damage to a nonconforming use or structure is caused by flooding, hail, wind event or wind storm, lighting strike, tornado damage, explosion, falling tress, or falling tree limbs. 
NEW CONSTRUCTION 
Any construction within an historic district that is independent and exclusive of an existing building or structure or part thereof in the historic district. 
NONCONFORMING LOT 
A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
NONCONFORMING SIGNS 
Any sign lawfully existing on May 1, 2010 or the effective date of an amendment to this Ordinance, that does not conform to all the standards and regulations of this Ordinance or the amendment. 
NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURE 
A feature of a use (other than the use or building that was lawfully existing on May 1, 2010 which does not conform with the open space set-aside, parking, loading, landscaping, screening, or signage regulations of this Ordinance. 
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING 
A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to May 1, 2010 or on the effective date of any amendment to this Ordinance, but that fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
NONCONFORMING USE 
Any use lawfully being made of any land, building, or structure not otherwise abandoned, existing on May 1, 2010 or on the effective date of any amendment of this Ordinance, that does not comply with the use regulations of this Ordinance or the amendment. If land or a structure is vacant or unused on May 1, 2010 or the effective date of any amendment to this Ordinance, it shall be conclusively presumed that the land or structure is subject to the provisions of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto. 
NONCONFORMITY 
A nonconforming use, structure, lot of record, site feature, or sign. 
NONCONTRIBUTING PROPERTIES 
Properties so designated on the inventory map of historic districts and properties which is adopted as a part of this Ordinance, being generally those properties which by reason of age, condition, amount of alterations, form, materials, architectural details and relation to surrounding properties do not contribute favorably to the general character of the part of the historic district in which they are located. 
NOT-FOR-PROFIT 
An organization or activity which has obtained nontaxable status from the United States Internal Revenue Service. 
NOTICE OF VIOLATION 
An initial notice indicating an alleged violation of this Ordinance. 
NURSING HOME 
Any facility or any identifiable component of any facility in which the primary function is the provision, on a continuing basis, of nursing services and health-related services for the treatment and inpatient care of two or more non-related individuals, including facilities known by varying nomenclature or designation such as rest homes, convalescent homes, skilled care facilities, intermediate care facilities, extended care facilities and infirmaries. This does not include the home or residence of any individual who cares for or maintains only persons related to him or her by blood or marriage. 
OBJECT 
A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable, yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
OFFICES, BUSINESS SERVICES 
A room, or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a general business establishment, other than financial services and professional services. Examples of business services office uses include offices for retail and wholesale establishments. 
OFFICES, FINANCIAL SERVICES 
A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business offering financial services, such as banking services, investment banking, stock brokerage, investment services, credit card services, and the like. 
OFFICES, PROFESSIONAL SERVICES 
A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, or service industry. Examples of professional services offices include offices for lawyers, accountants, engineers, architects, doctors, dentists, real estate brokers and agents, and similar professions. 
OFFICES, SALES 
A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business engaged in the buying and/or selling of personal property, services, or other products, such as artwork, artifacts, or other specialized services. 
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 
The official zoning map of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia. See Section 40.1-1.7. 
OPACITY 
A measurement indicating the degree of obscuration of light or visibility. 
OPEN SPACE 
Space suitable for passive recreation, gardens or landscaping which may include areas left in their natural state, trails, ponds, stream banks, recreation areas, areas of excessive slopes, low-lying areas, marshland, environmentally-sensitive areas, and required landscaping areas. Such space must be free of automobile traffic and parking, and be readily accessible to all those for whom it is required. 
OPEN SPACE, ACTIVE 
Space suitable for active forms of recreation, including athletic fields, playgrounds, swimming pools, courts, tracks, and similar uses that are well served by streets, parking facilities, spectator areas, restroom facilities, and exterior lighting where appropriate. 
OPEN SPACE, COMMON 
An open space area owned privately or in common for use by all members of the public. 
OPEN SPACE, PASSIVE 
Required open space areas designated for passive recreation uses including walking trails, pathways, gazebos, picnic areas, fountains and pools, plazas, and similar areas. Such areas may also include undisturbed natural vegetation. 
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE 
Space on each building lot that is for the private use of inhabitants. 
OPEN SPACE SET-ASIDE 
Portion of a proposed development required for reservation as permanent open space by Section 40.1-5.4, Open Space Standards and Set-Asides. 
OTHER GOVERNMENT FACILITIES 
A facility of an governmental agency—other post offices, government offices, government maintenance, storage, and distribution facilities—that provides services to the public. 
OTHER RETAIL SALES ESTABLISHMENTS 
Commercial enterprises—other than convenience stores, drug stores, flea markets, grocery stores, liquor stores, manufactured homes sales, and large retail establishments—that provide goods and/or services directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. Examples include stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods such as art, art supplies, bicycles, cameras, clothing, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, hardware, home improvements, household products, jewelry, pets, pet food, plants, printed material, stationary, and videos. 
OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALES 
The placement of products or materials for sale outside the entrance of a retail or wholesale sales establishment. 
OUTDOOR STORAGE 
The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. This shall not include the display of vehicles for sale in a new or used car sales lot. Such activities may be the principal use of the land where located or as an accessory use to another principal use. 
OUTDOOR STORAGE (AS A PRINCIPAL USE) 
The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. This shall not include the display of vehicles for sale in a new or used car sales lot. Such activities may be the principal use of the land where located or as an accessory use to another principal use. 
OUTPARCEL OR OUTLOT 
A portion of land in a subdivision, shopping center, or other development that does not contain the primary building associated with the development, and that is intended for development of one or more smaller, independent buildings usually located adjacent to a development's street frontage. Outparcels are typically smaller than the parent parcel and may not be contiguous to the parcel containing the primary building or buildings. 
OUTPATIENT FACILITY 
A facility where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one person or a group of persons practicing any form of the healing arts, whether such persons be medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, or any such profession, the practice of which is regulated by the state. A public clinic is one operated by any governmental organization for the benefit of the general public. 
OWNER, PROPERTY 
A person having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of land. 
PARAPET 
A building façade that rises above the roof level, typically obscuring a gable or flat roof as well as any roof-mounted equipment. 
PARCEL 
Any quantity of land and/or water capable of being described in definitive terms with respect to its location and boundaries. It may be established as distinct from other parcels which are designated by its owner or a developer as land to be used or developed as a unit, or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
PARCEL SERVICES 
Retail sales or business services establishment to facilitate the transmittal and receipt of parcels. 
PARK AND RIDE FACILITY 
A publicly owned, short-term, parking facility for commuters. 
PARK, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE 
Land used for recreation, exercise, sports, education, rehabilitation, or similar activities, or a land area intended to enhance the enjoyment of natural features or natural beauty, specifically excluding commercially operated amusement parks. 
PARKING BAY 
The parking module consisting of one row of parking spaces or stalls and the aisle from which motor vehicles enter and leave the spaces. 
PARKING DEMAND STUDY 
An analysis of the total number of parking spaces required in order to accommodate the maximum number of vehicles for parking purposes by a particular use or site at any given time, including the parking requirements for all employees, occupants, clients, and visitors. 
PARKING LOT 
The portion of a site or development dedicated to vehicular ingress and egress, off-street parking, parking aisles, internal travel ways, fire lanes, and other areas dedicated to vehicular use, but not necessarily including vehicular storage areas. 
PARKING LOT DRIVE AISLE 
A vehicular accessway located within an off-street parking or vehicular use area which serves individual parking stalls and driveways. 
PARKING SPACE, ACCESSIBLE 
A space designated for the parking or temporary storage of one motor vehicle in addition to the space necessary for the ingress and egress from the vehicle by a disabled person and any equipment needed for that purpose. 
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET 
A space that is designated for the parking or temporary storage of one motor vehicle located outside of a dedicated street right-of-way, vehicular travel way, or parking aisle. 
PARKING STRUCTURE 
A structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck surface of a building. This definition includes parking garages and deck parking. 
PARKING, DEFERRED 
A portion of the required off-street parking associated with a use that is not installed at the time of construction, but delayed or deferred until a parking demand study can be completed to determine if the additional required parking is needed. 
PARKING, OFF-SITE 
An off-street parking area provided on a different parcel than the use it is intended to serve. 
PARKING, ON STREET 
A location or area within the right-of-way of a public or private street that is reserved for the parking of vehicles. Such areas may or may not be formally designated with signage, striping, or parking meters. 
PARKING, SHARED 
Off-street parking facilities shared by two or more uses that are in close proximity to one another and the parking area, and that have different operational characteristics such that use of the parking facilities by one use will not generally overlap with the use of the parking area by the other use(s). 
PARKING, TANDEM 
A parking space within a group of two or more parking spaces arranged one behind the other. 
PARTY WALL 
A wall separating and common to two or more buildings on individual lots that consists of noncombustible material as specified by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
PASSENGER TERMINAL, SURFACE TRANSPORTATION 
A facility that receives and discharges passengers and at which facilities and equipment required for their operation are provided. Examples include terminals for bus, trolley, taxi, railroad, shuttle van, or other similar vehicular services. 
PATHWAYS, PEDESTRIAN 
Interconnected paved walkways that provide a pedestrian passage through blocks running from street to street, vehicular use areas, or other locations. 
PATIO 
An area, usually paved, adjoining a building—used as an area for outdoor lounging, dining, or gathering. 
PAVED SURFACE OR ROAD 
Brick, concrete or asphalt placed on land as a hard dustless surface. 
PEDESTRIAN 
A person traveling on foot under their own locomotion. 
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION 
A right-of-way intended for pedestrian movement/activity, including but not limited to, sidewalks, internal walkways, external and internal arcades, and plazas. 
PENNANT 
For the definition of the term pennant, see Section 40.1-5.11(C), Definitions. 
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 
Cash or other guarantee provided by an applicant in-lieu of completion of public infrastructure or installation of required private site features prior to issuance of a permit or other development approval. 
PERIMETER FENCES AND WALLS 
For the purposes of Section 40.1-5.10(F), Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Public Rights-of-Way, a fence or wall of four feet or more in height that is located adjacent to the edge of a public street right-of-way, and runs parallel to or alongside the adjacent public right-of-way for at least two linear feet. 
PERMITTED USE 
Use or activity, which because of its nature and impact, is allowed to occur within a designated zoning district as a use by-right. 
PERSON 
Any individual, corporation, government agency, business trust, partnership, two or more persons having a joint interest, or any other legal entity. 
PERSONAL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT 
An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature. Examples include: photographic studios; mailing or packing service, photocopy and blueprint services; hair, tanning, and personal care services; psychics and mediums; martial arts schools; dance or music classes; taxidermists; and mortuaries. 
PERVIOUS SURFACE 
A surface that absorbs water. 
PLANNING COMMISSION 
The Planning Commission for the City of Portsmouth, as established in the City Code. 
PLANNING DIRECTOR 
The Planning Director of the city. See Section 40.1-2.1(G)(1). 
PLANTING SEASON 
That period during which a particular species of vegetation may be planted for maximum survivability and healthy growth as established by the local agricultural extension office. 
PLANTING STRIP 
Areas intended for the placement of vegetation within the interior of vehicular use areas or along street right-of-way edges, typically between the back of the curb and the inside edge of the sidewalk. 
PLAYGROUND 
Land which is improved with active recreation equipment and areas such as swings, gym bars, and other similar equipment. 
PLAZA 
An open area which is available to the public for gathering, walking, seating, and eating. 
POLICE STATION 
A building or part of a building that is designated by a chief of police or sheriff to be used as a police or sheriff's station and at which duly authorized officers perform law enforcement functions. 
PORCH 
A roofed structure not more than 75 percent enclosed by walls, attached to the main building, and not heated or cooled. 
PORTABLE SHIPPING CONTAINER 
A large container, typically intended for transport by large truck, train, or ship, that is used for the temporary storage and or transport of personal property. 
PORTICO 
A large porch usually with a pediment usually associated with an entrance, supported by columns. 
POST OFFICE 
A facility designated or licensed by the federal government to sell U.S. postage stamps and U.S. postal products and accept mail and packages for delivery. 
POULTRY 
The category of domesticated birds which some humans keep for the purpose of collecting their eggs, or kill for their meat and/or feathers. 
PRIMARY DRIVE AISLE 
The main aisle(s) that extends from the street right-of-way, or from the driveway entrance(s) serving a development along the front of the building it serves. 
PRIMARY ENTRANCE 
The place of ingress and egress to a building, parcel, or development used most frequently by the public. 
PREMISES 
A lot, parcel, tract, or plot of land together with the buildings and structures thereon. 
PRESIDING OFFICER 
A person appointed by a commission or board to preside at public meetings or hearings. 
PROCEDURES MANUAL 
A document maintained by the Planning Director that serves as a user's guide to this Ordinance. The procedure manual contains copies of application forms, fees, schedule and contact information, as well as interpretations of the intent behind standards in this Ordinance. 
PRODUCE STAND 
A building or structure used for the retail sales of fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers, herbs or plants grown on the same parcel of land where the stand is located. Such use may also involve the accessory sales of other unprocessed foodstuffs, home processed food products such as jams, jellies, pickles, sauces or baked goods, and homemade handicrafts. No commercially packaged handicrafts or commercially processed or packaged foodstuffs shall be sold. Such uses also include "pick your own" establishments where customers gather their own produce from the fields for purchase and off-site consumption. 
PRODUCTION PLANT NURSERY 
The growing, storage, and sale of garden plants, shrubs, trees, vines, groundcovers, and other related landscaping materials for resale, typically occurring as wholesale or retail sales directly to landscaping professionals. Such uses may include limited incidental retail sales to members of the general public. Such uses may include greenhouses; outdoor storage of goods, materials, and equipment; irrigation systems; and caretaker's dwelling. 
PROFFER 
An offer or proposal by which the property owner, or his agent, commits himself to additional requirements or restrictions on his property (see Section 40.1-2.3(A)(7), Proffer Standards). 
PSYCHIATRIC TREATMENT FACILITY 
Inpatient facility which provides care for persons with psychiatric problems and which may include outpatient follow-up care to the facility's patients. 
PUBLIC SQUARE OR PLAZA 
Open space generally open and readily accessible to the public and used by pedestrians for passive recreation and as an outdoor meeting or gathering place. Such uses may be provided with amenities such as shelters, seating, fountains, art, and landscaping. 
QUORUM 
The minimum number of board members that must be present in order to conduct official business or take official action. 
RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING STUDIO 
A facility for the staging and recording of audio or television productions. 
RAINWATER CISTERN 
A catchment device to capture rain water from a roof or other surface before it reaches the ground. 
RECONSTRUCTION 
Any or all work needed to remake or rebuild all or a part of any building to a sound condition, but not necessarily of original materials. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES OR RENTALS 
Premises on which new or used recreational vehicles in operating condition are displayed for sale, lease, or rental. 
RECYCLING AND SALVAGE CENTER 
A facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, resale, or reuse of recyclable and recovered materials. 
RECYCLING DROP-OFF Station or Center 
A small collection facility where recyclable materials are purchased or accepted from the public. Typical uses include neighborhood recycling stations and thrift store collection trucks. 
REDEVELOPMENT 
Any proposed expansion, addition, reduction, or other alteration to an existing building, structure, or other constructed feature on a lot or site. Redevelopment also includes changes in use to existing buildings, as well as modifications to site features such as parking, signage, landscaping, grading, stormwater management devices, or changes to outdoor storage. 
REHABILITATION 
The process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values. 
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION 
A structure or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals, and education are held, together with its accessory buildings and uses (including buildings used for educational and recreational activities), operated, maintained, and controlled under the direction of a religious group. Religious institutions include churches, mosques, synagogues, and temples. Accessory uses may include school facilities, parking, caretaker's housing, pastor's housing, and group living facilities such as convents. 
REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT 
An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of repair services for TV's, bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes, guns, canvas products, appliances, and office equipment; including tailor; locksmith; and upholsterer. 
REPAIR OF SCIENTIFIC OR PROFESSIONAL INSTRUMENTS 
An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of repair services for scientific or professional instruments for businesses. 
REPAIRS 
Any work or all work involving the replacement of existing material with equivalent material for the purpose of maintenance, but not including any addition, change, or modification in construction. 
REPLACEMENT COST 
The cost of restoring a damaged building or structure to its original condition (exclusive of foundations). Replacement cost shall include reasonable estimates of the cost of materials and labor and shall be compared with the assessed value as determined by the county assessor to determine the percentage of the cost of improvements. 
REPRODUCIBLE VALUE 
The cost for replacement of a structure, including all materials and labor, based upon the structure's current tax valuation from the Tax Assessor. 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
A business that engages in research, or research and development, of innovative ideas in technology-intensive fields. Examples include research and development of computer software, information systems, communication systems, transportation, geographic information systems, multi-media and video technology. Development and construction of prototypes may be associated with this use. 
RESTAURANT, BREW-PUB. 
A sit-down restaurant that includes a microbrewery, both as principal uses. Uses providing on-site entertainment in the form of live performances, dancing, or other entertainment activities are entertainment establishments. Performances related to the simulation of specified sexual activities or the display of specified anatomical areas are classified as Adult Uses. 
RESTAURANT, WITH DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE 
An establishment where provision is made on the premises for the ordering, selling, dispensing, or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages to persons driving by the structure in their motor vehicles. 
RESTAURANT, WITH INDOOR AND OUTDOOR SEATING ONLY 
An establishment where meals or prepared food, including beverages and confections, are served to customers for consumption on the premises. Such a facility may include indoor and outdoor seating, but no drive-through service. 
RESTORATION 
Any or all work connected with the returning to or restoring of a building, or part of any building, to its original condition through the use of original or nearly original materials. 
RIGHT-OF-WAY(ROW) 
An area owned or maintained by the city, county, the state of Virginia, federal government, a public utility, a railroad, or a private concern for the placement of such utilities and/or facilities for the passage of vehicles or pedestrians, including roads, streets, pedestrian walkways, utilities, or railroads. 
ROOFLINE 
The highest point of a flat roof and mansard roof and the lowest point of a pitched roof excluding any cupolas, chimneys or other minor projection. 
ROOMING HOUSE OR BOARDING HOUSE 
Any building or portion thereof for providing lodging, either with meals (boarding house) or without meals (rooming house), to not more than two guests, where rent is paid to the owner or proprietor. This definition does not include the incidental provision of lodging within a Dwelling Unit by a resident owner, provided no more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the Dwelling Unit's living space is devoted to such lodging use. 
ROOT ZONE 
The area inside the dripline of a tree that contains its roots. 
SALVAGE AND JUNKYARD 
An establishment where junk, waste, discarded, salvaged, or similar materials such as old metals, wood, slush, lumber, glass, paper, rags, cloth, bagging, cordage, barrels, containers, and the like, are brought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, stored, or handled, including used lumber and building material yards, housewrecking yards, heavy equipment wrecking yards, and yards or places where salvaged house wrecking or structural steel materials are stored, handled, and sold. This definition shall not include automobile wrecker services and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of second-hand cars, clothing, salvaged machinery, furniture, radios, stoves, refrigerators, or similar household goods and appliances, all of which shall be usable, nor shall it apply to the processing of used, discarded, or salvaged materials incident to manufacturing activity on the same site where such processing occurs. 
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA 
A round or parabolic antenna and its supporting structure for the purposes of sending and/or receiving radio or electromagnetic signals. Satellite dishes with a diameter up to 39 inches are considered as "small" satellite antenna dishes, while any such use with a diameter of more than 39 inches is considered as a "large" satellite dish antenna. 
SCHOOL, Elementary 
A public or private school offering general, technical, or alternative instruction at the elementary school level that operates in buildings or structures or on premises on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes. Such uses include classrooms, laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution. 
SCHOOL, High 
A public or private school offering general, technical, or alternative instruction at the high school level that operates in buildings or structures or on premises on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes. Such uses include classrooms, vocational training (including that of an industrial nature for instructional purposes only), laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution. 
SCHOOL, MIDDLE 
A public or private school offering general, technical, or alternative instruction at the middle school level that operates in buildings or structures or on premises on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes. Such uses include classrooms, vocational training (including that of an industrial nature for instructional purposes only), laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution. 
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY 
A building or group of buildings within a controlled access or fenced environment divided into separate compartments used to meet the temporary storage needs of small businesses, apartment dwellers, and other residential uses. Also referred to as "mini-warehouse." 
SENIOR CENTER 
A facility typically for use by citizens of 62 years of age, or older, dedicated to the provision of services, activities, or facilitation of interaction between older citizens and the community at large. Such centers may be publicly or privately-owned, but are not operated for a profit. 
SHARED PARKING FACILITY 
A parking lot or garage used for shared parking by two or more businesses or uses. 
SHELTER 
Any facility to provide emergency group living accommodations as a single housekeeping unit for up to 90 days for the maintenance and care of adults, children, and families in need of emergency housing—including, but not limited to, facilities qualified to be licensed by the city or the commonwealth. 
SHIPPING CONTAINER STORAGE YARD 
An operation for storage of empty shipping containers conducted as the principal use of a property. 
SHOEBOX-STYLE LIGHTING FIXTURE 
An exterior lighting device in the shape of a box that is typically mounted on a pole and constructed to direct illumination to a constrained area directly beneath the lighting fixture. 
SHOPPING CENTER 
Commercial development of more than one retail sales or service establishment on a single parcel of common ownership attached by common walls or if located in separate buildings are interconnected by walkways and/or access ways, providing common parking facilities for all establishments, having multiple tenancy of a single or several large common structures, and otherwise present the appearance of one continuous commercial area. 
SHRUB 
A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems emerging from the ground, or small branches near the ground. Shrubs may be deciduous or evergreen. 
SIGHT TRIANGLE 
The triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on intersecting right-of-way lines (or a right-of-way line and the curb or a driveway). 
SIGN 
For the definition of the term sign and other definitions related to signage, see Section 40.1-5.11(C), Definitions. 
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO) FACILITY 
A residential facility in which individual furnished rooms (which may or may not have kitchen or bathroom facilities) are rented on a weekly or monthly basis to one- or two-person households, and that may provide common facilities and services for laundry, cleaning, and meals. 
SITE 
The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
SITE LANDSCAPING 
Required vegetative material consisting of trees and shrubs that are placed on a development site to soften built edges and provide transitions. (See Section 40.1-5.2, Landscaping and Screening.) 
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY 
A group living residential facility with furnished rooms that are rented on a weekly or monthly basis, and which provides common facilities and services for laundry, cleaning, and meals. 
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT 
A system designed to convert solar radiation into usable energy for space, water heating, or other uses. 
SPECIAL EVENTS HOUSE 
A residence-type structure that is used for one-time social events for invited guests, such as teas, bridal showers, receptions, etc., and which may include both indoor and outdoor activities. 
SPECIALTY EATING ESTABLISHMENT 
Establishments selling specialty food items that normally do not constitute a full meal, including but not limited to: ice cream parlors, dessert cafes, snack shops, juice and coffee houses, and bakeries. 
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS 
This means: (a) Less than completely or opaquely covered: (i) Human genitals; (ii) Buttocks; (iii) Human breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and (b) Human genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES 
This means: (a) Humans genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; (b) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; (c) Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, buttock, chest, or human breast. 
SPECIMEN TREE 
Any canopy tree with a DBH of 42 inches or more and any understory or ornamental tree with a DBH of ten inches or more that is not exempted as a specimen tree by this Ordinance. 
STABILIZATION 
The installation of vegetative or structural measures to establish a soil cover to reduce soil erosion by stormwater runoff, wind, ice, and gravity. 
STACKING/STANDING AREA 
A portion of the vehicular use area on a site that is dedicated to the temporary storage or "standing" of vehicles engaged in drive-through use of the site or development. Parking or storage of vehicles is not permitted within the stacking/standing area. 
STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES (HISTORIC DISTRICTS) 
A set of established standards, requirements, and guidelines adopted by City Council for each established historic district that further guides the development and redevelopment of land within the historic districts. 
STATE 
The Commonwealth of Virginia. 
STOOP 
A platform, without a roof, located at the entrance of a building with sufficient area to facilitate the ingress and egress to the building. 
STREET 
A strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic which may also serve in part as a way for pedestrian traffic and providing direct or indirect access to property, including, but not limited to, roads, lanes, drives, trails, courts, places, terraces, alleys, avenues, highways, boulevards or any other thoroughfare. 
STRUCTURE 
Anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. This includes a fixed or movable building which can be used for residential, business, commercial, or office purposes, either temporarily or permanently. "Structure" also includes, but is not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, cisterns, sewage treatment plants, sheds, docks, mooring areas, and similar accessory construction. 
STRUCTURE, HISTORIC 
Any individually listed "historic property" as defined above or structure contributing to a historic district as defined above as "contributing properties." 
SURVEYOR 
A land surveyor or engineer certified under Sections 54.1-400 through 54.1-411, Code of Virginia, (1950), as amended. 
TATTOO PARLOR 
An establishment operated by individuals licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia, whose principle business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of one or more of the following: (1) placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin. 
TAXICAB SERVICE 
A business offering transportation in passenger automobiles and vans for compensation. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA, COLLOCATION ON EXISTING TOWER 
Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting and/or transmitting electromagnetic waves for commercial purposes, where two or more different telecommunication service providers place communication antennas and/or other communications equipment on a common antenna-supporting structure (building, tower, or other stationary device). 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA, PLACEMENT ON EXISTING BUILDING 
Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting and/or transmitting electromagnetic waves for commercial purposes, where a communication antenna is placed on an existing business use or multi-family building with eight or more dwelling units. The term does not include private home use of satellite dishes and television antennas. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER, FREESTANDING 
Any tower or antenna structure and its appurtenances erected on the ground and used primarily for the support of communication antennas used by commercial, governmental, or other public or quasi-public users. The term includes microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term does not include private home use of satellite dishes and television antennas, or amateur radio operators as licensed by the FCC. 
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT 
A permit, approved, approved with condition, or denied by the Planning Director in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(E), Temporary Use Permit. 
THEATER 
A building, or part thereof, which contains an assembly hall with or without stage which may be equipped with curtains and permanent stage scenery or mechanical equipment adaptable to the showing of plays, operas, motion pictures, performances, spectacles, and similar forms of entertainment. 
TIRE DISPOSAL OR RECYCLING 
A facility that disposes of or recycles waste tires or waste tire residuals. 
TIRE/MUFFLER SALES AND MOUNTING 
This use includes the on-site sale and subsequent installation of automobile parts and accessories limited to tires and mufflers. Such uses do not include the sale of gasoline or other fuels. 
TOOL REPAIR 
An establishment that repairs tools for compensation. 
TOPPING 
The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
TOURIST HOME 
An establishment in a private Dwelling Unit that supplies temporary lodging accommodations to not more than five overnight guests for a fee. 
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (TND) 
A compact, fully-integrated, mixed-use development which encourages social interaction by the use of a variety of housing types, commercial and civic spaces, landscaped streets and public areas, and a system of easily accessible neighborhood parks and greens. 
TRANSFER STATION 
Any solid waste storage or collection facility at which solid waste is transferred from collection vehicles to haulage vehicles for transportation to a central solid waste management facility for disposal, incineration, or resource recovery. 
TREE SAVE AREA 
The area around a specimen tree that extends one linear foot around the tree's dripline. 
TRUCK OR FREIGHT TERMINAL 
A use where buses, trucks, and cargo are stored, where loading and unloading is carried on regularly, and where minor maintenance of these types of vehicles is performed. 
TRUCK STOP 
A facility providing services to the trucking industry, including but not limited to the dispensing of fuel, repair shops, automated washes, restaurants, restrooms, scales, and overnight parking facilities. 
UNDERSTORY TREE 
A tree that has an expected height at maturity of no greater than 30 feet. 
UNENCLOSED PORCH 
A covered or uncovered porch which is open to the weather or screened on all sides except where attached to the walls of a building. 
USE 
The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
USE PERMIT 
A permit, approved, approved with condition, or denied by the City Council in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(B), Use Permit. 
UTILITY, MAJOR 
Infrastructure services providing regional or community-wide service that normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as water towers, waste treatment plants, potable water treatment plants, solid waste facilities, and electrical substations. 
UTILITY, MINOR 
Infrastructure services that need to be located in or near the neighborhood or Use Type where the service is provided. Examples of Minor Utilities include water and sewage pump stations, storm water retention and detention facilities, telephone exchanges, and surface transportation stops such as bus stops and park-and-ride facilities. 
VALET PARKING 
The provision of parking for vehicles whereby vehicles are parked and un-parked in a parking area, parking lot or any parking structure by a person other than the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
VARIANCE PERMIT 
A permit, approved, approved with condition, or denied by the BZA in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(G), Variance Permit. 
VEGETATION, NATIVE 
Any indigenous tree, shrub, ground cover or other plant adapted to the soil, climatic, and hydrographic conditions occurring on the site. 
VEHICULAR USE AREA LANDSCAPING, INTERIOR 
Vegetative material, structures (walls or fences), berms, and associated ground cover located within the interior of a parking lot, or other vehicular use area for the purposes of providing visual relief and heat abatement. (See Section 40.1-5.2(D)(2)) 
VEHICULAR USE AREA LANDSCAPING, PERIMETER 
Vegetative material, structures (walls or fences), berms, and associated ground cover located around the perimeter of a parking lot, or other vehicular use area when such areas are adjacent to a street right-of-way or land in a residential district or residentially developed lands, used property for the purposes of screening the vehicular use area from off-site views. (See Section 40.1-5.2(D)(3)) 
VENDING MACHINE 
A coin-operated machine that sells and dispenses merchandise. 
VETERINARY CLINIC 
A facility for the care and treatment of animals, including household pets and larger domesticated animals. Such facilities may be entirely indoors or may have both indoor and outdoor components. 
VOCATIONAL OR TRADE SCHOOL 
A public or private school offering vocational or trade instruction to students and that operates in buildings or structures or on premises on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes. Such uses include classrooms, vocational training (including that of an industrial nature for instructional purposes only), laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution. 
VOLUNTARY PROFFER STATEMENT 
A statement submitted by an applicant that includes all the proposed proffers or conditions associated with an amendment to the zoning map Rezoning). 
WALL PACKS 
An exterior lighting device that is flush-mounted on a vertical wall surface. 
WALL, PARAPET 
A low protective or decorative wall or railing along the edge of a raised structure such as a roof or balcony. 
WAREHOUSE (DISTRIBUTION) 
A use engaged in distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment. 
WAREHOUSE (STORAGE) 
A use engaged in storage of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment excluding bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or that present hazards or conditions commonly recognized as offensive. 
WASTE COMPOSTING 
Uses where solid wastes are composted using composting technology. Accessory uses may include offices and repackaging and transshipment of by-products. 
WHOLESALE SALES, ALL USES 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers. Wholesale establishment does not include contractor's materials or office or retail sales of business supplies/office equipment. 
YOUTH CLUB FACILITY 
A boys' club, a girls' club, or any other non-profit facility that is not a school but which provides entertainment, recreation, crafts, tutorials or other quality of life enhancements for minors. 
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 
The city official charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT 
A permit, approved, approved with condition, or denied by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(F), Zoning Compliance Permit. 
ZONING MAP, OFFICIAL 
The official, adopted map or maps which are part of this Ordinance, and delineate the boundaries of each zoning district (See Section 40.1-1.7, Official Zoning Map). 
ZONING MAP AMENDMENT (REZONING) 
A zoning district change reviewed and approved or denied by the City Council in accordance with Section 40.1-1.7, Zoning Map (Rezoning) or Text Amendment. 
ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT 
A zoning district change reviewed and approved or denied by the City Council in accordance with Section 40.1-2.3(A), Zoning Map (Rezoning) or Text Amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-23, sec. 3, 6-11-2013; Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 3, 10, 14, 16, 28), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 26), 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 3), 1-26-2016; Ord. No. 2016-70, Amd. 2, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 2018-01 , Exh. A, 1-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-02 , Exh. A, 1-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-112 , § 1(Exh. A), 11-27-2018)  
ARTICLE 40.1-9: - APPENDIX 
(A)  Downtown Districts and the D1 Zoning District   
(B)  Downtown D2 Zoning District Refer to the Uptown D2 District Form-Based Code document, as adopted. 
(C) Residential Mobile Home (RMH) District [1] 
PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The Residential Mobile Home (RMH) district is established to accommodate mobile homes and manufactured homes in parks that are developed with such amenities as recreation, open space, and landscaping, and designed in ways that are compatible with surrounding development and the neighborhood or area in which they are located. 
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 
STANDARD 	ALL USES 
District Size, Minimum (AC) 	20 
Number of Individual Dwelling Units, Minimum (#) 	50 
Density, Maximum (DU/AC) 	N/A 
Lot Size, Minimum (sf) 	3,600 
Lot Width, Minimum (ft) 	25 
Building Coverage, Maximum (%) 	35 of the entire site or development 
Front Yard, Minimum (ft) 	15 
Side Yard, Minimum 	15 ft from a street; Otherwise, 10% of lot width up to 15 feet 
Rear Yard, Minimum (ft) 	15 
Corner Side Yard, Minimum (ft) 	15 
Perimeter Setback 	25 feet from all mobile home park boundaries 
Accessory Structure, Minimum (ft) 	5 
Height, Maximum (ft) 	36 
Accessory Structure Size, Maximum (%) 	33 for structures accessory to an individual unit [2] 
Street Frontage Requirements 	Must front on public or private street of at least 50 feet right-of-way width 
NOTES: "sf" = square feet; "ft" = feet; "FAR" = floor area ratio; "DU" = dwelling units; "AC" = acre 
[1] Amendments to the Official Zoning Map to enlarge an existing or establish a new RMH district are prohibited. 
[2] See Section 40.1-4.4(C)(1), Accessory Dwelling Units, for accessory dwelling unit dimensional requirements. 
 
(1)  Required Improvements for Mobile Home Parks The developer of every mobile home park shall install the following improvements in locations convenient to the residents and shall maintain such improvements in good working order at all times during the operation of the mobile home park: 
(a)  Facilities and Recreational Areas   
(i)  Laundry Facilities A minimum of one automatic washer and one automatic dryer for each 25 mobile home sites. 
(ii)  Storage facilities Storage facilities shall be provided on or conveniently near each home lot: 
a.  For the active storage of outdoor equipment, furniture and tools; 
b.  For the inactive storage of such other material as is used only seasonally or infrequently by the typical tenant and cannot be conveniently stored in the typical mobile home. 
c.  There shall be a minimum of 200 cubic feet of storage for each mobile home. Storage facilities shall be provided on the lot or in compounds located within a reasonable distance. Storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the park and shall be constructed of suitable weather-resistant materials appropriate under the use and maintenance contemplated. 
(iii)  Play Areas for Children Playground areas with suitable facilities and equipment shall be provided. 
(iv)  Adult Recreational Areas Recreational areas with suitable facilities and equipment shall be provided for adult residents. 
(b)  Open Space Within every mobile home park there shall be permanently set aside an amount of open space to be used exclusively for leisure and recreational purposes. The amount of such space shall be a minimum of 15 percent of the gross development area of the mobile home park. The open space shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
(i)  All open space areas shall be reasonably accessible to residents; 
(ii)  Open space lands shall contain at least 6,000 square feet; and 
(iii)  Recreational facilities as required in this subsection may be designated as required open space. 
(2)  Mobile Home Parking Outside of RMH District It shall be a violation of this Ordinance to place, keep, or maintain for more than three consecutive days any mobile home used for human habitation upon any lot or parcel of land outside a RMH district. 
 
Downtown Districts and the D1 District  
40.1-9.1 - Specific Purpose of Downtown Districts 
The Downtown Districts are created for the purposes set forth in section 40.1-3.6(E) (1) and also, without limitation, for the promotion and preservation of the city's educational, cultural and economic interests, opportunities and advantages. Such districts include and bound the only significant tourist routes providing access to the many historic structures and buildings in downtown Portsmouth and to its historic waterfront and governmental center and contain many significant historic structures and buildings. 
The Downtown Districts fulfill this purpose through: 
(A)  The preservation and protection of buildings, structures, places and areas of educational, cultural, economic and civic interest in the core area of the original community settlement; 
(B)  The development and maintenance of appropriate settings and environment for such buildings, structures, places and areas; 
(C)  The protection and enhancement of the tourist corridors leading to the historic core area, governmental center and historic waterfront; 
(D)  The regulation and control of construction of new buildings and structures in accordance with the City's Comprehensive Plan, the Downtown Master Plan and Waterfront Strategy, and Downtown Design Manual, adopted by the city council to protect such areas and the setting and environment found, preserved and promoted therein. 
(E)  In addition to the above, an additional purpose of the D2 Form Based Code District is to provide a mechanism for implementing the following specific goals, using both public and private sector investment: Capitalizing on public investment in existing infrastructure; promoting compact, mixed-use development at moderate to high densities; ensuring transit-supportive and transit-serviceable development; requiring pedestrian-oriented and transit-oriented design; and ensuring compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods.  
40.1-9.2 - Downtown Districts—Permitted Uses 
Uses permitted in the Downtown Districts shall be governed according to subdistricts, as shown on the zoning map. Table 40.1-9.2.1 in this Article of this Chapter lists the uses allowed in the various subdistricts. The designations and general purposes of the subdistricts are as follows: 
(A)  T3 subdistrict. The T3 (Urban Residential) subdistrict contains a mix of residential uses, but maintains a residential urban fabric. These areas, furthest from the Historic District, represent the least intense urbanism downtown. This subdistrict contains flexible dimensional requirements to allow development consistent with the design of existing downtown neighborhoods. 
(B)  T4 subdistrict. The T4 (General Urban) subdistrict contains a mix of uses, but maintains a predominantly residential urban fabric. These areas, nearest to the Historic District, represent moderately intense urbanism in the downtown. This subdistrict contains flexible dimensional requirements to allow development complimentary to and building upon the design of existing downtown neighborhoods. 
(C)  T5 subdistrict. The T5 (Urban Center) subdistrict contains a higher density mix of uses with primarily retail space at the ground floor. 
(D)  T6 subdistrict. The T6 (Urban Core) subdistrict is designed for high-density mixed uses. This subdistrict is the most intense land use Downtown. 
(E)  SD subdistrict. The SD (Special District) subdistrict is a low-density, limited mixed use district. This subdistrict is intended to provide employment with mixed-uses, including manufacturing, distribution and warehousing, as well as civic uses and supportive retail uses. In an effort to minimize land-use conflicts, this subdistrict is not generally suited for residential uses. 
(F)  The zoning map shall also identify those properties within the Downtown Districts where a Certificate of Appropriateness is required by the provisions of this Article. 
(G)  D2 District. The D2 District is a Form Based Code District designed to foster a setting for economic growth and development in a sustainable mixed-use pattern of diverse urban neighborhoods, integrating residential with employment and commercial uses (as well as recreational opportunities). All regulations and requirements concerning the D2 subdistrict can be found in Appendix B to Chapter 40.1 of the City Code.  
TABLE 40.1-9.2.1. Permitted Uses 
[Cross Reference the Attached Use Table for the D1 District]  
40.1-9.3 - Downtown Districts—Certificate of Appropriateness; When Required 
(A)  For those properties within the Downtown Districts so identified on the zoning map, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required by Downtown Design Committee in accordance with the provisions of this Article and the requirements of the Downtown Design Manual. 
(B)  For those properties within the Downtown Districts which are not required to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Certificate of Appropriateness and Downtown Design Committee provisions listed in this Article shall not be applicable, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(C)  Provided however, that all applications for the proposed construction, alternation, or renovation of any structure shall be generally consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan and the General Development Standards and Guidelines for the Downtown District and Parking Structure Standards contained within the Downtown Design Manual adopted by the city council, as determined by the Director of Planning. In addition, the following shall be adhered to: 
(1)  Building form. The following fenestration requirements shall be applicable to building facades along street frontages designated as "A" or "B" Grid Streets on the Special Requirements Map of the Comprehensive Plan: 
Street-level story 
(a)  Nondwelling uses. For nondwelling uses, a minimum of 60 percent of the building façade between two and eight feet in height along the street frontage shall be comprised of glass windows and/or glass doors that allow views to the interior of the building space. On streets designated as "B" Grid streets on the Special Requirements Map of the Comprehensive Plan, a minimum of 50 percent of the building façade between two and eight feet in height along the street frontage shall be comprised of glass windows and/or glass doors that allow views to the interior of the building space. Windows used to satisfy the requirements of the paragraph shall have a minimum height of four feet. 
(b)  Dwelling uses. For dwelling uses, windows shall comprise a minimum of 30 percent of the building façade between two and eight feet in height along the street frontage, relative to the finished floor elevation. Such windows shall be double-hung, awning, or casement type, and fixed shall be permitted only as a component of a system including operable windows within a single wall opening. 
(c)  Distance between entries. At least one functioning street entry door shall be provided along each ground story façade at intervals not greater than 75 feet. On streets designated as "B" Grid streets on the Special Requirements Map of the Comprehensive Plan, at least one functioning street entry door shall be provided along each ground story façade at intervals not greater than 100 feet. 
Upper stories 
(a)  Nondwelling uses. For nondwelling uses, windows shall comprise a minimum of 30 percent (and up to 80 percent maximum) of the building façade between two and eight feet in height above the floor level of each story above the street level story. 
(b)  Dwelling uses. For dwelling uses, windows shall comprise a minimum of 30 percent (and up to 80 percent maximum) of the building façade between two and eight feet in height above the floor level of each story above the street level story. The types of permitted windows shall be as specified in the section above. 
(2)  Additional building form and siting, use, and building envelope requirements for the T5 and T6 subdistricts: 
(a)  The building façade shall be built to the RBL within 30 feet of a block corner. However, within 7 feet of the block corner, the ground story façade may be chamfered to form a corner entry. 
(b)  On each lot, the building façade shall be built to the required building line for at least 75% of the RBL length. 
(c)  No part of any building may be located outside of the buildable area except overhanging eaves, awnings, shopfronts, bay windows, steps, handicapped ramps, or balconies. 
(d)  The parking setback line is generally 30 feet behind the RBL and extends vertically as a plane. Vehicle parking shall be located behind the parking setback line, except where parking is provided below grade or on-street. When structured parking is provided, all portions of such structure along a street shall not be used for parking of vehicles, but shall be devoted to other permitted principal uses or to means of pedestrian or vehicle access, provided that such vehicle access along a principal street shall be permitted only when no other secondary street or alley is available for adequate access. Provided however, this condition shall not apply to public parking decks. 
(e)  Corner lots and through lots shall satisfy the build-to requirements for their full/all frontages (RBL), unless otherwise specified in this Code. 
(f)  A street wall shall be required along any RBL frontage that is not otherwise occupied by a building. The street wall shall be located not more than 8 inches behind the RBL. The street wall shall not be less than 5 feet in height or greater than 12 feet in height. 
(g)  Curb cuts or driveways shall be located at least 75 feet away from any block corner or another garage entry on the same block face. These requirements are not applicable along alleys. 
(h)  The upper stories may only house residential or commerce uses. No restaurant or retail sales uses shall be allowed in upper stories unless they are second story extensions equal to or less than the area of the ground story use. This provision shall not apply to property in the T6 district as non-residential uses may be desirable on the upper or top floors to take advantage of water views. 
(i)  No commerce use is permitted above a residential use. This provision shall not apply to property in the T6 district as non-residential uses may be desirable on the upper or top floors to take advantage of water views. 
(j)  Additional habitable space is permitted within the roof where the roof is configured and approved as an attic story. 
(k)  Balconies and stoops shall not project within 5 feet of a common lot line. 
(l)  Openings in any RBL for parking garage entries shall have a maximum clear height no greater than 16 feet and a clear width no greater than 22 feet. 
(m)  Blank lengths of wall exceeding 20 linear feet are prohibited on all required building lines (RBL). 
(n)  Awnings shall project a minimum of 5 feet to a maximum of: 
i.  within 1 foot of back of curb where there are no street trees, or 
ii.  1 foot into the tree lawn (where there are street trees). 
(o)  Awnings that project over the sidewalk portion of a street-space shall maintain a clear height of at least 10 feet. 
(p)  Awnings may have supporting posts at their outer edge provided that they: 
i.  Have a minimum of 8 feet clear width between the facade and the support posts or columns of the awnings, and 
ii.  Have between 18 and 24 inches between the support posts or columns of the awnings and the back of curb, and 
iii.  Provide a continuous clear walkway area at least 6 feet wide running adjacent and parallel to the awning columns/posts. 
(q)  Opportunities for unique architecture and signature buildings exist at intersections designated by the adopted Downtown Master Plan as Activity Nodes and should be developed accordingly. 
(r)  Mechanical and electrical equipment including, but not limited to, air compressors, hoods, mechanical pumps, exterior water heaters, water softeners, utility and telephone transformers, meters or boxes, garbage cans, storage tanks and similar elements may not be stored or located within any street space and shall be screened from view. Temporary placement of private garbage cans within the street-space may be allowed to accommodate scheduled pick-up. When access to these service areas and/or equipment is desired, one access gate no wider than 22 feet and one pedestrian entry gate no wider than 5 feet shall be permitted within any required street wall. 
(s)  Roof mounted equipment shall be placed behind and away from any RBL and be screened from view from the public right of way. 
(t)  Residential uses are prohibited on the ground story level on streets designated to have a "Required Retail Frontage" on the Special Requirements Map of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(3)  Streetscapes. Street trees, sidewalks and pedestrian-scaled lighting of no greater than 14 feet in height shall create a comfortable walking environment. Pedestrian amenities such as benches shall be consistent with city standards for outdoor furniture downtown and shall also be provided, as appropriate, throughout the development site. 
(4)  Street trees. Street trees shall be located by the developer in tree pits or tree lawns established between the curb and the sidewalk after approval by the Planning Department and City Arborist and in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Each street-space must have street trees planted along the street tree alignment line (generally 3 to 3½ feet from the back of the curb unless otherwise specified at an average spacing not greater than 30 feet on center (calculated per block face). Where necessary, spacing allowances may be made to accommodate curb cuts, fire hydrants and other infrastructure elements; however, at no location may street tree spacing exceed 45 feet on center. 
(b)  Required tree planting area minimum specifications are as follows: 
i.  Soil surface area shall not be less than 90 square feet per isolated tree or 60 square feet per tree for connected (tree lawn) situations. 
ii.  No dimension of the soil surface area may be less than 5 1/2 feet. 
iii.  These requirements may be met through the use of bridged slab, structural soil, or other techniques that clearly exceed these standards in the fostering of vital and long-lived street trees. 
(c)  Street tree planting areas shall be at grade or not greater than six inches in height above or below the sidewalk. 
(d)  At planting, street trees shall be at least 2.5 inches in diameter (at DBH) and at least ten feet in overall height. Species must be selected from the street tree list (see Tree Lists). Consult with the Planning Director for the designated tree species for a particular street-space. 
(e)  Any unpaved ground area shall be planted with groundcover, flowering vegetation, or climbing vines, not to exceed 12 inches in height. Street trees must be "limbed up" as they gain appropriate maturity so as to not interfere with pedestrian or truck travel (minimum 7 feet clear over the sidewalk and 14 feet over the travel lanes of the street) and to maintain visibility. 
(f)  The distance between street trees shall be determined by the design of the site and building to provide for an integrated landscaped theme. The Planning Department and the City Arborist shall also approve tree selection. Spacing and tree selection shall reflect the urban character and enhance the viewscapes of the waterfront and downtown areas. 
(5)  Open Space. 
(a)  Each property shall provide open space as follows: 
i.  T3 & T4: at least 20% of the total lot area in open space. 
ii.  T5: at least 15% of the total lot area in open space. 
iii.  T6: at least 10% of the total lot area in open space. 
Open space may be public and/or private and may be in the form of roof gardens, brick gardens, landscape ground level spaces and atriums. Each such space to be considered as "open space" must contain landscaping, public art form elements, or pedestrian elements and blend with the architecture of the development.  
40.1-9.4 - Downtown Districts—Dimensional and Density Requirements 
Development in the T3, T4, T5, T6 and the SD district shall reflect the urban character created by the downtown area. The design of the development shall create a vibrant, walkable place. 
(A)  Siting and Building Envelope Standards. For those properties where a Certificate of Appropriateness is required, the Downtown Design Committee shall determine the setbacks for any construction project are in conformity with the requirements and provisions of the Downtown Design Manual. 
For those properties where a Certificate of Appropriateness is not required, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Front.   
(a)  T3 and T4: Required to be within 12 feet of property line or Right-of-Way, or the average of the existing buildings along the same block face. 
(b)  T5 and T6: The building shall be built to the Required Building Line (RBL). For purposes of the T5 and T6 subdistricts, the RBL shall be the property line abutting any public right of way. The RBL incorporates an offset area (or depth) of 20 inches beyond that line (into the buildable area of the property) allowing for jogs, façade articulation, etc., unless otherwise designated herein. 
(c)  SD: Minimum of 25 foot setback 
(2)  Interior Side.   
(a)  3 and T4: 3 feet unless attached 
(b)  T5 and T6: Zero feet 
(c)  SD: 10 feet 
(3)  Rear and or Alley.   
(a)  T3 and T4: Zero 
(b)  T5 and T6: Zero 
(c)  SD: 25 feet minimum 
(4)  Street Side.   
(a)  T3 and T4: Required to be within 12 feet of property line or Right-of-Way, or the average of the existing buildings along the same block face 
(b)  T5 and T6: The building shall be built to the Required Building Line (RBL). 
(c)  SD: 20 feet 
(B)  Building Height.   
(1)  For those properties where a Certificate of Appropriateness is required, the Downtown Design Committee shall determine the building height for any construction projects is in conformity with the requirements and provisions of the Downtown Design Manual. 
(2)  For those properties where a Certificate of Appropriateness is not required, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  T3: Minimum two stories to maximum three stories. An attic story or English-basement story is not included in the height measurement. Total building height may not exceed 43 feet. 
(b)  T4: Minimum two stories to maximum three stories. An attic story or English-basement story is not included in the height measurement. Total building height may not exceed 43 feet. 
(c)  T5: Minimum two stories to maximum six stories. Total building height may not exceed 91 feet. 
(d)  T6: Minimum four stories 
(e)  SD: Minimum one story to maximum 3 story 
(C)  Story Height.   
(a)  T3: First floor 14 feet maximum; stories above the first floor maximum 12 feet. 
(b)  T4: First floor 14 feet maximum; stories above the first floor maximum 12 feet. 
(c)  T5 and T6: See below. 
(d)  SD: First floor 14 feet minimum, maximum 22 feet; stories above the first floor maximum 16 feet. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, story height shall be defined as that space within a building and above grade that is situated between one floor level and the floor level next above, or if there is no floor above, the ceiling or roof above. 
(D)  Additional Height and Story requirements for the T5 and T6 subdistricts.   
(1)  Ground Story Height: Commerce Uses.   
(a)  The average ground story finished floor elevation shall be equal to the exterior sidewalk elevation in front of the building, with a maximum finished floor elevation of 18 inches above the sidewalk. 
(b)  The ground story shall have at least 15 feet of clear interior height (floor to ceiling) contiguous to the required building line (RBL) frontage for a minimum depth of 25 feet. 
(c)  The maximum ground story height is 22 feet, measured from the sidewalk to the second story floor. 
(2)  Ground Story Height: Residential Units.   
(a)  The average finished floor elevation shall be no less than 3 feet above the exterior sidewalk elevation at the RBL. 
(b)  The ground story shall have an interior clear height (floor to ceiling) of at least 9 feet and a maximum sidewalk to second story floor height of 22 feet. 
(3)  Upper Story Height.   
(a)  The maximum clear height (floor to ceiling) for story's other than the ground story is 12 feet. 
(b)  At least 80% of each upper story shall have an interior clear height (floor to ceiling) of at least 9 feet. 
(4)  Height, Generally. Opportunities for unique architecture and signature buildings exist at intersections designated as Activity Nodes by the adopted Downtown Master Plan. Taller buildings increase the density and activity of the space and corner buildings located at activity nodes should be taller than adjacent mid-block buildings. 
(E)  Residential Densities. New development projects that include Dwelling Units, other than subdivisions substantially consisting of Single Family Detached Dwellings, shall be developed in accordance with the following density limit ranges: 
(1)  T3: N/A dwelling units per acre 
(2)  T4: 8-12 dwelling units per acre 
(3)  T5: 18-24 dwelling units per acre 
(4)  T6: 60-96 dwelling units per acre 
(5)  SD: N/A 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 27), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-9.5 - Administrative Deviations 
(A)  Authority. During the site plan review process, the Planning Director is authorized to approve limited administrative deviations to certain provisions of this Code, where, owing to special conditions, strict enforcement would be physically impractical. This optional process occurs only where the applicant requests an administration deviation to a standard as specified below. 
(B)  Permitted Deviations. The Planning Director will review the request in light of the intent of the applicable transect requirements. The Planning Director is authorized to approve an administrative deviation for the following standards: 
(1)  Height.   
(a)  Minimum and maximum story heights—up to ten percent for any one story, limit of five percent for any cumulative increase or decrease in building height. 
(b)  Street wall/fence requirements—up to ten percent. 
(c)  Finished floor elevation—up to five percent. 
(2)  Siting.   
(a)  Required Building line—increase of up to 6 inches (from the specified 20 inches to 26 inches in width). 
(b)  Required building line minimum percentage built-to—reduction of up to five percent of required length. 
(c)  Street wall requirements—up to ten percent. 
(d)  Entrances (maximum average spacing)—up to five percent increase in spacing. 
(3)  Elements.   
(a)  Fenestration (minimum and maximum percent)—up to five percent. 
(b)  Elements (minimum and maximum projections)—up to five percent. 
(4)  Density. .....(minimum and maximum dwelling units per acre)—up to ten percent. 
(C)  Relief from Standards.   
(1)  In any case where the Director of Planning and the applicant cannot agree on a proposal, the application shall be referred to the Downtown Design Committee for action. 
(2)  Deviations from these standards outside of those recommended by the Downtown Design Guidelines may be considered by the Planning Commission through a Type II Site Review. A written report/agenda shall accompany any application forwarded to the Committee. 
The Type II site review process will give the opportunity for appropriate deviations from the Code that are consistent with the City's goals and plans to revitalize the Downtown District. Examples of these deviations may include problems related to topography or street grade, the location of alleys and streets, breaks and passages between buildings, signs, streetscape details, design issues related to the inclusion of existing buildings or mature trees as part of a development proposal.  
40.1-9.6 - Application of Code 
(A)  General. There are two review processes: By-Right (administrative review) and Use Permit. The Use Permit process is dependent upon project size. Projects approved through the Use Permit process should nonetheless meet the intent of the Code. 
(1)  By-Right. Single Family Detached, Two-to-Four Family and Live/Work Dwellings are allowed by right. Non-residential projects of less than or equal to 45,000 gross square feet and less than or equal to 15,000 gross square feet footprint are able to build as a matter of right when they meet all of the standards of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Use Permit. A Use Permit is required for all Multi-Family and Townhouse Dwellings. A Use Permit is also required for non-residential buildings over 45,000 gross square feet or with floorplates over 15,000 gross square feet. Such sites will be required to meet the intent of the Code and will be evaluated in terms of how well they conform to the Code and meet other objectives of the Master Plan. The Use Permit process also provides the opportunity for community input as well as fine tuning of a development proposal to address issues that may not have been contemplated by the Code. Provided however, no use permit shall be required in the SD district based solely on building size. 
(Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 28), 12-8-2015)  
40.1-9.7 - Parking 
No off-street parking or loading facility shall be required for those properties zoned T4, T5 or T6 and which are located downtown north of Interstate 264. Where parking or loading is provided, parking shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of Section 40.1-5 of this Ordinance, with the exception of Section 40.1-5.1(D) and (E). Parking in the T3 district and T4 district south of Interstate 264 shall be in accordance with the number of spaces required in Table 40.1-5.1(E) (2). Single family residences are exempt from the 30 foot parking setback contained in this section.  
40.1-9.8 - Downtown Districts, Properties; Publicly-Owned Property 
The city manager or other appropriate city official shall file an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the proposed construction, alteration, renovation, or razing of any historic city-owned building or structure, and shall adhere to all other requirements of this division. For buildings and structures owned by other governmental entities or public utilities companies, the city manager or other appropriate city official shall request that such owners submit an application for a certificate of appropriateness and adhere to all requirements of this division. 
Nothing in this article or section shall be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of any such elements that the authorized city officers certify as required for public safety. 
For those properties within the Downtown Districts which are not required to obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness, civic use buildings are exempt from the Dimensional and Density Requirements listed above. 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 12), 12-9-2014)  
40.1-9.9 - Demolition by Neglect 
(A)  No structure within a Downtown District shall be allowed to deteriorate due to neglect. Deterioration due to neglect shall constitute demolition by neglect when: 
(1)  Deterioration of the exterior of a building occurs to the extent that it creates, or permits, a hazardous or unsafe condition; or 
(2)  Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical supports, horizontal members, roofs, chimneys, exterior wall elements such as siding, wooden walls, brick, plaster, or mortar occurs to the extent that it adversely affects the character of the district or could reasonably lead to irreversible damage to the structure or lead to a hazardous condition. 
(B)  The Committee shall monitor the condition of properties to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. In the event that the Committee receives a complaint or determines that a structure is being demolished by neglect, it shall notify the zoning administrator and the building official of such complaint or neglect stating the reasons for such notice, and shall set forth the steps that it believes need to be taken to remedy the situation.  
40.1-9.10 - Maintenance of Downtown Properties 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the normal repair and maintenance of any exterior architectural feature or ordinary yard maintenance in the Downtown Districts to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form. Normal repair and maintenance shall not include a material change in design, material, color or outer appearance and does not require a certificate of appropriateness. In addition, this paragraph does not prohibit any repair, maintenance, painting or alteration of any such feature that the building official certifies to be required for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
Normal maintenance and repair shall include the following and similar actions which in the sole opinion of the Committee or its designated staff will have no greater effect on the character of the district than those listed: 
(A)  Repainting resulting in the same color. 
(B)  Replacement of broken windowpanes, missing roof shingles, or missing features with matching in-kind materials. 
(C)  Addition or deletion of television or radio antennas, skylights or solar collectors in locations not visible from a public street. 
(D)  Planting of grass, trees and shrubs, but not including landscape treatment which substantially alters the contour of a site or involves landscaping or construction of parking areas, fences, walls, walkways, pools, fountains and the like which materially affect the appearance of a site and which is visible from a public street. 
(E)  Any changes to a structure that are not visible from a public street.  
40.1-9.11 - Downtown Design Committee 
For the general purposes of this chapter and specifically to preserve and protect historic places and areas in Portsmouth through the control of demolition and regulation of architectural design and uses of structures in such areas, a Downtown Design Committee is established. 
(A)  The Downtown Design Committee shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the city council and who shall serve without compensation. 
(B)  All members must demonstrate an interest or competence in or knowledge of historic preservation and shall include at least: 
(1)  Two members who are registered architects or architectural historians; 
(2)  One registered Landscape Architect; 
(3)  Two residents or business owners; 
(4)  Two members with professional training or equivalent experience in engineering, planning, real estate or realtors, or a contractor and; 
(5)  Up to three alternates as defined below. 
(C)  The city council, in additional to the seven voting members, may appoint a non-voting liaison to the Committee from its own body. 
(D)  Committee members shall be appointed for terms of office of three years from the date of appointment. Members may be reappointed for consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for a term of one year, three members for terms of two years, and three members for terms of three years. No individual may serve more than six years total as a Committee member without a three-year vacancy from the Committee, except that the initial member appointed for a one-year term may be reappointed for two additional three-year terms. 
(E)  The city council may appoint at least one, but up to three qualified alternate members to the Committee. The terms of the alternates shall be for three years. Alternate members shall be required to attend regular meetings and training, but shall not participate in any Committee discussions or voting pertaining to an application for a certificate of appropriateness unless so requested by the chairperson in order to create or maintain a quorum. 
(F)  A Committee member may be removed from office by the city council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance, or continued absence from regular or called meetings of the Committee. Continued absence is defined as absence from three consecutive meetings or four meetings within a 12-month period. 
(G)  If a member representing a designated organization or profession ceases to be a member of that organization or profession, or if a Committee vacancy occurs for any other reason, the city council shall appoint a new member to fill the uncompleted portion of the term within 60 days of the vacancy. 
(H)  Every member of the committee shall annually attend at least one informational or educational meeting approved by the Virginia Department of Historic Resources pertaining to the work and functions of the Committee or to historic preservation.  
40.1-9.11.1 - Downtown Design Committee; Establishment and Membership 
There is hereby created and established a Downtown Design Committee. 
(A)  The committee's membership shall be appointed by City Council. Members of the committee shall serve without compensation. 
(B)  The committee shall implement the purpose and objectives of the City's Comprehensive Plan and the "Downtown Master Plan and Waterfront Strategy" hereinafter referred to as "the plans," through the Downtown Design Guidelines and issuance of certificates of appropriateness. 
(C)  The committee shall meet on a regular basis as provided for in the Downtown Design Guidelines or when called upon by the chairman or by at least two members of the committee. 
(D)  The committee shall appoint a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members and a secretary who shall be an employee of the city planning commission. 
(E)  The committee may employ a consultant and seek advice from any city departments as it deems it necessary.  
40.1-9.11.2 - Downtown Design Committee; Powers, Duties, and Responsibilities 
The Downtown Design Committee shall have such powers, duties, and responsibilities as may be assigned to it by the city council, and in particular shall: 
(A)  Review and act upon each application for a certificate of appropriateness for any material change in appearance, including construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, demolition, or relocation of contributing or noncontributing properties within the historic districts and for individually-designated downtown properties. 
(B)  Assist and advise the city council, the planning commission, other city departments, and property owners concerning matters involving individual historically significant sites and buildings, and those properties located either in or abutting historic districts. 
(C)  Request information and services from any city department, agency, board or commission related to the exercise of the Committee's powers and duties of the Committee including: (1) a current project review, (2) development standards, and (3) the investigation of new products or materials. 
(D)  Periodically conduct or cause to be conducted, a survey of buildings, structures, places and areas in the city having historical, architectural, archaeological, or cultural significance, interest or value for the purpose of compiling appropriate descriptions, facts, lists and an inventory map. 
(E)  Administer the provisions of this article in accordance with the Committee's duties set forth therein and establish and periodically review appropriate standards and guidelines for such districts and properties subject to review and adoption by the city council. 
(F)  Request the opinion, advice, or other aid from any officer, employee, board, bureau or Committee of the city within the scope of that person's competence.  
40.1-9.11.3 - Downtown Design Committee; Rules of Procedure 
The Downtown Design Committee shall adopt bylaws, rules, and standards for the transaction of its business, and such bylaws, rules, and standards shall not conflict with the provisions of this Code. The Committee shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. It shall select a chairperson and such other officers, as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members appointed to the Committee.  
40.1-9.11.4 - Downtown Design Committee; Standards and Guidelines 
(A)  The Committee shall submit to the city council proposed standards and guidelines for each district that shall govern the Committee's decisions. After the city council reviews and approves the initial standards and guidelines, the Committee, the planning director, or city council may propose modifications. 
(B)  The Committee shall create, adopt and maintain a procedures manual containing standards and guidelines approved by the city council. The manual shall contain, among other things: 
(1)  Application instructions describing the required procedures, exhibits, visual displays and other data required relative to applications for certificates of appropriateness submitted to the Committee or its designee; and 
(2)  Committee process standards for certificate of appropriateness review and conduct of meetings.  
40.1-9.11.5 - Downtown Design Committee; Meeting Records 
A public record shall be kept of the resolutions, proceedings, and actions of the Downtown Design Committee. Designated staff of the city planning department shall serve as administrative staff to the Committee and maintain for public review all resolutions, proceedings, and actions of the Committee.  
40.1-9.11.6 - Downtown Design Committee; Annual Report 
The Downtown Design Committee shall annually make a report by June 30th of each year to the planning commission and to the city council with recommendations concerning the operation of the Committee and the status of historic preservation downtown.  
40.1-9.12 - Downtown Design Committee; Temporary Screening During Construction 
The Downtown Design Committee shall consider the need during construction to screen from public view by means of an opaque fence or other device certain new construction projects or additions to existing buildings. Such temporary screening may be required for any site within a downtown T district and for any site in the D-2 district which abuts a street classified as an arterial street in the comprehensive plan if the screening is determined by the committee to be necessary to protect the public from construction debris or equipment, to protect the public view from a public roadway, walkway or waterway or to protect the public view from a site with architectural, historic or cultural significance.  
40.1-9.13 - Downtown Design Committee; Historic Markers 
(A)  Historic markers, as approved by the Downtown Design Committee, shall be made available to the owner of any building designated as a historic structure by the committee. 
(B)  The markers shall show the date of construction and the historic significance of the structure and shall be placed on the structure or adjacent to it. 
(C)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to display an unauthorized marker or to remove an authorized marker without the consent of the structure owner and the committee. 
(D)  An application to remove an official marker shall be made in writing by the building owner to the committee for investigation and report, which report shall be made within 30 days from the date on which the application was received. The report shall be forwarded to the building official. 
(E)  In considering the removal of a marker, the Committee shall consider the historical or architectural value and significance of the building or structure and its relationship to or congruity with the land, place and area in the historic district upon which it is erected and with other buildings or structures therein. 
(F)  In the event that the Downtown Design Committee recommends approval of the application to remove an official marker, the committee shall immediately so advise the owner. 
(G)  In the event that the committee recommends denial, the owner shall be notified immediately not to remove the marker. 
(H)  The applicant may appeal any committee decision in accordance with the provisions of section 40.1-9.30.  
40.1-9.14 - Outdoor Retail Displays in Rights-of-Way 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause an outdoor retail display area to be established in any public right-of-way of the city except as permitted by this section and shall be limited to property zoned either T5 or T6 or D2. 
(B)  Upon determination that an outdoor retail display area will not materially or unreasonably interfere with the use of any public right-of-way or constitute a hazard, the city council or its designee may issue an outdoor retail display area permit subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  That application be made in writing to the city manager for such permit, in a form satisfactory to the city manager, to which shall be attached a plat of survey or an engineering drawing depicting the area to be occupied by the outdoor retail display area. 
(2)  That the outdoor retail display area permit shall be revocable at the pleasure of city council or its designee. 
(3)  That the permit to be issued by the city manager shall provide that the permittee, for himself, his heirs, successors and assigns, shall agree to indemnify, keep and hold the city free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of or directly or indirectly resulting from such use and the maintenance, operation and removal thereof; and that in the event that any suit or proceeding shall be brought against the city, at law or in equity, either independently or jointly with such permittee on account thereof, the permittee will defend the city in any such suit or proceeding at the cost of the permittee; and in the event of a final judgment or decree being obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with the permittee, then the permittee will pay such judgment or comply with such decree and pay all costs and expenses of whatsoever nature and hold the city harmless therefrom. 
(4)  That the retail display area shall be temporary and shall be removed daily. 
(5)  That the retail display area shall conform to the sidewalk display standards contained with the Downtown Design Manual as approved by City Council. 
(6)  That the issuance of the permit shall not relieve the permittee of the obligation to obtain and maintain in full force and effect any permits required by the department of public health or other applicable state or local agencies or departments. 
(7)  That the permittee shall comply with all applicable codes, ordinances, policies and regulations of federal, state and local governments and shall obtain all necessary licenses and permits. 
(8)  That the permit shall be issued to the applicant and shall not be transferable or assignable without written approval of the city manager. 
(9)  That the city council or its designee may impose such other reasonable conditions, including but not limited to a reasonable rent, as may be deemed appropriate. 
(10)  That the application fee for each permit shall be as set forth in appendix A to this Code. Such application fee shall be nonrefundable.  
40.1-9.15 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Required 
(A)  After the designation of a Downtown District, no material change including construction, reconstruction, exterior alteration, demolition, or relocation that affects the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the Downtown Design Committee. The owner of such building, structure or property or the owner's agent, shall make an application to the designated staff of the Downtown Design Committee. 
(B)  A certificate of appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit is required. Ordinary maintenance and repair items such as those listed in 40.1-9.10 are exempt from review. Exterior alterations that do not require a building permit but which can change the exterior appearance of the building or structure such as replacement of doors and windows shall not be constructed or installed unless a certificate of appropriateness has first been obtained. No site feature or appurtenance (such as walls, fences, arbors, paved parking areas, patios, decks, garages, tool sheds, and other accessory structures) where visible from a public right-of-way shall be constructed or installed unless a certificate of appropriateness has first been obtained. 
(C)  No building permit shall be issued for erection, alteration or improvement of an historic structure or property within an historic district unless a certificate of appropriateness, if required, has first been issued. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the project is constructed in compliance with the certificate of appropriateness. 
(D)  A certificate of appropriateness must be approved by the Committee prior to a zoning review of site plans, the site plan review process, subdivision review, board of zoning appeals review, or the processing of a use permit or rezoning application. No action by the departments, commissions, or agencies responsible for such reviews shall take place if a required certificate of appropriateness has not been approved.  
40.1-9.16 - Certificate Issuance Authority 
(A)  Certificate of appropriateness. The Downtown Design Committee shall have the power and the duty to issue or deny a certificate of appropriateness all proposed building and development on properties within the downtown districts so designated on the zoning map. The certificate of intent shall contain specifications for use, building, height, bulk, location (including setback requirements), required parking space, landscaping, signs and other design features of all buildings and other improvements to be constructed, erected or reconstructed in the downtown districts. 
(B)  Limitation. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the owner of such building, structure or property in the Downtown districts from performing any maintenance, alteration or painting to the external architectural features of such building, structure or property which does not involve a change in design, material, color or the outward appearance thereof and which maintenance, painting or alteration is of such nature that it may be lawfully effected without a permit from the city manager, provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, nor to prevent any repair, maintenance, painting, demolition or alteration of any such feature which the building official shall certify to be required by the public safety because of any unsafe or dangerous condition. 
(C)  Further limitation. The committee shall not consider detailed designs, interior arrangements or features of a building or structure which are not subject to public view from a public street, public way or other public place, and shall not make any requirements except for the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects of the surroundings and the downtown districts.  
40.1-9.17 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Committee Review and Approval 
(A)  Major actions, as defined in the standards and guidelines adopted by the city council as those projects requiring a three-step review, and any other actions not specifically exempted by the terms of this article and which constitute a major permanent change to the character of the historic district or property shall be approved only after a public meeting and favorable action by the Downtown Design Committee. 
(B)  In its review of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for a major action, the Committee shall be guided in its decisions by the standards and guidelines required and established by this article. 
(C)  In response to an application, the Committee shall either (i) approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, (ii) approve the application with any modifications or conditions it deems necessary if the applicant concurs with the modifications or conditions, or (iii) deny the application. The Committee may defer action on an application in order to obtain additional information necessary for its decision. 
(D)  The Committee shall not deny an application except with respect to the standards and guidelines in this article. The Committee shall give reasons for its decisions of denial in writing, shall act promptly on applications before it and shall coordinate its procedures with those of other agencies and individuals charged with administration of this division.  
40.1-9.18 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Submission of Plans Required 
A written description, drawings, photographs, plans, and documentation as required by the Committee and as further set forth on the application for the certificate of appropriateness and in the adopted Design Guidelines Submittal Requirements Section shall accompany the application for a certificate of appropriateness.  
40.1-9.19 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Application Fees 
The application fees for a certificate of appropriateness shall be as set out in Appendix A. 
There shall be no fee for the administrative review or review by the Downtown Design Committee of an application for a certificate of appropriateness when the approval is obtained prior to commencement of the work described in the application.  
40.1-9.20 - Certificate of Appropriateness; General Criteria for Approval. 
(A)  The Committee shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, cultural, historic, or architectural significance and value of the structure or the district in accordance with the Downtown Design Guidelines and the following: 
(1)  A property will be used as it was historically or be given a new use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships. 
(2)  The historic character of a property will be retained and preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property will be avoided. 
(3)  Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other historic properties, will not be undertaken. 
(4)  Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right will be retained and preserved. 
(5)  Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property will be preserved. 
(6)  Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features will be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence. 
(7)  Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials will not be used. 
(8)  Archeological resources will be protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be undertaken. 
(9)  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction will not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that characterize the property. The new work will be differentiated from the old and will be compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale and proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its environment. 
(10)  New additions and adjacent or related new construction will be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(B)  In making its determination, the Committee shall further consider the compatibility of the proposed project with the standards and guidelines as adopted by city council in addition to any other pertinent factors. 
(C)  This section is not intended to discourage contemporary architectural expression, or to require the emulation of existing structures of historic or architectural interest in specific detail. Harmony, or incompatibility, shall be evaluated in terms of the appropriateness of the architectural features, materials, scale, size, height, and placement of a new structure in relationship to existing structures and to the setting.  
40.1-9.21 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Action Required on Application 
(A)  Upon receipt of a complete application for a certificate of appropriateness, the designated staff shall review the application to determine if a one, two, or three step approval process is required, as defined in the standards and guidelines adopted by the city council. 
(B)  For those reviews by the committee, staff shall place the application on the agenda for the next regularly scheduled Committee meeting for which it meets the deadline pursuant to the procedures manual. During the public hearing portion of the Committee meeting the Committee will confer with the applicant for the certificate of appropriateness and other parties that appear to voice an opinion on the project. After the public comment portion of the meeting has ended, the Committee members shall vote to either approve or disapprove such plans and specifications based on architectural compatibility and in accordance with the Committee's adopted standards and guidelines. 
(C)  If the application is approved, the Committee shall issue a certificate of appropriateness therefore with or without conditions or with such modifications of the plans and specifications as the Committee deems necessary and the applicant accepts to fulfill the purposes and objectives declared in section 40.1-9.1 and to require compliance with the regulations and restrictions set out in this chapter and the standards and guidelines as adopted by the city council. 
(D)  If issued, a certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for a period of one year from date of issuance. All work approved and initiated under a certificate of appropriateness shall be completed within one year of issuance. Without an extension, after one year from issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, an owner shall obtain a new certificate in order to commence any previously approved work or to complete any work. Once begun, no project or work shall be left partially completed. On written request from the applicant, the Committee may grant a single extension of its approval for a period of up to one additional year if, based upon submissions from the applicant, the Committee finds that conditions on the site and in the area of the proposed project are essentially the same as when approval was originally granted. 
(E)  Any certificate of appropriateness shall also expire and become null and void if such authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 12 months after being commenced, or at such time the building permit issued for such work becomes no longer valid. Any period or periods of time during which the right to use any such certificate or permit is stayed pursuant to this article shall be excluded from the computation of the 12 months. 
(F)  During construction or installation, the certificate of appropriateness shall be posted on the property in a location where it shall be visible from the public right-of-way. A complete set of the approved plans shall be retained on the premises and shall be made available to designated staff. 
(G)  If the plans do not meet the Committee's adopted standards and guidelines or the applicant does not agree to the proposed conditions, the Committee shall deny the application. The Committee shall not under any circumstances issue a certificate of appropriateness containing conditions if the applicant does not consent to the conditions. 
(H)  In the event that the Committee rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit notification of such reasons and actions to the applicant in writing. The Committee may suggest any alternative courses of action it deems appropriate if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application. 
(I)  Where an application covers a material change in the appearance of a historic structure that would require the issuance of a building permit, the denial of the application shall be binding upon city staff charged with issuing building permits. In such a case, a building permit shall not be issued. 
(J)  The failure of the Committee to approve or disapprove such plans and specifications within 60 days from the date of application for the certificate, unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time in writing, shall be deemed to constitute approval of the plans and specifications as submitted, and the building official shall issue any required permit, unless the planning director requests that the city council make a determination on the application pursuant to the appeal procedures established by this article.  
40.1-9.22 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Administrative Review and Approval 
Administrative review of an application for a certificate of appropriateness is permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(A)  The designated staff of the Downtown Design Committee may issue a certificate of appropriateness if authorized by standards and guidelines approved by the city council. 
(B)  The Committee's designated staff shall be guided by the standards and guidelines established for the Committee and shall have the authority to request of the applicant modifications of a specific proposal in order that such proposal may comply with said standards and guidelines. 
(C)  In any case where the designated staff is uncertain of his/her authority to act on a particular application, or in any case where the designated staff and the applicant cannot agree on changes in the proposal, or if the designated staff otherwise fails to issue such certificate within 30 days, the application shall be referred to the Committee for action. A written report/agenda shall accompany any application forwarded to the Committee. 
(D)  The designated staff shall report, in writing, to the Downtown Design Committee at each regular meeting on all certificates so issued. 
(E)  Notwithstanding the above, the building official, the zoning administrator, or their designees may order that work be stopped and that an appropriate application be filed for Committee review upon determination that the action being undertaken surpasses ordinary maintenance as defined in section 40.1-9.10 and a certificate of appropriateness is not displayed, or the work being performed is not in conformance with the approved action for which a certificate of appropriateness has been issued.  
40.1-9.23 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Undue Hardship Exception 
The Committee shall have the power to reduce or suspend any of the requirements of this article, if it finds that the application presents special circumstances whereby strict compliance will produce an undue hardship or if the spirit of the chapter has been met and deviation has been deemed to be in the best interest of the city. 
In granting a hardship the Committee shall make the following findings of fact in writing: 
(A)  Strict compliance with the regulation will deprive the property owner of all reasonable use of the property. 
(B)  The hardship results from application of the regulation to the property. 
(C)  The hardship is one that affects the property directly. 
(D)  The hardship is not the result of the property owner's own actions or omissions. 
(E)  The hardship is unique to the property and is not commonly shared by other similarly situated properties. 
(F)  Any financial considerations greatly decrease or destroy the property's value. 
(G)  The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this ordinance.  
40.1-9.24 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Demolitions 
(A)  The owner of an historic property or the owner of a building, structure, site, or object in any historic district, shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or demolish such building, or structure in accordance [with] of the Code of Virginia (1950), § 15.2-2306 A.3, as amended; provided, however, the owner must first have applied to the Committee for a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition. If the Committee denies the demolition request, the owner may appeal such denial to the city council. 
(B)  In the case of an application for demolition, if the Committee finds that it is physically or economically unfeasible to preserve an historic structure according to the above criteria, it shall issue the certificate of appropriateness. If preservation is found to be both physically and economically feasible, the Committee shall take or promote the taking of whatever public or private action that it deems likely to lead to such preservation, either on the site on which the historic structure is located or on another site to which it might appropriately be moved. Where preservation is feasible but the applicant still seeks demolition, the city may take any of the actions authorized by Code of Virginia (1950), § 15.2-2306 A.4, as amended. 
(C)  A decision by the Committee concerning a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of historic structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by: 
(1)  The historic, scenic, cultural, aesthetic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object. 
(2)  The importance of the historic structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
(3)  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
(4)  Whether the historic structure, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
(5)  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
(6)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the historic structure, site, or object from collapse. 
(7)  Whether the historic structure, site, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value.  
40.1-9.25 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Relocation of Historic Structure or Object 
A decision by the Downtown Design Committee concerning a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a historic structure, or object shall be guided by: 
(A)  The historic, scenic, cultural, aesthetic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object. 
(B)  The importance of the historic structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
(C)  Whether there are definite plans for the property to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
(D)  Whether the historic structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
(E)  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the scenic, cultural, aesthetic, historical, and architectural character of the building, structure, site, or object.  
40.1-9.26 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Enforcement and Remedies 
(A)  Any violation or attempted violation of this article or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected or abated by injunction or other appropriate proceeding pursuant to the Code of Virginia. 
(B)  After the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, city zoning inspectors shall from time to time inspect the alteration or construction approved by such certificate and shall give prompt notice to the applicant of any work not in accordance with such certificate or in violation of any ordinances of the city. If violations are not corrected in a timely manner, the certificate and building permit may be revoked. 
(C)  The zoning administrator, building official and designated city staff are authorized to order that work be stopped and that an appropriate application be filed or reviewed in any case where, in the inspector or designated staff's opinion, the work being performed is inconsistent with the character of the present structure or the prevailing character of the surroundings and the historic district or when it appears that the work exceeds the scope of an approved certificate of appropriateness. The Committee, upon review of the application may require the property owner to remedy such violations by restoring the affected property to its previous appearance.  
40.1-9.27 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Violations; Civil Penalties 
(A)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2209, the following uniform schedule of civil penalties for violations of specified provisions of the zoning ordinance is adopted. The offenses does not include any zoning violation resulting in injury to any persons, and the existence of these civil penalties shall not preclude action by the zoning administrator under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2286(4) or action by the governing body under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2208. 
(1)  Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the removal and/or installation of roofing materials: 
i.  Initial offense .....$100.00 
ii.  Continuing offense .....500.00 
iii.  Repeat offense .....500.00 
(2)  Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the removal and/or installation of wall siding materials: 
i.  Initial offense .....$100.00 
ii.  Continuing offense .....500.00 
iii.  Repeat offense .....500.00 
(3)  Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the removal and/or installation of windows: 
i.  Initial offense .....$200.00 
ii.  Continuing offense .....500.00 
iii.  Repeat offense .....500.00 
(4)  Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the removal and/or installation of exterior doors: 
i.  Initial offense .....$100.00 
ii.  Continuing offense .....500.00 
iii.  Repeat offense .....500.00 
(5)  Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the removal and/or installation of fences: 
i.  Initial offense .....$100.00 
ii.  Continuing offense .....500.00 
iii.  Repeat offense .....500.00 
(6)  Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the painting of any exterior surfaces: 
i.  Initial offense .....$50.00 
ii.  Continuing offense .....500.00 
iii.  Repeat offense .....500.00 
(7)  Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the removal and/or installation of driveways and/or sidewalks: 
i.  Initial offense .....$100.00 
ii.  Continuing offense .....500.00 
iii.  Repeat offense .....500.00 
(8)  Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of part or all of any structure: 
i.  Initial offense .....$200.00 
ii.  Continuing offense .....500.00 
iii.  Repeat offense .....500.00 
(9)  Failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for the construction of any addition: 
i.  Initial offense .....$200.00 
ii.  Continuing offense .....500.00 
iii.  Repeat offense .....500.00 
(B)  For the purpose of these penalties, the following terms shall apply: 
(1)  Initial offense. The first offense committed by this individual at this or any other property in the historic districts. 
(2)  Continuing offense. An offense that has not been corrected after receiving notice to correct and being issued an initial civil penalty. 
(3)  Repeat offense. An offense committed by an owner, agent and/or contractor after receiving a violation notice for failure to obtain a certificate of appropriateness at any other property within any of the historic districts. 
(C)  Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. Violations enumerated in paragraph (a) above arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, and a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $5,000.00. Designation of a particular zoning ordinance violation for a civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions. Except for any violation resulting in injury to persons, such designation shall preclude the prosecution of a violation as a criminal misdemeanor. 
(D)  The zoning administrator or his/her deputy may issue a civil summons as provided by law for a scheduled violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a scheduled violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the department of finance or the Portsmouth City Treasurer prior to the date fixed for trial. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offense charged. Such person shall be informed of his/her right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. 
If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. In any trial for a scheduled violation authorized by this section, it shall be the city's burden to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission of liability or a finding of liability shall not constitute a criminal conviction.  
40.1-9.28 - Certificate of Appropriateness; Violations; Criminal Penalties 
Failure to either obtain a required certificate of appropriateness prior to commencement of work or failure to proceed with a project as approved or failure to complete a project with one year after work has commenced shall be a violation of this article and shall be punishable as provided in article 40.1-7.  
40.1-9.29 - Exemptions 
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the owner of a building, structure or property in the Downtown Districts from performing any maintenance, alteration or painting to the external architectural features of such building, structure or property which does not involve a change in design, material, color or the outward appearance thereof and which maintenance, painting or alteration is of such nature that it may lawfully be effected without a permit from the building official, provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding. 
This chapter shall not prevent any demolition, repair, maintenance, painting or alteration of any such feature which the building official shall certify to be required by the public safety because of unsafe or dangerous condition.  
40.1-9.30 - Appeals 
(A)  Either an applicant or the planning director may appeal to the city council any final decision of the Downtown Design Committee regarding a certificate of appropriateness, provided such appeal is filed in writing with the Committee secretary within 30 days of the Committee's decision. The written appeal shall set forth any alleged error in the Committee's action or decision. The appeal shall state with specificity the nature of the error allegedly committed by the Committee in finding that the proposed erection, alteration, reconstruction or restoration of a structure would not be architecturally compatible with the historic properties, buildings or structures within the historic district. A conclusory statement of error without any allegations of specific facts shall be insufficient to meet the requirements of this paragraph. An appeal review committee consisting of the planning director and the city attorney or their designees shall initially review the written appeal. In the event that the planning director initiates an appeal, the city manager shall designate a city employee not employed in the department of planning to serve on the committee in place of the planning director. The committee shall determine whether the written appeal meets the requirements of paragraph (a) above. If the appeal fails to meet the requirements, the committee will deny the appeal on the grounds of insufficiency and so notify the applicant in writing. The notification shall provide the reasons for the denial. The applicant may appeal the committee's decision to the circuit court. If the committee finds that the applicant's appeal has stated sufficient grounds for an appeal, the appeal shall be forwarded to the city clerk who shall place it on the city council's agenda. The applicant shall be notified in writing when an appeal is forwarded to the city clerk. 
(B)  The filing of an appeal shall stay the Committee's decision pending the outcome of the appeal, except that such filing will not stay the Committee's decision if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a building or structure. 
(C)  The city council shall reverse the Committee's decision only upon a finding of error in the Committee's actions or findings. If the city council affirms the Committee's decision, the applicant may appeal the city council's decision to the circuit court within 30 days after the final decision is rendered by the city council. 
(D)  The timely filing of appeal in the circuit court shall stay the city council's decision pending outcome of the appeal to the court, except that the filing of such petition shall not stay the decision if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a building or structure. 
TABLE 40.1-9.2.1: USE TABLE 
P = PERMITTED USE U = USE PERMIT REQUIRED A= ALLOWED BLANK CELL or SLASH = PROHIBITED USE 
USE CATEGORY 	USE TYPE 	DISTRICTS 	CONDITIONS 
		T3 	T4 	T5 	T6 	SD 	

RESIDENTIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Household Living 	Dwelling, live/work 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Dwelling, multi-family 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Dwelling, single-family detached 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Dwelling, townhouse 	U 	U 	/ 		/ 	
	Dwelling, two- to four-family 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Dwelling, upper story 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
Group Living 	Dormitory 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Family care home 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Fraternity or sorority house 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Group home 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	8 or less mentally handicapped dependent persons 
	Individual and Family Social Services 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Rooming or boarding house 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Single room occupancy (SRO) facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	

PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Community Services 	Community center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Cultural facility 	U 	U 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Library 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Museum 	U 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Senior center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Youth club facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Day Care 	Adult day care center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Child day care center 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Family child day care home (6 to 12 children) 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	40.1-4.3(B)(1)(b) 
*See additional requirement for administrative approval 
	Home child day care for 5 or fewer children 	P 	P 	U 	U 	/ 	
Educational Facilities 	College or university 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	School, elementary 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	School, middle 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	School, high 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Vocational or trade school 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
Government Facilities 	Government maintenance, storage, or distribution facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Government offices 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Other Government Facilities 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Post office 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
Health Care Facilities 	Blood/tissue collection facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Drug or alcohol treatment facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Hospital 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Medical or dental clinic 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Medical or dental lab 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Medical treatment facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Outpatient facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Institutions 	Assisted living facility 	/ 	P 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Auditorium 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Convention center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	
	Halfway house 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Nursing home 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Psychiatric treatment facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Religious institution 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Civic, social or fraternal clubs or lodges 	/ 	U 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Shelter 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Parks and Open Areas 	Arboretum or botanical garden 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Cemetery, columbaria, mausoleum 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Community garden 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Equestrian facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Golf course, public 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Park, public 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Park, private 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Public square or plaza 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
Public Safety 	Correctional facility 	/ 	/ 	/ 		/ 	
	Fire or EMS facility 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Fire or police substation 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Police station 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Transportation 	Airport 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Helicopter landing facility 	/ 	U 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Water Transportation/Charters 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	
	Passenger terminal, surface transportation 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	
Utilities 	Telecommunications antenna, collocation on existing tower 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Telecommunications antenna, placement on existing building 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Telecommunications tower, freestanding 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	
	Utility, major 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	
	Utility, minor 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	

COMMERCIAL USE CLASSIFICATION OTHER THAN RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE 
Adult Uses 	Adult bookstore 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Adult Novelties 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Adult entertainment establishment 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Adult motion picture theater 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Animal Care 	Animal grooming 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	
	Animal shelter 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Kennel, indoor 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Kennel, outdoor 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Veterinary clinic 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	
Conference and Training Centers 	Conference or training center 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	
Food Service 	Dinner theater 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Eating Establishments 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Eating Establishment with Drive-thru 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	U 	
	Restaurant, with indoor or outdoor seating 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Restaurant, Brewpub 		U 	P 	P 		
	Restaurant, with drive-through service 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Restaurant, without drive-through service 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
Entertainment establishment 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 		
Offices 	Offices, business services 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Offices, financial services 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Offices, professional services 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Offices, sales (including real estate) 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Contractor Office only 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Limited Interior display area allowed 
	Radio and television broadcasting studio 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Parking, Commercial 	Parking lot 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Parking structure 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Recreation/ 
Entertainment, Indoor 	Fitness Facility 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	City Recreation Facility 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Nonprofit Recreation Center 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Bowling Alley 	/ 		P 	P 	/ 	
	Pool Hall 	/ 		P 	P 	/ 	
	Video Arcade 	/ 		P 	P 	/ 	
	Commercial recreation, indoor theater 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
Recreation/ 
Entertainment, Outdoor 	Public Arena, amphitheater, or stadium 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	/ 	
	Private Arena, amphitheater, or stadium 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Commercial recreation, outdoor 	/ / 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Country club 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Golf course, public 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Golf driving range 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Marina 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	
	Marina, pleasure boats only 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	
	Membership sports or recreation club(e.g., swimming pools, tennis courts) 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	

RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE 
	Gasoline sales 	/ 	U 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Crematory 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Dry cleaning and laundry drop-off establishment 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Financial institution, without drive-through service 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Financial institution, with drive-through service 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Funeral home 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Laundry, self-service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Convenience store, without gas sales 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Convenience store, with gas sales 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Drug store or pharmacy, without drive-through service 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Drug store or pharmacy, with drive-through service 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Flea market 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	on publically owned land 
	Farmers Market 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Second Hand Sales 	/ 	P 	P 		/ 	
	Grocery store 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Liquor store 	/ 	U 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Microbrewery/Micro-Distillery/Micro-Winery/Micro-Cidery 		U 	P 	P 		
	Retail sales establishment, large 	/ 	/ 	U 	U 	/ 	
	Small Retail/Eating Establishment 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Gross square footage less than 2500 square feet 
	Other retail sales establishments 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
Personal Services 	Massage Therapy 	/ 		P 	P 	/ 	
	Personal services establishment 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Barber Shop 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Beauty Salon 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Special events house 	/ 	/ 	/ 	U 	/ 	
	Tattoo parlor/body piercing establishment 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Repair establishment 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
Self-Service 
Storage 	Mini-warehouse 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Vehicle Sales and Services, Heavy 	Aircraft parts, sales, and maintenance 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Automotive painting/body shop 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Automotive wrecker service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Transmission shop 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Boat and marine rental,. service and sales 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	
	Truck stop 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Vehicle Sales and Services, Light 	Automotive parts and installation 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Automobile repair and servicing (without painting/bodywork) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Automobile sales or rentals 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Automotive wrecker service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Car wash or auto detailing 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Motorcycle sales 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Recreational vehicle sales or rentals 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Tire/muffler sales and mounting 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Visitor Accommodations 	Bed and breakfast inn 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Campground or recreational vehicle (RV) park 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Hotel or motel 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	U 	Full service only 
	Tourist Home 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	

INDUSTRIAL USE CLASSIFICATION 
Industrial Services 	Building, heating, plumbing, or electrical contractor 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Electric motor repair 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Fuel oil/bottled gas distributor 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Fuel oil storage 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	General industrial service 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Heavy equipment sales, rental, or storage 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 		
	Heavy equipment servicing and repair 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Laundry, dry cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 		
	Machine shop 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Repair of scientific or professional instruments 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Research and development 	/ 	/ 	P* 	P* 	P 	* no manufacturing 
	Tool repair 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
Manufacturing and 
Production 	Manufacturing, heavy 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Manufacturing, light 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Brewery/Distillery/Winery/Cidery 					P 	
	Bulk fuel sales and storage 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Warehouse and Freight Movement 	Cold storage plant 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Outdoor storage (as a principal use) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Parcel services 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Shipping container storage yard 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Truck or freight terminal 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Warehouse (distribution) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Warehouse (storage) 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	excluding hazardous, petroleum and nuclear materials 
Waste-Related Services 	Energy recovery plant 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Hazardous waste collection sites 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Incinerator 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Recycling and salvage center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Recycling drop-off center 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Salvage and junkyard 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Tire disposal or recycling 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Waste composting 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
Wholesale sales 	All uses 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	

ACCESSORY USE CLASSIFICATION 
	Accessory Dwelling Units single-family detached dwellings only 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Amateur Radio/TV Antenna 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Canopies 	/ 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Clothes line 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Community Garden 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Fences or Walls 	A 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
	Garages 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Greenhouses 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Home Occupations 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
	Outdoor Display/Sales 	/ 	/ 	P 	P 	/ 	
	Rainwater Cisterns 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	not visible from the street 
	Satellite Dish 	/ 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	not visible from the street 
	Recycling Drop-off Stations 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	
	Solar Energy Equipment 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	not visible from the street 
	Storage or Parking of Heavy Trucks, Trailers, Major Recreational Equipment, or Mobile Home 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	P 	
	Swimming Pools 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	/ 	not visible from the street 
	Spas, and Hot Tubs 	A 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	not visible from the street 
	Vending Machines 	/ 		P 	P 	P 	not visible from the street 

TEMPORARY USE CLASSIFICATION 
	Outdoor Seasonal Sales 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	Such sales are limited to a maximum of 30 days per calendar year and no more than three occurrences per parcel per year. 
	Garage and /or Yard Sales 	P 	P 	/ 	/ 	/ 	Such sales are limited to a maximum of three occurrences per parcel per year, for a maximum duration of two days per occurrence, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance. 
	Special Events 	P 	P 	P 	P 	/ 	Such events are limited to 14 total days per calendar year, per parcel, unless expressly stated otherwise in this Ordinance. 
 
(Ord. No. 2014-103 , § 1(Exh. A, Amd. 2), 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 2015-83 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-8-2015)  
APPENDIX A - FEE SCHEDULE 
This appendix contains the various fees, charges and rates referred to in the listed section of this Code. 
CHAPTER 3. AMUSEMENTS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
3-103 	Permit application fee for commercial recreation center 	$  50.00 
3-301(f)(1) 	Permit to operate a body art studio, per year 	1,500.00 
3-301(f)(2) 	Plan review fee for initial opening of body art studio or for changes requiring a review of the construction plans 	200.00 
 
CHAPTER 4. ANIMALS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
4-8 	Cost for cremation or burial of dead animals, not to exceed 	$75.00 
4-8 	Cost for cremation or burial of dead fowl, not to exceed 	5.00 
4-32(c) 	Animal impoundment fee for animals running at large, first day 	12.00 
	 Each additional day of impoundment or part thereof, per day 	5.00 
4-33(i) 	Permit fee for wild exotic or poisonous animals 	50.00 
4-33(i) 	Annual renewal of permit fee for wild exotic or poisonous animals 	25.00 
4-33.1(d) 	Fee for dangerous dog registration certificate 	150.00 
	Annual renewal fee 	85.00 
4-71 	Fee for duplicate dog license tag 	1.00 
4-97(a) 	Impoundment fee for unvaccinated dogs or cats, first day 	3.00 
	 Each additional day of impoundment or part thereof 	1.00 
4-98(c) 	Fee for quarantine of animal, per day or fraction thereof 	3.00 
 
( Ord. No. 2013-03, § 2, 1-8-2013) 
CHAPTER 5. BICYCLES 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
5-29 	Bicycle registration fee 	$2.00 
5-33 	Fee for replacement of lost or mutilated bicycle registration decal 	0.50 
5-34 	Fee for transfer of bicycle registration 	0.50 
5-38 	Storage charge for impounded unregistered bicycle 	5.00 
 
CHAPTER 6. BOATS AND WATERWAYS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
6-32 	License fee for registration of pleasure boats or watercraft, per boat or watercraft 	$20.00 
 
CHAPTER 7. BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
7-101 	Reinspection fee 	$ 50.00 
7-102 	Administrative fee for failure to obtain permit; inspection, certificate of occupancy 	150.00 
7-103(a) 	Fee for certificate of occupancy for existing structure 	50.00 
7-103(b) 	Fee for temporary certificate of occupancy (residential) 	50.00 
7-103(b) 	Fee for temporary certificate of occupancy (commercial) 	100.00 
7-103(c) 	Fee for first renewal of temporary certificate of occupancy (resdential) 	100.00 
7-103(c) 	Fee for first renewal of temporary certificate of occupancy (commercial) 	200.00 
7-103(d) 	Fee for reinspection of commercial property prior to occupancy 	100.00 
7-104 	Fees for review of construction plans 	
	(1) 	New construction and additions to one-family and two-family buildings: 	
		a. 	Under 2,000 square feet 	50.00 
		b. 	Over 2,000 square feet 	80.00 
	(2) 	All other structures: 	
		a. 	0 to 2,499 square feet 	80.00 
		b. 	2,500 square feet to 4,999 square feet 	120.00 
		c. 	5,000 square feet to 9,999 square feet 	160.00 
		d. 	10,000 square feet to 74,999 square feet 	180.00 
		e. 	75,000 square feet and up 	240.00 
	(3) 	Existing structures when altered and area of the building contains 3,000 square feet or more, or, exceeds 2½ stories in height; review of electrical, fire protection, mechanical, or plumbing plans 	50.00 
7-105 	Fee for appeal to any division of the department of the building official and/or code official 	100.00 
7-131(1) 	Building permit and inspection fees, minimum 	50.00 
7-131(2) 	Fee for additional reinspections 	50.00 
7-132 	Fee schedule for building permits 	
	(1) 	All Commercial Buildings: 	
		a. 	For 100 square feet up to and including 999 square feet, the fee shall be $10.00 per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. The minimum fee shall be $50.00. 	
		b. 	For 1,000 square feet up to and including 4,999 square feet, the fee shall be $100.00 for the first 1,000 square feet plus $9.00 per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 	
		c. 	For 5,000 square feet or more, the fee shall be $460.00 for the first 5,000 square feet plus $8.00 per 100 square feet or fraction thereof without limit. 	
	(2) 	Use Group O—Residential Garages, Porches, Decks and Similar Accessory Residential Buildings: 	
		a. 	For up to and including 999 square feet, the fee shal be $7.00 per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. The minimum fee shall be $50.00. 	
		b. 	For 1,000 square feet or more, the fee shall be $70.00 for the first 1,000 square feet and $5.00 per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 	. 
	(3) 	Residential Use Group R5, Single Family Residence, Duplex, or Townhome: 	
		a. 	For up to and including 1,999 square feet, the fee shal be $8.00 per 100 square feet, or fraction thereof. The minimum fee shall be $50.00. 	
		b. 	From 2,000 square feet up to and including 4,999 square feet, the fee shall be $160.00 for the first 2,000 square feet plus $7.00 per 100 square feet or fraction thereof. 	
		c. 	For 5,000 square feet or more, the fee shall be $370.00 for the first 5,000 square feet, plus $6.00 per 100 square feet or fraction thereof, without limit. 	
	(4) 	Use Group T: 	
		a. 	Alterations, Repairs, Private Piers, Bulkheads, Pools, Walls, Bay Windows, Dormers, Roofing, Siding, Commercial Interior Finish, Miscellaneous Structures: 	
			1. 	The minimum fee shall be $50.00. 	
			2. 	For a valuation up to $4,999.00 the fee shall be $20.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 	
			3. 	For a valuation from $5,000.00, up to and including $19,999.00 the fee shall be $100.00 for the first $5,000.00 plus $10.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 	
			4. 	For a valuation from $20,000.00 up to and including $99,999.00, the fee shall be $250.00 for the first $20,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 	
			5. 	For a valuation of over $100,000.00, the fee shall be $625.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $4.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, without limit. 	
		b. 	Tents, Mobile Homes and Other Temporary Structures: 	
			1. 	For tents and other temporary structures, the fee shall be $50.00 each. 	
			2. 	For the new placement of mobile homes on a site including the tie-down and foundation, the fee shall be $50.00. 	
			3. 	For the replacement of mobile homes on a site including the tie-down and foundation, the fee shall be $50.00. 	
7-133 	Fee schedule for electrical permits and inspections: 	
7-133(a)(1) 	Minimum permit fee 	$50.00 
7-133(a)(2)a. 	Temporary service, 60 amperes 	50.00 
7-133(a)(2)b. 	Temporary service, 100 amperes 	50.00 
7-133(a)(2)c. 	Temporary service for construction regardless of amperage 	50.00 
7-133(a)(3)a. 	Fees for new services whether single- or three-phase include all circuits, motors, generators and other derivations of an electrical system. Single-phase fee is $25.00 per 50 amperes. 	
7-133(a)(3)b. 	Three-phase service fee is $30.00 per 50 amperes for first 1,000 amperes and $15.00 per 50 amperes for remaining amperes after 1,000. 	
7-133(a)(4)a. 	Changes of service (old): For single phase service. Fees for changes of service (pay for change of service and any additional circuits added or worked on) are $12.50 per 50 amperes for single phase. For circuit fee, see additions or repairs schedule below. 	
7-133(a)(4)b. 	Changes of service (old): For three phase service. Fees for changes of service are $15.00 per 50 amperes for the first 1,000 amperes and $10.00 per 50 amperes for the remaining amperes after 1,000. 	
7-133(a)(5) 	Additions or repairs: For each piece of equipment connected and for each circuit or feeder installed, extended, relocated or repaired the fee shall be: 	
 
Amperes 	Fee Conductor Size 	(Per 
Circuit) 
0—30 	#14, 12, 10 	$5.00 
31—60 	#8, 4 	 6.00 
61—100 	#4, 3, 2 	 7.00 
101—200 	#1, 0, 00, 000 	12.50 
Over 200 	Over 000 	18.00 
$5.00 per meter base 
 
7-133(a)(6) 	Miscellaneous swimming pool fees: 	
	 Pool inspection 	$50.00 
	 Pool grounding 	50.00 
	 Inspection for temporary release 	50.00 
7-134 	Fee schedule for plumbing permits and inspections: 	
7-134(a) 	For each plumbing permit issued, permit fee 	50.00 
7-134(b)(1) 	For each plumbing fixture or trap placed or replaced, or removed from one place to another, and for each place roughed-in for a fixture 	6.00 
7-134(b)(2) 	For each house sewer 	6.00 
7-134(b)(3) 	For renewal or replacement of existing house sewer 	6.00 
7-134(b)(4) 	For each house water service 	6.00 
7-134(b)(5) 	For renewal or replacement of existing house water service 	6.00 
7-134(b)(6) 	For each water heater 	6.00 
7-134(b)(7) 	For replacement of water heaters 	6.00 
7-134(b)(8) 	For roof drains or internal rain leaders 	6.00 
7-134(b)(9) 	A per trip fee will be charged for site work inspections 	0.00 
7-135 	Fee schedule for mechanical permits and inspections: 	
7-135(a) 	For the installation in new construction of mechanical systems or equipment, storage tanks for flammable liquids or gases, and fire suppression systems, the permit fee shall be at the rate of 1.1 percent of the current value of all service, labor, materials and equipment; minimum fee 50.00 	
7-135(b) 	For the replacement, repair or alteration of mechanical systems or equipment, storage tanks for flammable liquids or gases, or fire suppression systems, in existing buildings or structures, or the removal of storage tanks, the fee shall be at the rate of 1.1 percent of the value of all service, labor, materials and equipment, minimum fee 25.00 	
7-135(c) 	For the installation of one kitchen hood vent and not more than three bathroom vents in a single-family dwelling 	65.00 
7-135(d) 	For the installation of standpipes, the fee shall be $50.00 for each riser, plus $2.50 for each floor served by that riser 	
7-135(e) 	For amusement ride permits and inspections: 	
	For each small mechanical ride or inflatable amusement device covered by a permit 	35.00 
	Annual inspection of inflatable amusement device 	50.00 
	For each circular or flat ride less than 20 feet in height 	55.00 
	For each spectacular ride that cannot be inspected as a circular or flat ride due to complexity or height 	75.00 
	For each coaster exceeding 30 feet in height 	200.00 
	For each generator other than small portable generators 	165.00 
	For all other structures at carnivals, the permit fee shall $15.00 per structure with inspection required. 	
7-136 	Fee schedule for elevator permits and inspections: For periodic inspections made on elevators, dumbwaiters, moving stairs, moving walks and manlifts in accordance with the building code, a processing fee of $15.00 and the following inspection fees shall apply unless otherwise provided: 	
7-136(1) 	Six-month inspection 	41.25 
7-136(2) 	Annual hydraulic inspection 	85.25 
7-136(3) 	Annual traction inspection 	85.25 
7-136(4) 	Three-year inspection 	141.75 
7-136(5) 	Five-year inspection 	141.75 
7-136(6) 	Acceptance test for new construction 	175.00 
7-136(7) 	Reinspection (no additional processing fee) 	150.00 
7-137 	Fee schedule for building moving permits: 	
7-137(a)(1) 	Fee for a permit to move a building from without the city to a site within the city 	500.00 
7-137(a)(2) 	Fee for a permit to move a building from within the city to a site out of the city 	250.00 
7-137(a)(3) 	Fee for a permit to move a building from one location to another within the city 	250.00 
7-137(a)(4) 	Fee for a permit to move a building through the city 	250.00 
7-137(a)(5) 	Fee for a permit to move a building, moving on the same parcel within the city 	50.00 
7-138(a) 	Fee schedule for demolition permits: 	
	 Single-family structures 	50.00 
	 Any other structure 	450.00 
7-138(b) 	Fee for inspection of sanitary sewer lateral seal 	25.00 
7-138(b) 	Fee for sealing of sanitary sewer lateral by city 	250.00 
7-139(a)(1) 	Fees for sign permits, for signs under 100 square feet 	50.00 
7-139(a)(2) 	Fees for sign permits, for signs 100 square feet to 299 square feet 	55.00 
7-139(a)(3) 	Fees for sign permits, for signs 300 square feet and over 	60.00 
7-139(b) 	Permit fee for repainting an authorized sign in place when the sign will not be changed 	10.00 
7-139(c) 	Permit fee for the repair of each billboard 	25.00 
7-139(d) 	Application fees for a certificate of compliance, or a use permit 	30.00 
7-141(b) 	Processing fee for refunds from building permits fees 	25.00 
7-143 	Rental inspection fees: 	
	 Initial inspection 	50.00 
	 Follow-up inspection (first) 	50.00 
	 Second and subsequent follow-up inspection 	50.00 
	 Periodic inspection 	50.00 
 
( Ord. No. 2009-42 , § 1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 2015-24, § 9(Exh. A), 5-12-2015, eff. 7-1-2015 ; Ord. No. 2017-34 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 9. CEMETERIES 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
9-3 	City cemetery fees and charges: 	
9-3(a)(1) 	Opening and closing of adult graves: Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 	$500.00 
9-3(a)(2) 	Opening and closing of adult graves: Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 	600.00 
9-3(a)(3) 	Opening and closing of adult graves: Sunday and state and federal holidays, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 	750.00 
9-3(a)(4) 	Opening and closing of child graves: Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., for a grave not exceeding a length of 48 inches, a width of 40 inches, and a depth of 48 inches 	300.00 
9-3(a)(5) 	Opening and closing of child graves: Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., for a grave not exceeding a length of 48 inches, a width of 40 inches, and a depth of 48 inches 	300.00 
9-3(a)(6) 	Opening and closing of child graves: Sunday and state and federal holidays, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., for a grave not exceeding a length of 48 inches, a width of 40 inches, and a depth of 48 inches 	375.00 
9-3(a)(7) 	Opening and closing of cremation graves: Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 	300.00 
9-3(a)(8) 	Opening and closing of cremation graves: Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 	300.00 
9-3(a)(9) 	Opening and closing of cremation graves: Sunday and state and federal holidays, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 	375.00 
9-3(a)(10) 	Additional fee: For services where the funeral party is not present at the graveside by 4:00 p.m. 	100.00 
9-29.1 	Burial permit fee for each adult burial 	200.00 
9-29.1 	Burial permit fee for cremated remains 	100.00 
 
CHAPTER 9.1. CHESAPEAKE BAY PRESERVATION AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
9.1-11 	Fee for review of plan of development for compliance with Chesapeake Bay Preservation Overlay District 	$125.00 
9.1-12(c)(1) 	Fee for application for planning commission exception to the performance standards for the Chesapeake Bay Preservation area Overlay District prior to commencement of project 	$275.00 
	Fee for application for planning commission exception to the performance standards for the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District after commencement of project 	500.00 
	Fee for application for administrative exception to the performance standards for the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District prior to commencement of project 	25.00 
	Fee for application for administrative exception to the performance standards for the Chesapeake Bay Preservation area Overlay District after commencement of project 	150.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2008-34, § 1, 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2011-19, § 1, 5-4-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 7(Exh. A), 5-12-2020) 
CHAPTER 11. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL, EXCAVATION 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
11-5(c) 	Administrative review fee to accompany an erosion and sedimentation control plan at the time of submission 	$75.00 
11-5(e)(1) 	Development of an individual single-family lot involving over 2,500 square feet of land disturbance 	600.00 
11-5(e)(2) 	Demolition of a single-family structure involving over 2,500 square feet of land disturbance 	480.00 
11-5(e)(3) 	Multifamily residential development 	1,440.00 
11-5(e)(4) 	Demolition of multifamily structures 	540.00 
11-5(e)(5) 	Commercial development and subdivisions involving less than one acre of land disturbance 	1,200.00 
11-5(e)(6) 	Commercial development and subdivisions involving one to five acres of land disturbance 	2,400.00 
11-5(e)(7) 	Commercial development and subdivisions involving more than five acres of land disturbance 	3,120.00 
11-5(e)(8) 	Demolition of commercial structures 	1,200.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2009-36, § 4, 5-12-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 10(Exh. A), 5-12-2020) 
CHAPTER 12. FINANCE 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
12-21(b) 	Fee for the construction, reconstruction, renovation, or adaptive reuse of a structure or structures to replace the circuit and district courthouses 	$3.00 
12-121(a) 	Fee for the construction, renovation or maintenance of the courthouses, jail or court-related facilities 	2.00 
12-122 	Local criminal justice training academy fee imposed on certain individuals each time a fee is charged pursuant to Virginia Code §§ 16.1-69.48:1, 17.1-275.1, 17.1-275.2, 17.1-275.3, 17.1-275.4, 17.1-275.7, 17.1-275.8 or 17.1-275.9, as each may be amended 	1.00 
 
( Ord. No. 2012-65, § 2, 11-13-2012) 
CHAPTER 13. FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
13-35 	Commercial inspections 	$55.00 
	Response to third false alarm 	50.00 
	Plans review 	25.00 
13-74 	Ambulance services fees: 	
13-74(1) 	Nonemergency incident response and ambulance transport with basic life support services 	290.38 
13-74(2) 	Emergency incident response and ambulance transport with basic life support services 	464.61 
13-74(3) 	Nonemergency incident response and ambulance transport with advanced life support Level 1 services 	348.46 
13-74(4) 	Emergency incident response and ambulance transport with advanced life support Level 1 services 	551.73 
13-74(5) 	Emergency incident response and ambulance transport with advanced life support Level 2 services 	798.56 
13-74(6) 	Emergency incident response and ambulance transport with specialty care transport services 	943.75 
13-74(7) 	The fee for ground transport mileage shall be $9.45 per loaded mile in addition to the service charges set out in subsections (1) through (6) of this section. 	
13-74(8) 	Emergency incident response and patient assessment with a medical assessment and/or treatment performed but no transport to a health care facility 	
	Basic charge 	125.00 
	plus, if applicable, ambulance billing—ALS supplies 	100.00 
	plus, if applicable, ambulance billing—BLS supplies 	60.00 
	plus, if applicable, ambulance billing—Oxygen 	50.00 
13-74(9) 	Emergency incident response and patient assessment with a medical assessment and treatment performed where the patient is determined to be deceased at the scene by a medical provider. 	358.97 
13-74(10) 	Patient care reports 	10.00 
13-86 	Charge for copy of fire report, each 	10.00 
 
( Ord. No. 2009-42 , § 1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 2009-43 , § 2, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 2013-25, § 1, 5-14-2013, eff. 7-1-2013; Ord. No. 2015-23, § 6, 5-12-2015, eff. 7-1-2015 ; Ord. No. 2017-37 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-31 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-8-2018) 
CHAPTER 16. GARBAGE AND REFUSE 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
16-31 	Fee to cover administrative cost of enforcement of violations of regulations governing garbage and refuse collections 	$150.00 
	Fee per load or portion thereof for the use of the city's waste management vehicles and equipment 	250.00 
	Rates for dwelling units, per dwelling unit, per month 	38.09 
16-34 	Four or more tires placed out for collection within any 12-month period, per additional tire 	5.00 
16-64 	Rates for dwelling units, per dwelling unit, per month 	29.16 
16-65 	Rates for standard automated 65-gallon or 105-gallon refuse containers, one collection per week, zero to two standard containers per collection, minimum charge per month 	19.00 
16-66(b) 	The monthly rate for regularly-scheduled service in the downtown commercial district shall be $40.72 per container multiplied by the number of pick-ups per week. 	
16-66(c) 	For each additional pick-up 	10.00 
16-67 	Fee for disposal of small dead animals, per animal 	30.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 2006-85, § 3, 9-26-2006; Ord. No. 2007-05, § 2, 1-9-2007; Ord. No. 2007-51, § 1, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-32, § 2, 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2009-56 , § 2, 6-9-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 2010-57, § 1, 6-22-2010; Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 1-25-2011; Ord. No. 2011-27, § 1, 5-4-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. No. 2012-19, § 1, 5-15-2012; Ord. No. 2017-31 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 2019-29 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-4-2019) 
CHAPTER 17. HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
17-1(c) 	Fee for administrative expenses associated with abatement of dangerous building nuisance 	$160.00 
17-134(a) 	Fee for administrative expenses associated with securing a vacant building 	85.00 
17-136 	Fees for registration and inspection of vacant buildings: 	
17-136(1) 	Single-family or two-family dwellings 	15.00 
17-136(2) 	Multiple-family apartment dwellings 	15.00 
	 Plus for each additional apartment above five 	5.00 
17-136(3) 	All other classes of buildings whether institutional, commercial, industrial, for the first gross 1,000 square feet 	15.00 
	 Plus for each additional gross 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof 	5.00 
17-136(4) 	All classes of buildings whether residential, institutional, commercial or industrial which had been vacant for a period of 12 months or more, annual registration fee 	25.00 
 
CHAPTER 18. JUNK, SECONDHAND GOODS AND PAWNBROKERS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
18-158 	Permit fee for residential sales 	$5.00 
 
CHAPTER 19. LIBRARIES AND MUSEUMS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
19-1 	Library card fee; non-resident library patrons: 	
	Non-residents, each library card 	$20.00 
19-111 	Law library assessment: 	
	 Law library assessment in civil actions filed with circuit court 	4.00 
	 Law library assessment in civil actions filed with district courts 	4.00 
19-150 	Museum admission fees: 	
19-150(1) 	Museum daily admission fees for Children's Museum of Virginia: 	
19-150(1)a. 	Regular admission 	
	 Children less than two years of age 	None 
	 Children 2 to 17 years of age 	10.00 
	 Adults 	11.00 
	 Military with ID, seniors (62 years of age and older), AAA members 	10.00 
19-150(1)b. 	Group: Portsmouth Public Schools students 	None 
19-150(1)c. 	One supervising adult per Portsmouth Public School group of eight students, including Planetarium 	None 
19-150(1)d. 	Group: Per person, self-guided tour 	7.00 
19-150(1)e. 	Additional fees: 	
	With either Focus Program or Planetarium Program 	1.00 
	With both Focus Program and Planetarium Program 	2.00 
19-150(2) 	Other museums, per person: 	
19-150(2)a. 	Courthouse Galleries 	3.00 
19-150(2)b. 	Naval Shipyard Museum/Lightship Museum 	
	 Children less than two years of age 	None 
	 Children 2 to 17 years of age 	2.00 
	 Adults 	4.00 
	 Military with ID, seniors (62 years of age and older), AAA members 	3.00 
19-150(3) 	Keypass Discount Program. Admittance to all city museums, except Planetarium, during normal working hours for 90 days from the date of issuance 	
	 Children less than two years of age 	None 
	 Children 2 to 17 years of age 	12.00 
	 Adults (18 years of age and older) 	14.00 
	 Military with ID, seniors (62 years of age and older), AAA members 	12.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2009-70, § 2, 7-28-2009; Ord. No. 2011-23, § 2, 5-4-2011; Ord. No. 2012-24 , § 1, 5-15-2012, eff. 7-1-2012; Ord. No. 2013-29, § 2, 5-14-2013, eff. 7-1-2013) 
CHAPTER 22. MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
22-3 	Assessment in traffic cases for funding of courthouse security personnel 	$ 10.00 
22-11 	Registration fee for motorized push scooters 	1.00 
22-12(a) 	Permit application fee for parades and other special events 	50.00 
22-14 	Police escort service fee for funeral processions 	10.00 
22-74(a) 	Annual license fees for vehicles designed and used for transportation of passengers: 	
22-74(a)(1) 	$32.00 for each private passenger car or motor home if the passenger car or motor home weighs 4,000 pounds or less and $37.00 for each passenger car or motor home which weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds; provided, such passenger car or motor home is not used for the transportation of passengers for compensation and is not kept or used for rent or for hire, or is not operated under a lease without a driver. 	
22-74(a)(2) 	$0.30 per 100 pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for a private motor vehicle other than a motorcycle with a normal seating capacity of more than ten adult persons including the driver if such private motor vehicle is not used for the transportation of passengers for compensation and is not kept or used for rent or for hire or is not operated under a lease without a driver. In no case shall the fee be less than $32.00 if the vehicle weighs 4,000 pounds or less or $37.00 if the vehicle weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds. 	
22-74(a)(3) 	$0.30 per 100 pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for a school bus, public or private; provided that in no case shall the fee be less than $32.00 if the vehicle weighs 4,000 pounds or less or $37.00 if the vehicle weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds. 	
22-74(a)(4) 	$32.00 for each trailer or semitrailer designed for use as living quarters for human beings. 	
22-74(a)(5) 	$20.00 in addition to $0.80 per 100 pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for each motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer kept or used for rent or for hire or operated under a lease without a driver for the transportation of passengers. An additional fee of $5.00 shall be charged if the vehicle weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds. This subsection does not apply to vehicles used as common carriers. 	
22-74(a)(6) 	$32.00 for a taxicab or other vehicle kept for rent or hire and operated with a driver for the transportation of passengers and which is operated or should be operated under permits issued by the state corporation commission as required by law and this Code. An additional fee of $5.00 shall be charged if the vehicle weighs in excess of 4,000 pounds. This subsection does not apply to vehicles used as common carriers. 	
22-74(a)(7) 	$24.00 for a motorcycle, with or without a sidecar. 	
22-74(a)(8) 	$32.00 for a bus used exclusively for transportation to and from Sunday School or church, for the purpose of divine worship; provided that if the empty weight of the vehicle exceeds 4,000 pounds, the fee shall be $37.00. 	
22-74(a)(9) 	$20.00 in addition to $0.70 per 100 pounds of weight or major fraction thereof for other passenger-carrying vehicles. 	
22-77 	Annual license fee for vehicles not displaying current license 	100.00 
22-78 	License fee for vehicles not designed or used for transportation of passengers: 	
	 Gross weight of 4,000 pounds or less 	20.00 
	 Gross weight of 4,001 through 6,500 pounds 	25.00 
	 Gross weight of 6,501 through 10,000 pounds 	26.00 
 
Gross Weight 	Fee Per Gross Weight 
Groups 
(Pounds) 	Private 
Carriers 	For-Rent or 
For-Hire 
Carriers 
10,001—25,000 	$ 41.00 	$ 62.50 
25,001—40,000 	100.00 	200.00 
40,001—55,000 	150.00 	300.00 
55,001—70,000 	200.00 	400.00 
Over 70,000 	250.00 	500.00 
 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
22-79 	License fee for vehicles not designed or used for transportation of passengers 	$ 6.50 
22-80(a) 	License fee for combinations of tractor trucks and semitrailers, etc. 	17.00 
22-80(a) 	License fee for combinations of tractor trucks and semitrailers, etc. exceeding a gross weight of 4,000 pounds 	22.00 
22-120 	Special permits for traction engines and tractors, for each permit 	2.00 
22-266.1(b)(1) 	Permits fees for excessive size and weight; each single trip permit 	100.00 
22-266.1(b)(2) 	Permits fees for excessive size and weight; single-trip house move permit 	100.00 
22-266.1(b)(3) 	Permits fees for excessive size and weight; annual blanket-term permit 	
	 First unit 	300.00 
	 Each additional unit 	300.00 
22-266.1(b)(3)c. 	Permits fees for excessive size and weight; for blanket-term mobile crane permits 	300.00 
22-266.1(b)(4) 	Permits fees for excessive size and weight; for each movement of oversized vehicles with a width exceeding 14 feet or a weight exceeding 115,000 pounds 	100.00 
22-266.2 	Fee for police escort for certain overweight and oversize vehicles 	150.00 
22-270(e) 	Fee if the driver of an overloaded vehicle is convicted, forfeits bail, or purchases an increased license as a result of vehicle weighing 	2.00 
22-561(c) 	Fee for removal of vehicle creating traffic hazard or interfering with the procedures of police, firemen, rescue workers, etc. 	25.00 
22-570(c) 	Fee in lieu of towing when the owner of the trespassing vehicle is present and removes the trespassing vehicle from premises before it is actually towed 	25.00 
22-603 	Metered street parking, except Crawford Street, per hour 	1.00 
	Metered street parking on Crawford Street, per hour 	1.25 
22-637 	(Effective until December 31, 2020) Metered parking at city garages and lots, except Civic Center parking lot, per hour 	1.00 
22-637 	(Effective January 1, 2021) Metered parking at city garages and lots, per hour 	1.25 
	(Effective until December 31, 2020) Metered parking at Civic Center parking lot, per hour 	1.25 
	(Effective January 1, 2021) Metered parking at city garages and lots, per hour, evenings and weekends 	2.00 
	(Effective January 1, 2021) Metered parking at city garages and lots, per hour, special events 	3.00 
22-760 	Fee for furnishing copy of accident report to parties in interest, per copy 	7.00 
22-805 	Storage charge for impounded vehicles, per day 	20.00 
 
( Ord. No. 2011-22, § 2, 5-4-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. No. 2014-45, § 1, 5-27-2014 ; Ord. No. 2015-26, § 1(Exh. A), 5-12-2015, eff. 7-1-2015 ; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 23(Exh. A), 5-12-2020, eff. 1-1-2021) 
CHAPTER 23. NUISANCES 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
23-30 	Administrative fee for cost of nuisance abatement of weeds and debris 	$150.00 
23-49(a) 	Administrative fee for cost of nuisance abatement of inoperable motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer 	100.00 
23-49(c) 	Fee for disposal of vehicle at auction, per vehicle 	50.00 
23-105 	Administrative fee for mosquito nuisance abatement: $150.00 or 25 percent of cost of abatement, whichever is less (not less than $25.00) in addition to the actual cost of nuisance abatement 	
 
CHAPTER 24. OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
24-10(f) 	Permit fee for "going-out-of-business" sales 	$65.00 
24-11(a) 	Fee for conviction in criminal case in district and circuit court 	10.00 
24-11(b) 	Processing fee for admission to city jail following conviction of any violation 	25.00 
 
CHAPTER 25. PARKS AND RECREATION 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
25-91 	Fees for reservation of picnic shelters at City Park.Picnic shelters: 	
25-91.3 	Parking fee for the City Park boat ramp (non-residents only) 	10.00 per day 
 
	Residents 	Nonresidents 
Single shelters (suitable for 40 people) 
 Weekdays 	Dawn to Dusk - $25.00 	Dawn to Dusk - $40.00 
	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $15.00 	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $25.00 
	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $15.00 	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $25.00 
		
 Weekends/Holidays 	Dawn to Dusk - $50.00 	Dawn to Dusk - $75.00 
	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $30.00 	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $40.00 
	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $30.00 	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $40.00 
		
Double shelter (suitable for groups of 40—75) 
 Weekdays 	Dawn to Dusk - $80.00 	Dawn to Dusk - $120.00 
	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $45.00 	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $65.00 
	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $45.00 	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $65.00 
		
 Weekends/Holidays 	Dawn to Dusk - $120.00 	Dawn to Dusk - $150.00 
	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $65.00 	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $80.00 
	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $65.00 	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $80.00 
		
Large multi-purpose shelter: (suitable for groups of 75—200) 
 Weekdays 	Dawn to Dusk - $175.00 	Dawn to Dusk - $225.00 
	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $100.00 	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $125.00 
	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $100.00 	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $125.00 
		
 Weekends/Holidays 	Dawn to Dusk - $225.00 	Dawn to Dusk - $275.00 
	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $125.00 	Dawn to 3:00 p.m. - $150.00 
	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $125.00 	3:30 p.m. to Dusk - $150.00 
 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
25-91.1 	Pokey Smoky II, per ride 	$2.00 
25-92 	Fees for use of athletic, recreational and special activity facilities: 	
25-92(a)(1) 	Gym, per hour 	100.00 
25-92(a)(2) 	Social hall, per hour 	50.00 
25-92(a)(3) 	Meeting hall/room, per hour 	30.00 
25-92(a)(4) 	Gym, athletic practice sessions only, per hour 	25.00 
25-92(a)(5) 	Damage deposit required for gym, except for athletic practice sessions per rental 	150.00 
25-92(a)(6) 	Damage deposit required for meeting room per rental 	25.00 
25-92(a)(7) 	Damage deposit required for social hall per rental 	75.00 
25-92(c) 	Fees for individual use of recreational facilities 	
25-92(c)(1) 	Adult Membership Card (annual) 	$20.00 
25-92(c)(2) 	Adult Replacement Card 	10.00 
25-92(c)(3) 	Youth Membership Card (annual) 	10.00 
25-92(c)(4) 	Youth Replacement Card 	3.00 
25-92(c)(5) 	Senior Membership Card (annual) 	5.00 
25-92(c)(6) 	Senior Replacement Card 	3.00 
25-92(c)(7) 	Visitor Pass (one week) 	5.00 
25-92(c)(8) 	Adult or Senior Day Pass 	3.00 
25-92(c)(9) 	Youth Day Pass 	1.00 
25-92(d) 	Fees for multi-session adult class programs shall be set by the City Manager within the indicated range per program, but the total program fee shall not exceed $4.00 per individual session offered as part of the program. 	20.00— 
50.00 
25-92(e) 	Optional Annual/Quarterly Rates for Senior Fitness Class Programs (Portsmouth Residents only) 	Annual: 
65.00 
Quarterly: 
17.00 
25-148 	Municipal golf course fees: 	
 
BIDE-A-WEE GOLF COURSE 
	Apr.—Oct. 	Nov.—Mar. 
18 Holes—Weekend: 
Resident 	$33.00 	$22.00 
Senior 	33.00 	22.00 
Nonresident (per person) 	42.00 	27.00 
Nonresident Senior (per person) 	42.00 	27.00 
Junior 	15.00 	12.50 
Twilight (except Juniors): 
After 11:30 a.m. 	38.00 	
After 12:00 noon 		21.00 
After 4:00 p.m. 	27.00 	
18 Holes—Weekday: 
Resident 	23.00 	17.00 
Senior 	21.00 	15.00 
Nonresident 	28.00 	22.00 
Senior 	23.00 	17.00 
Junior 	12.50 	10.00 
Monday/Thursday Special for active and retired military, police and fire personnel, City of Portsmouth employees, and Seniors (Incl. Cart) 	28.00 	
Winter Special: Nov.—Mar.—Unlimited play (Greens fees only) 	$300.00 per period 
Twilight (except Juniors): 
After 1:00 p.m. 		$17.00 
After 2:00 p.m. (per person) 	28.00 	
After 4:00 p.m.(per person) 	25.00 	
9 Holes—Weekday: 
Resident 	15.00 	12.00 
Senior 	12.50 	10.00 
Nonresident 	20.00 	17.00 
Senior 	15.00 	12.00 
Junior 	10.00 	8.00 
Electric Cart Rentals: 
9 holes per person 	$6.00 
18 holes per person 	12.00 
Pull Carts— 	2.00 per day 
Range Balls— 	$4.00 per small bucket 
$6.00 per large bucket 
Annual Pass (Green fee only, per person) 	Portsmouth Resident Only 
Regular 	1,500.00 
Senior 	1,100.00 
Student 	500.00 
Family 	1,950.00 
 
THE LINKS AT CITY PARK 
	Apr.—Oct. 	Nov.—Mar. 
18 Holes—Weekend: 
Resident 	$15.00 	$12.00 
Nonresident 	18.00 	15.00 
Junior 	10.00 	8.00 
Senior 	12.00 	9.00 
Twilight: 
After 1:00 p.m. 	n/a 	8.00 
After 3:00 p.m. 	10.00 	n/a 
9 Holes Green fees: 
Resident 	10.00 	8.00 
Nonresident 	12.00 	10.00 
Junior 	7.00 	6.00 
Senior 	8.00 	7.00 
Putting Course: 
Adult 	3.00 	3.00 
Junior 	2.00 	2.00 
Gas Cart Rentals: 
9 holes per person 	6.00 	6.00 
18 holes per person 	12.00 	12.00 
Pull Carts— 	$2.00 per day 
Range Balls— 	$4.00 per small bucket 
$6.00 per large bucket 
$30.00 per 10 small buckets 
Annual Pass (Green fee only, per person) 	Portsmouth Resident Only 
Regular 	700.00 
Senior 	500.00 
Student 	200.00 
 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
25-202(1) 	Fee for the use of the National Guard Armory by nonprofit organization or private individual, per day or any fraction thereof 	$500.00 
25-202(2) 	Fee for the use of the National Guard Armory by a commercial organization, per day or any fraction thereof 	750.00 
25-202(3) 	Additional hours, or fraction thereof, shall be charged by multiplying the number of additional hours and the hourly rate as established by subsection (1) or (2) of this section ($500.00 or $750.00 divided by eight) plus $25.00 	
25-204(a) 	Deposit against damages to armory 	$300.00 
25-247 	Admission fees for municipal swimming pools: 	
25-247(1) 	Three years of age and younger 	Free 
25-247(2) 	Four years of age and older 	1.00 
25-247(3) 	Annual membership—Unlimited use 	15.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2007-45, § 2, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, 2-26-2008; Ord. No. 2009-62 , § 2, 6-23-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 2010-69, § 1, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. 2011-25, § 2, 5-4-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. No. 2011-26, §§ 1, 2, 5-4-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 2, 8-13-2013; Ord. No. 2015-80, § 2(Exh. A), 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 2016-16, § 2(Exh. A), 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 12(Exh. A), 5-12-2020) 
CHAPTER 26. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
26-55(f) 	Annual registration fee for charitable organization, independent registration 	$10.00 
26-62 	Charge for copy of registration statements, reports, professional fundraising counsel contracts or professional solicitor contracts, not exceeding, per page 	1.00 
 
CHAPTER 27. POLICE 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
27-6(c) 	Service charge for false alarm occurrence: 	
	 Second false alarm occurrence 	$ 35.00 
	 Third and fourth false alarm occurrence 	50.00 
	 Fifth through ninth false alarm occurrence 	75.00 
	 Subsequent false alarm occurrences within a 12-month period 	100.00 
27-7 	Fees for police services and documents: 	
	 (1) Criminal record check 	10.00 
	 (2) Fingerprinting 	10.00 
	 (3) Identification photos 	10.00 
	 (4) Reports (offense, accident, police) 	10.00 
	 (5) Photographs 	10.00 
	 (6) 911 tape copy 	10.00 
	 (7) Mugshot 	20.00 
	 (8) Videotape copy 	20.00 
	 (9) Copies (per page) 	0.05 
	 (10) Research and copying (per hour) 	25.00 
	 (11) Concealed handgun permit 	35.00 
 
( Ord. No. 2013-28, § 2, 5-14-2013, eff. 7-1-2013) 
CHAPTER 28. PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
28-52 	Permit application fee for dealers in precious metals and gems 	$200.00 
28-56 	Renewal of annual permit for dealers in precious metals and gems 	200.00 
 
CHAPTER 31.1. STORMATER MANAGEMENT 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
31.2-26(a) 	Stormwater utility fee: 	
	(Effective until December 31, 2020) Residential accounts—1 ERU times 	$11.25 
	(Effective January 1, 2021) Residential accounts—1 ERU times 	$12.00 
	(Effective until December 31, 2020) Nonresidential accounts—Actual number of ERUs times 	11.25 
	(Effective January 1, 2021) Nonresidential accounts—Actual number of ERUs times 	12.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-34, § 1, 4-25-2006; Ord. No. 2008-31, § 2, 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2009-41 , § 2, 5-12-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 2011-24, § 1, 5-4-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. No. 2012-18, § 1, 5-15-2012, eff. 7-1-2012; Ord. No. 2017-32 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 2019-28 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-14-2019; Ord. No. 2020-35 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-12-2020, eff. 1-1-2021) 
CHAPTER 32. STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
32-5(a) 	Application fee for vacation of street, alley, easement, right-of-way, or other public way; appointment of viewers 	$350.00 
32-5(b) 	Fee for payment of viewers, paid by the person making the application to alter or vacate the street or alley, each 	25.00 
32-6(b) 	Reinspection fee for driveways 	40.00 
32-6(e) 	Permit fees for driveways: 	
	 Per driveway apron for single-family property 	50.00 
	 Per apron for duplexes 	60.00 
	 Per driveway apron for all other property 	300.00 
32-8(b)(15) 	Permit application fee for annual permit for outdoor dining areas in rights-of-way 	100.00 
32-60(d) 	Fee for performing or directing the performance of land disturbance work in the right-of-way without a valid right-of-way permit 	150.00 
32-61(a) 	Inspection fee for nonresidential (utilities/other) land disturbance construction in right-of-way, not exceeding 100 square feet 	50.00 
32-61(a) 	Additional inspection fee per square foot disturbed for nonresidential (utilities/other) land disturbance construction in right-of-way, exceeding 100 square feet, per square foot 	2.00 
32-61(a) 	Where a site plan is required, the inspection fee for nonresidential (commercial) land disturbance construction in right-of-way 	7.5% of ROW bond 
32-61(a) 	Unit fee for utility poles, per pole 	40.00 
32-61(b) 	Inspection fee for residential land disturbance construction in right-of-way, per residential lot 	50.00 
32-61(c) 	Fee for reinspection 	100.00 
32-61(f) 	Fee for temporary street or lane closure: 	
	Residential Street 	$50.00 
	Arterial Street (1—15 day duration) 	$50.00 
	Arterial Street (>15 day duration) 	$100.00 
32-202(a) 	Permit application fee for vendors in downtown district 	50.00 
32-204 	Permit issuance fee for vendors in downtown district 	50.00 
32-285 	Permit application fee for food truck permit 	50.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2008-34, § 1, 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2015-25, § 1(Exh. A), 5-12-2015, eff. 7-1-2015 ; Ord. No. 2017-34 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 2017-36 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 2020-34 , §§ 2, 3, 5(Exh. A), 5-12-2020) 
CHAPTER 33.1. SUBDIVISIONS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
33.1-20 	Subdivision application and review fees: 	
	Minor plat (subdivision or condominium)—$100.00 plus $11.00 per lot 	
	Major, preliminary—$100.00 plus $11.00 per lot; for land zoned commercial or industrial $100.00 plus $27.00 per lot 	
	Major, final—$100.00 plus $11.00 per lot; for land zoned commercial or industrial $100.00 plus $27.00 per lot 	
	Subdivision variance, per application 	220.00 
	Plat vacation, per application 	125.00 
	Modification, resubdivisions, relocation of lot lines, per application 	125.00 
	Modification without new lots or new improvements, per application 	125.00 
33.1-55 	Application to change name of existing street—$350.00 application fee plus the direct costs for fabrication and installation of new street signs 	
 
(Ord. No. 2008-34, § 1, 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2017-35 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 34. SWIMMING POOLS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
34-5 	Swimming pool permit fee: 	
	 Seasonal operation (four months or less) 	$50.00 
	 Year round operation 	75.00 
 
CHAPTER 35. TAXATION 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
35-3(a) 	Administrative charge for collection of delinquent taxes and charges, etc. 	$30.00 
35-3(a) 	Administrative charge for collection of nuisance abatement lien for administrative costs shall be $150.00 or 25 percent of the costs, whichever is less; however, in no event shall the fee be less than $25.00 	
35-189 	Application processing fee for exemption of property which has undergone substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement 	50.00 
35-219 	Application processing fee for exemption of rehabilitated real estate in urban enterprise zone 	50.00 
 
CHAPTER 36. VEGETATION 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
36-56(b) 	Fee for application for appeal from enforcement or interpretation of tree planting and replacement regulations 	$25.00 
 
CHAPTER 37. VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
37-44(b) 	Inspection fee for inspection of taxicabs and other public vehicles, annual and semi-annual inspection 	$40.00 
37-44(b) 	Reinspection fee for taxicabs and other public vehicles with corrected defect 	10.00 
37-62 	Processing fee for application for certificate of public convenience and necessity 	20.00 
37-73 	Fee for issuance of certificate of public convenience and necessity 	20.00 
37-92 	Processing fee for application for public vehicle driver's permit 	20.00 
37-95 	Fee for issuance public vehicle driver's permit 	20.00 
37-99 	Fee for renewal of public vehicle driver's permit 	10.00 
37-100 	Fee for replacement of public vehicle driver's permit when lost, stolen or destroyed 	10.00 
37-250(a) 	Processing fee for application to be included in tow book 	20.00 
37-250(b) 	Processing fee for application to be included in tow book 	22.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-35, § 1, 4-25-2006) 
CHAPTER 38. WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
38-9 	Not to exceed fee for department of public utilities site plan/plan of development review 	$500.00 
38-40(a)(1) 	Charges for ownership and maintenance of water connections. 	
	¾-inch service (connection) 	$500.00 
	¾-inch service (connection), developer installed with meter installation by department 	200.00 
 
1-inch service (connection) 	Actual cost of such installation 
plus 25% (minimum $750.00) 
1½-inch service (connection) 	Actual cost of such installation 
+ 25% (minimum $900.00) 
2-inch-service (connection) 	Actual cost of such installation 
+ 25% (minimum $1,500.00) 
4-inch service (connection) 	Actual cost of such installation 
+ 25% (minimum $2,900.00) 
6-inch service (connection) 	Actual cost of such installation 
+ 25% (minimum $4,000.00) 
8-inch service (connection) 	Actual cost of such installation 
+ 25% (minimum $5,800.00) 
10-inch service (connection) 	Actual cost of such installation 
+ 25% (minimum $6,200.00) 
 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
38-40(f) 	Construction inspection fee (water connection) 	25.00 
38-40(f) 	Reinspection fee (water connection) 	35.00 
38-42 	Sewer connection charges—Generally 	
38-42(a)(1)a. 	Sewer availability fee for residential and trailer parks, for each dwelling unit 	$500.00 
38-42(a)(1)b. 	Fee for residential and trailer parks, when the city performs the installation and connection, a connection fee equal to the greater of the actual cost of such connection plus 25 percent or $1,250.00 shall be made for each point of connection. 	
38-42(a)(2)a. 	Commercial, office and institutional: The availability fee for commercial, office or institutional developments shall be computed by dividing the estimated rate of flow as calculated pursuant to criteria for such development as set forth by the state sewage regulations by 280 gallons per day. The result thereof shall be multiplied by $500.00 to determine the total fee for the development. 	
38-42(b) 	Inspection fee for existing lateral on undeveloped or redeveloped property 	150.00 
38-42(g) 	Sewer connection fee when a substandard sewer collection system connected to a treatment facility is taken out of service and a new collection system connected to a treatment facility replaces such substandard collection system, not less than 	60.00 
38-42(h) 	Construction inspection fee (sewer connection) 	25.00 
38-42(h) 	Reinspection fee (sewer connection) 	35.00 
38-43(b) 	Sewer line connection fee 	250.00 
38-48(b) 	Charge for establishing a new water service account 	12.00 
38-48(b) 	Fee for transferring water account and turning on water at the new residence 	10.00 
38-56(b) 	Annual charge for use of public fire hydrants located in the city 	120.00 
38-56(b) 	Annual charge for use of public fire hydrants located in another city or town 	180.00 
38-56(b) 	Observation of fire hydrant flow test, per test 	50.00 
38-82 	Water meter charges 	
 
Meter Size (inches) 	Charge per Month 
  5/8 ..... 	$ 10.00 
 ¾ ..... 	10.00 
1 ..... 	16.63 
1½ ..... 	33.25 
2 ..... 	  53.20 
3 ..... 	  106.40 
4 ..... 	  166.25 
6 ..... 	 332.50 
8 ..... 	 532.00 
10 ..... 	 1,396.50 
 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
38-83 	Meter rates for water supplied 	
38-83(a) 	For all water that passes through meters, customers within the corporate limits of the city shall pay (1) $5.78 per 1,000 gallons or $4.32 per 100 cubic feet of water supplied during the period from July 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020; (2) $6.00 per 1,000 gallons or $4.49 per 100 cubic feet of water supplied during the period from January 1, 2021 through June 30, 2021; and (3) annual increases of five percent over the rate in effect at the end of the prior fiscal year beginning July 1, 2021, and each July 1 thereafter, until amended. 	
38-83(b) 	For all water which passes through meters, customers of the City of Chesapeake who are served by Portsmouth and whose rates are not set by contract shall pay (1) $8.66 per 1,000 gallons or $6.48 per 100 cubic feet of water supplied during the period from July 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020; (2) $9.00 per 1,000 gallons or $6.73 per 100 cubic feet of water supplied during the period from January 1, 2021 through June 30, 2021; and (3) annual increases of five percent over the rate in effect at the end of the prior fiscal year beginning July 1, 2021, and each July 1 thereafter, until amended. 	
38-83(c) 	For all water which passes through meters to the City of Chesapeake pursuant to contract, the City of Chesapeake shall pay the rates established by contract. 	
38-83(d) 	For all water which passes through meters to the City of Suffolk pursuant to contract, the City of Suffolk shall pay (1) $5.31 per 1,000 gallons or $3.97 per 100 cubic feet of water supplied during the period from July 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020; (2) $5.52 per 1,000 gallons or $4.17 per 100 cubic feet of water supplied during the period from January 1, 2021 through June 30, 2021; and (3) annual increases of five percent over the rate in effect at the end of the prior fiscal year beginning July 1, 2021, and each July 1 thereafter, until amended or as otherwise established by written contract. 	
38-87 	Deposit for water for building purposes 	$70.00 
38-94(b) 	Field service fee required prior to restoration of water service 	25.00 
38-94(b) 	Inspection fee when water service turned on by unauthorized person 	100.00 
38-94(b) 	Door tag when service discontinued 	10.00 
38-94(b) 	Removal of water meter 	50.00 
38-94(c) 	Additional charge for detection of water usage 	50.00 
38-117 	Sewer service rates: 	
38-117(a) 	Charges for the disposal of sewage discharged into the city system will be based upon the water delivered to the premises as measured by meters used for this purpose at the rate of (1) $4.54 per 1,000 gallons or $3.39 per 100 cubic feet during the period from July 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020; (2) $4.71 per 1,000 gallons or $3.52 per 100 cubic feet during the period from January 1, 2021 through June 30, 2021; and (3) annual increases of five percent over the rate in effect at the end of the prior fiscal year beginning July 1, 2021, and each July 1 thereafter, until amended. The minimum charge for such service shall be $3.21 per month. 	
38-117(b) 	The minimum charge for a premises or groups of premises containing two or more dwelling units served through a single water meter or connection will be determined by multiplying the minimum charge set out in subsection (a) of this section by the number of dwelling units so served. 	
38-117(c) 	Charges for sewer service for dwelling units in premises with unmetered water connections shall be $18.59 per month. 	
38-364(a)(1) 	Annual permit fee for boating on city-owned lakes, for privately-owned boats beginning April 1, issued for the period April 15 to April 15 of the following year at the following charges: 	
	 Nonresidents 	50.00 
	 Portsmouth residents 	25.00 
	 Sixty-two years of age or over 	20.00 
	 City of Portsmouth employees 	No charge 
38-364(a)(3) 	Daily permits for boating on city-owned lakes 	6.50 
38-365(15) 	Charge for return of boats found on the city lakes or on city-owned property adjoining the lakes and not displaying the city public utilities current year boat decal. 	75.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-36, § 1, 4-35-2006; Ord. No. 2007-52, § 1, 4-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-30, § 2, 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2009-40 , § 2, 5-12-2009, eff. 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 2, 5-4-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. No. 2012-20, § 1, 5-15-2012, eff. 7-1-2012; Ord. No. 2017-30 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-31 , § 2(Exh. A), 5-8-2018; Ord. No. 2020-34 , §§ 13, 15, 17, 19, 20, 22(Exh. A), 5-12-2020; Ord. No. 2020-36 , § 1(Exh. A), 5-12-2020) 
CHAPTER 39. WETLANDS 
Code 
Section 	Description 	Fee 
39-25 	Wetlands application fees: 	
	Single-family dwellings 	$200.00 
	All other uses 	200.00 
	After commencement of land disturbance 	200.00 
 
(Ord. No. 2008-34, § 1, 5-13-2008, eff. 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2017-34 , § 3(Exh. A), 5-9-2017) 
CHAPTER 40.1 ZONING 
Code 
Section 		Description 	Fee 
40.1-2.2(C) 	Planning and zoning fees and charges 	
	(1) 	Board of zoning appeals application 	$200.00 
	(2) 	Commercial site plan (per hour for each hour in excess of four hours) 	25.00 
	(3) 	Excavation use permit 	200.00 
	(4) 	Extension application 	55.00 
	(5) 	Housing use permit application 	660.00 
		Plus, per unit 	33.00 
	(6) 	Parking special exception 	110.00 
	(7) 	Rezoning application 	880.00 
	(8) 	Rezoning (conditional) application 	880.00 
	(9) 	Sign use permit or certificate (per sign) 	30.00 
	(10) 	Site plan (Plan of development) review: 	
		 One acre or less 	480.00 
		 Less than five acres 	1,000.00 
		 Five acres or greater 	1,440.00 
		 Erosion control plan submitted separately 	240.00 
		 Plan re-submittal (3rd resubmission prior to approval) 	100.00 
	(11) 	Use permit application 	660.00 
	(12) 	Administrative review of family child day care home (Note: fee is for administrative review only: if administrative review determines that a use permit is required and applicant elects to apply for a use permit, this fee will be applied against the use permit application fee and applicant will be required to pay the balance of the use permit application fee) 	200.00 
	(13) 	Variance or special exception 	150.00 
	(14) 	Zoning clearance fee 	15.00 
	(15) 	Zoning letter fee 	25.00 
	(16) 	Application fee for all projects not involving removal of roofing or siding material, removal and replacement of windows or doors, or the addition or removal of all or part of any structure when the approval is not obtained prior to the commencement of construction. 	250.00 
	(17) 	Application fee for all projects involving removal of roofing or siding material, removal and replacement of windows or doors, or the addition or removal of all or part of any structure when the approval is not obtained prior to the commencement of construction. 	1,000.00 
	(18) 	Application for administrative adjustment/variance 	175.00 
	(19) 	Buildable lot determination 	25.00 
	(20) 	Type II site plan review—N/A 	
	(21) 	Text amendment; non-city request 	880.00 
	(22) 	Application for temporary use permit 	30.00 
	(23) 	Engineering final inspection for issuance of certificate of occupancy 	100.00 
 
( Ord. No. 2011-19, § 2, 5-4-2011, eff. 7-1-2011; Ord. No. 2015-30, § 1(Exh. A), 5-12-2015, eff. 7-1-2015 ; Ord. No. 2017-34 , § 4(Exh. A), 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 2020-34 , § 8(Exh. A), 5-12-2020)  
APPENDIX B. - UPTOWN D2 DISTRICT FORM-BASED CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that Ord. of November 24, 2009, effective January 1, 2010, provides," 1. The document entitled "Uptown D2 District Form-Based Code," as recommended by the Planning Commission and on file in the Clerk's Office and in the Department of Planning, is adopted as Appendix B, entitled "Downtown D-2 Zoning District," of the Code of the City of Portsmouth, Virginia (2006).   2. The Zoning Map is hereby amended to define the boundaries of the Downtown D-2 zoning district as set out in Exhibit A and the building envelope standards boundaries as set out in Exhibit B, both attached hereto and made parts hereof.   Said attachments are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 

